# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume VIII.   Basil - Letters and Select Works
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume VIII.
# father: Basil
# work: Canonical Letters to Amphilochius (Letters 188, 199, 217)
# clavis: CPG-2901
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Schaff/Jackson English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CLXXXVIII. [2611]

   (Canonica Prima.)

   To Amphilochius, concerning the Canons. [2612]

   "Even a fool," it is said, "when he asks questions," is counted wise.
   [2613]   But when a wise man asks questions, he makes even a fool
   wise.  And this, thank God, is my case, as often as I receive a letter
   from your industrious self.  For we become more learned and wiser than
   we were before, merely by asking questions, because we are taught many
   things which we did not know; and our anxiety to answer them acts as a
   teacher to us.  Assuredly at the present time, though I have never
   before paid attention to the points you raise, I have been forced to
   make accurate enquiry, and to turn over in my mind both whatever I have
   heard from the elders, and all that I have been taught in conformity
   with their lessons.

   I.  As to your enquiry about the Cathari, [2614] a statement has
   already been made, and you have properly reminded me that it is right
   to follow the custom obtaining in each region, because those, who at
   the time gave decision on these points, held different opinions
   concerning their baptism.  But the baptism of the Pepuzeni [2615] seems
   to me to have no authority; and I am astonished how this can have
   escaped Dionysius, [2616] acquainted as he was with the canons.  The
   old authorities decided to accept that baptism which in nowise errs
   from the faith.  Thus they used the names of heresies, of schisms, and
   of unlawful congregations. [2617]   By heresies they meant men who were
   altogether broken off and alienated in matters relating to the actual
   faith; by schisms [2618] men who had separated for some ecclesiastical
   reasons and questions capable of mutual solution; by unlawful
   congregations gatherings held by disorderly presbyters or bishops or by
   uninstructed laymen.  As, for instance, if a man be convicted of crime,
   and prohibited from discharging ministerial functions, and then refuses
   to submit to the canons, but arrogates to himself episcopal and
   ministerial rights, and persons leave the Catholic Church and join him,
   this is unlawful assembly.  To disagree with members of the Church
   about repentance, is schism.  Instances of heresy are those of the
   Manichæans, of the Valentinians, of the Marcionites, and of these
   Pepuzenes; for with them there comes in at once their disagreement
   concerning the actual faith in God.  So it seemed good to the ancient
   authorities to reject the baptism of heretics altogether, but to admit
   that of schismatics, [2619] on the ground that they still belonged to
   the Church.

   As to those who assembled in unlawful congregations, their decision was
   to join them again to the Church, after they had been brought to a
   better state by proper repentance and rebuke, and so, in many cases,
   when men in orders [2620] had rebelled with the disorderly, to receive
   them on their repentance, into the same rank.  Now the Pepuzeni are
   plainly heretical, for, by unlawfully and shamefully applying to
   Montanus and Priscilla the title of the Paraclete, they have blasphemed
   against the Holy Ghost.  They are, therefore, to be condemned for
   ascribing divinity to men; and for outraging the Holy Ghost by
   comparing Him to men.  They are thus also liable to eternal damnation,
   inasmuch as blasphemy against the Holy Ghost admits of no forgiveness.
   What ground is there, then, for the acceptance of the baptism of men
   who baptize into the Father and the Son and Montanus or Priscilla?  For
   those who have not been baptized into the names delivered to us have
   not been baptized at all.  So that, although this escaped the vigilance
   of the great Dionysius, we must by no means imitate his error.  The
   absurdity of the position is obvious in a moment, and evident to all
   who are gifted with even a small share of reasoning capacity.

   The Cathari are schismatics; but it seemed good to the ancient
   authorities, I mean Cyprian and our own [2621] Firmilianus, to reject
   all these, Cathari, Encratites, [2622] and Hydroparastatæ, [2623] by
   one common condemnation, because the origin of separation arose through
   schism, and those who had apostatized from the Church had no longer on
   them the grace of the Holy Spirit, for it ceased to be imparted when
   the continuity was broken.  The first separatists had received their
   ordination from the Fathers, and possessed the spiritual gift by the
   laying on of their hands.  But they who were broken off had become
   laymen, and, because they are no longer able to confer on others that
   grace of the Holy Spirit from which they themselves are fallen away,
   they had no authority either to baptize or to ordain.  And therefore
   those who were from time to time baptized by them, were ordered, as
   though baptized by laymen, to come to the church to be purified by the
   Church's true baptism.  Nevertheless, since it has seemed to some of
   those of Asia that, for the sake of management of the majority, their
   baptism should be accepted, let it be accepted.  We must, however,
   perceive the iniquitous action of the Encratites; who, in order to shut
   themselves out from being received back by the Church have endeavoured
   for the future to anticipate readmission by a peculiar baptism of their
   own, violating, in this manner even their own special practice. [2624]
     My opinion, therefore, is that nothing being distinctly laid down
   concerning them, it is our duty to reject their baptism, and that in
   the case of any one who has received baptism from them, we should, on
   his coming to the church, baptize him.  If, however, there is any
   likelihood of this being detrimental to general discipline, we must
   fall back upon custom, and follow the fathers who have ordered what
   course we are to pursue.  For I am under some apprehension lest, in our
   wish to discourage them from baptizing, we may, through the severity of
   our decision, be a hindrance to those who are being saved.  If they
   accept our baptism, do not allow this to distress us.  We are by no
   means bound to return them the same favour, but only strictly to obey
   canons.  On every ground let it be enjoined that those who come to us
   from their baptism be anointed [2625] in the presence of the faithful,
   and only on these terms approach the mysteries.  I am aware that I have
   received into episcopal rank Izois and Saturninus from the Encratite
   following. [2626]   I am precluded therefore from separating from the
   Church those who have been united to their company, inasmuch as,
   through my acceptance of the bishops, I have promulgated a kind of
   canon of communion with them.

   II.  The woman who purposely destroys her unborn child is guilty of
   murder.  With us there is no nice enquiry as to its being formed or
   unformed.  In this case it is not only the being about to be born who
   is vindicated, but the woman in her attack upon herself; because in
   most cases women who make such attempts die.  The destruction of the
   embryo is an additional crime, a second murder, at all events if we
   regard it as done with intent.  The punishment, however, of these women
   should not be for life, but for the term of ten years.  And let their
   treatment depend not on mere lapse of time, but on the character of
   their repentance.

   III.  A deacon who commits fornication after his appointment to the
   diaconate is to be deposed.  But, after he has been rejected and ranked
   among the laity, he is not to be excluded from communion.  For there is
   an ancient canon that those who have fallen from their degree are to be
   subjected to this kind of punishment alone. [2627]

   Herein, as I suppose, the ancient authorities followed the old rule
   "Thou shalt not avenge twice for the same thing." [2628]   There is
   this further reason too, that laymen, when expelled from the place of
   the faithful, are from time to time restored to the rank whence they
   have fallen; but the deacon undergoes once for all the lasting penalty
   of deposition.  His deacon's orders not being restored to him, they
   rested at this one punishment.  So far is this as regards what depends
   on law laid down.  But generally a truer remedy is the departure from
   sin.  Wherefore that man will give me full proof of his cure who, after
   rejecting grace for the sake of the indulgence of the flesh, has then,
   through bruising of the flesh [2629] and the enslaving of it [2630] by
   means of self control, abandoned the pleasures whereby he was subdued.
   We ought therefore to know both what is of exact prescription and what
   is of custom; and, in cases which do not admit of the highest
   treatment, to follow the traditional direction.

   IV.  In the case of trigamy and polygamy they laid down the same rule,
   in proportion, as in the case of digamy; namely one year for digamy
   (some authorities say two years); for trigamy men are separated for
   three and often for four years; but this is no longer described as
   marriage at all, but as polygamy; nay rather as limited fornication.
   It is for this reason that the Lord said to the woman of Samaria, who
   had five husbands, "he whom thou now hast is not thy husband." [2631]
   He does not reckon those who had exceeded the limits of a second
   marriage as worthy of the title of husband or wife.  In cases of
   trigamy we have accepted a seclusion of five years, not by the canons,
   but following the precept of our predecessors.  Such offenders ought
   not to be altogether prohibited from the privileges of the Church; they
   should be considered deserving of hearing after two or three years, and
   afterwards of being permitted to stand in their place; but they must be
   kept from the communion of the good gift, and only restored to the
   place of communion after showing some fruit of repentance.

   V.  Heretics repenting at death ought to be received; yet to be
   received, of course, not indiscriminately, but on trial of exhibition
   of true repentance and of producing fruit in evidence of their zeal for
   salvation. [2632]

   VI.  The fornication of canonical persons is not to be reckoned as
   wedlock, and their union is to be completely dissolved, for this is
   both profitable for the security of the Church and will prevent the
   heretics from having a ground of attack against us, as though we
   induced men to join us by the attraction of liberty to sin.

   VII.  Abusers of themselves with mankind, and with beasts, as also
   murderers, wizards, adulterers, and idolaters, are deserving of the
   same punishment.  Whatever rule you have in the case of the rest,
   observe also in their case.  There can, however, be no doubt that we
   ought to receive those who have repented of impurity committed in
   ignorance for thirty years. [2633]   In this case there is ground for
   forgiveness in ignorance, in the spontaneity of confession, and the
   long extent of time.  Perhaps they have been delivered to Satan for a
   whole age of man that they may learn not to behave unseemly; [2634]
   wherefore order them to be received without delay, specially if they
   shed tears to move your mercy, and shew a manner of living worthy of
   compassion. [2635]

   VIII.  The man who in a rage has taken up a hatchet against his own
   wife is a murderer.  But it is what I should have expected from your
   intelligence that you should very properly remind me to speak on these
   points more fully, because a wide distinction must be drawn between
   cases where there is and where there is not intent.  A case of an act
   purely unintentional, and widely removed from the purpose of the agent,
   is that of a man who throws a stone at a dog or a tree, and hits a
   man.  The object was to drive off the beast or to shake down the
   fruit.  The chance comer falls fortuitously in the way of the blow, and
   the act is unintentional.  Unintentional too is the act of any one who
   strikes another with a strap or a flexible stick, for the purpose of
   chastising him, and the man who is being beaten dies.  In this case it
   must be taken into consideration that the object was not to kill, but
   to improve, the offender.  Further, among unintentional acts must be
   reckoned the case of a man in a fight who when warding off an enemy's
   attack with cudgel or hand, hits him without mercy in some vital part,
   so as to injure him, though not quite to kill him.  This, however,
   comes very near to the intentional; for the man who employs such a
   weapon in self defence, or who strikes without mercy, evidently does
   not spare his opponent, because he is mastered by passion.  In like
   manner the case of any one who uses a heavy cudgel, or a stone too big
   for a man to stand, is reckoned among the unintentional, because he
   does not do what he meant:  in his rage he deals such a blow as to kill
   his victim, yet all he had in his mind was to give him a thrashing, not
   to do him to death.  If, however, a man uses a sword, or anything of
   the kind, he has no excuse:  certainly none if he throws his hatchet.
   For he does not strike with the hand, so that the force of the blow may
   be within his own control, but throws, so that from the weight and edge
   of the iron, and the force of the throw, the wound cannot fail to be
   fatal.

   On the other hand acts done in the attacks of war or robbery are
   distinctly intentional, and admit of no doubt.  Robbers kill for greed,
   and to avoid conviction.  Soldiers who inflict death in war do so with
   the obvious purpose not of fighting, nor chastising, but of killing
   their opponents.  And if any one has concocted some magic philtre for
   some other reason, and then causes death, I count this as intentional.
   Women frequently endeavour to draw men to love them by incantations and
   magic knots, and give them drugs which dull their intelligence.  Such
   women, when they cause death, though the result of their action may not
   be what they intended, are nevertheless, on account of their
   proceedings being magical and prohibited, to be reckoned among
   intentional homicides.  Women also who administer drugs to cause
   abortion, as well as those who take poisons to destroy unborn children,
   are murderesses.  So much on this subject.

   IX.  The sentence of the Lord that it is unlawful to withdraw from
   wedlock, save on account of fornication, [2636] applies, according to
   the argument, to men and women alike.  Custom, however, does not so
   obtain.  Yet, in relation with women, very strict expressions are to be
   found; as, for instance, the words of the apostle "He which is joined
   to a harlot is one body" [2637] and of Jeremiah, If a wife "become
   another man's shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be
   greatly polluted?" [2638]   And again, "He that hath an adulteress is a
   fool and impious." [2639]   Yet custom ordains that men who commit
   adultery and are in fornication be retained by their wives.
   Consequently I do not know if the woman who lives with the man who has
   been dismissed can properly be called an adulteress; the charge in this
   case attaches to the woman who has put away her husband, and depends
   upon the cause for which she withdrew from wedlock. [2640]   In the
   case of her being beaten, and refusing to submit, it would be better
   for her to endure than to be separated from her husband; in the case of
   her objecting to pecuniary loss, even here she would not have
   sufficient ground.  If her reason is his living in fornication we do
   not find this in the custom of the church; but from an unbelieving
   husband a wife is commanded not to depart, but to remain, on account of
   the uncertainty of the issue.  "For what knowest thou, O wife, whether
   thou shalt save thy husband?" [2641]   Here then the wife, if she
   leaves her husband and goes to another, is an adulteress.  But the man
   who has been abandoned is pardonable, and the woman who lives with such
   a man is not condemned.  But if the man who has deserted his wife goes
   to another, he is himself an adulterer because he makes her commit
   adultery; and the woman who lives with him is an adulteress, because
   she has caused another woman's husband to come over to her.

   X.  Those who swear that they will not receive ordination, declining
   orders upon oath, must not be driven to perjure themselves, although
   there does seem to be a canon making concessions to such persons.  Yet
   I have found by experience that perjurers never turn out well. [2642]
   Account must however be taken of the form of the oath, its terms, the
   frame of mind in which it was taken, and the minutest additions made to
   the terms, since, if no ground of relief can anywhere be found, such
   persons must be dismissed.  The case, however, of Severus, I mean of
   the presbyter ordained by him, does seem to me to allow of relief of
   this kind, if you will permit it.  Give directions for the district
   placed under Mestia, to which the man was appointed, to be reckoned
   under Vasoda.  Thus he will not forswear himself by not departing from
   the place, and Longinus, having Cyriacus with him, will not leave the
   Church unprovided for, nor himself be guilty of neglect of work. [2643]
     I moreover shall not be held guilty of taking action in contravention
   of any canons by making a concession to Cyriacus who had sworn that he
   would remain at Mindana and yet accepted the transfer.  His return will
   be in accordance with his oath, and his obedience to the arrangement
   will not be reckoned against him as perjury, because it was not added
   to his oath that he would not go, even a short time, from Mindana, but
   would remain there for the future.  Severus, who pleads forgetfulness,
   I shall pardon, only telling him that One who knows what is secret will
   not overlook the ravaging of His Church by a man of such a character; a
   man who originally appoints uncanonically, then imposes oaths in
   violation of the Gospel, then tells a man to perjure himself in the
   matter of his transfer, and last of all lies in pretended
   forgetfulness.  I am no judge of hearts; I only judge by what I hear;
   let us leave vengeance to the Lord, and ourselves pardon the common
   human error of forgetfulness, and receive the man without question.

   XI.  The man who is guilty of unintentional homicide has given
   sufficient satisfaction in eleven years.  We shall, without doubt,
   observe what is laid down by Moses in the case of wounded men, and
   shall not hold a murder to have been committed in the case of a man who
   lies down after he has been struck, and walks again leaning on his
   staff. [2644]   If, however, he does not rise again after he has been
   struck, nevertheless, from there being no intent to kill, the striker
   is a homicide, but an unintentional homicide.

   XII.  The canon absolutely excludes digamists from the ministry. [2645]

   XIII.  Homicide in war is not reckoned by our Fathers as homicide; I
   presume from their wish to make concession to men fighting on behalf of
   chastity and true religion.  Perhaps, however, it is well to counsel
   that those whose hands are not clean only abstain from communion for
   three years. [2646]

   XIV.  A taker of usury, if he consent to spend his unjust gain on the
   poor, and to be rid for the future of the plague of covetousness, may
   be received into the ministry. [2647]

   XV.  I am astonished at your requiring exactitude in Scripture, and
   arguing that there is something forced in the diction of the
   interpretation which gives the meaning of the original, but does not
   exactly render what is meant by the Hebrew word.  Yet I must not
   carelessly pass by the question started by an enquiring mind.  At the
   creation of the world, birds of the air and the fishes of the sea had
   the same origin; [2648] for both kinds were produced from the water.
   [2649]   The reason is that both have the same characteristics.  The
   latter swim in the water, the former in the air.  They are therefore
   mentioned together.  The form of expression is not used without
   distinction, but of all that lives in the water it is used very
   properly.  The birds of the air and the fishes of the sea are subject
   to man; and not they alone, but all that passes through the paths of
   the sea.  For every water-creature is not a fish, as for instance the
   sea monsters, whales, sharks, dolphins, seals, even sea-horses,
   sea-dogs, saw-fish, sword-fish, and sea-cows; and, if you like, sea
   nettles, cockles and all hard-shelled creatures of whom none are fish,
   and all pass through the paths of the sea; so that there are three
   kinds, birds of the air, fishes of the sea, and all water-creatures
   which are distinct from fish, and pass through the paths of the sea.

   XVI.  Naaman was not a great man with the Lord, but with his lord; that
   is, he was one of the chief princes of the King of the Syrians. [2650]
     Read your Bible carefully, and you will find the answer to your
   question there.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2611] Placed in 347.

   [2612] In this letter Basil replies to several questions of
   Amphilochius concerning the Canons, and also concerning the
   interpretation of some passages of Holy Scripture.  Maran dates it at
   the end of 374.

   [2613] Prov. xvii. 28, lxx.

   [2614] i.e.the followers of Novatian.  cf. Eusebius vi. 43.  cf. De.
   Sp. Scto. ch. x. p. 17 and note.

   [2615] Or Pepuziani, another name for the Montanists.  "Epiphanius may
   safely be disregarded, who, treating of the Montanists, in the 48th
   section of his work on heresies, treats of the Pepuziani, in the 49th,
   as a kindred, but distinct, sect."  Dr. Salmon in D.C.B. iv. 303.  The
   name is derived from Pepuza in Western Phrygia, the Montanist, or
   Cataphrygian, "Jerusalem."  (Eus. H.E. v. 18.)

   [2616] i.e. of Alexandria.  Jerome (Vir. illust. lxix.) says that he
   agreed with Cyprian and the African Synod on the rebaptizing of
   heretics.  The Ben. note says:  "Videtur hac in re major auctoritas
   Basilio attribuenda quam Hieronymo.  Plus operæ insumpserat Basilius in
   ea re examinanda."

   [2617] parasunagoge.

   [2618] Archbp. Trench (N.T. Syn. 330) quotes Augustine (Con. Crescon.
   Don. ii. 7):  "Schisma est recens congregationis ex aliquâ sententiarum
   diversitate dissensio; hæresis autem schisma inveteratum;" and Jerome
   (Ep. ad Tit. iii. 10):  "Inter hæresim et schisma hoc esse arbitrantur,
   quod hæresis perversum dogma habeat; schisma propter episcopalem
   dissensionem ab ecclesiâ separetur; quod quidem in principio aliquâ ex
   parte intelligi queat.  Cæterum nullum schisma non sibi aliquam
   confingit hæresim, ut recte ab ecclesia recessisse videatur." To these
   may be added Aug. (Quæst. in Matt. xi. 2):  "Solet autem etiam quæri
   schismatici quid ab hæreticis distent, et hoc inveniri quod
   schismaticos non fides diversa faciat sed communionis disrupta
   societas.  Sed utrum inter zizania numerandi sint dubitari potest,
   magis autem videntur spicis corruptis esse similiores, vel paleis
   aristarum fractis, vel scissis et de segete abruptis."

   [2619] ton aposchisanton, hos eti ek tes ekklesias onton. The Ben. note
   is "Quod autem addit Basilius, ut adhuc ex Ecclesia exsistentium, non
   idcirco addit quod schismaticos in Ecclesiæ membris numeraret.  Illius
   verba si quis in deteriorem partem rapiat, facilis et expedita
   responsio, Nam sub finem hujus, canonis de Encratitis ipsis, id est, de
   hæreticis incarnationem et Dei singularitatem negantibus, ait sibi non
   jam integrum esse eos qui huic sectæ conjuncti sunt ab Ecclesia
   separare, quia duos eorum episcopos sine baptismo ac sine nova
   ordinatione receperat.  Nemo autem suspicabitur Basilium ejusmodi
   hæreticos ab Ecclesia alienissimos non judicasse.  Quare quidquid
   schismaticis tribuit, in sola baptismi societate positum est.  Nam cum
   Cyprianus et Firmilianus schismaticos et hæreticos ita ab Ecclesia
   distractos crederent, ut nihil prosus ad eos ex fontibus Ecclesiæ
   perflueret; Basilius huic sententiæ non assentitur, et in schismaticis
   quia fidem Ecclesiæ retinent, vestigium quoddam agnoscit necessitudinis
   et societatis cum Ecclesia, ita ut valida sacramentorum administratio
   ab Ecclesia ad illos permanare possit.  Hinc sibi integrum negat
   detestandos hæreticos ab Ecclesia separare, quorum baptisma ratum
   habuerat.  Idem docent duo præstantissimi unitatis defensores.  Optatus
   et Augustinus.  Quod enim scissum est, inquit Optatus lib. iii. n. 9,
   ex parte divisum est, non ex toto:  cum constet merito, quia nobis et
   vobis ecclesiastica una est conversatio, et si hominum litigant mentes,
   non litigant sacramenta.  Vid. lib. iv. n. 2.  Sic etiam Augustinus
   lib. i.  De baptismo n. 3:  Itaque isti (hæretici et schismatici) in
   quibusdam rebus nobiscum sunt:  in quibus autem nobiscum non sunt, ut
   veniendo accipiant, vel redeundo recipiant, adhortamur.  Vid. lib. iii.
   n. 26.  Sic ex Basilio hæretici nobiscum sunt quoad baptisma."

   [2620] tous en bathmo.  cf. note on p. 218.

   [2621] As being one of Basil's predecessors in the see of Cæsarea.

   [2622] "Hoc Encratitarum facinore non corrupta essentialis baptismi
   forma.  Sed novæ quædam adjectæ cærimoniæ." Ben. Ed.

   [2623] i.e.those who used water instead of wine in the Eucharist, as
   Tatian and his followers.  cf. Clem. Al., Strom. i. 19 and Cyprian. Ep.
   lxiii.

   [2624] The Ben. note points out that the improper proceeding of the
   Encratites consisted not in any corruption of the baptismal formula,
   but in the addition of certain novel ceremonies, and proceeds:  "Nam in
   canone 47 sic eos loquentes inducit.  In Patrem et Filium et Spiritum
   baptizati sumus.  Hinc eorum baptisma ratum habet, si qua inciderit
   magni momenti causa.  Quod autem ait hoc facinus eos incipere, ut
   reditum sibi in Ecclesiam intercludant, videtur id prima specie in eam
   sententiam accipiendum, quasi Encratitæ baptisma suum ea mente
   immutassent, ut Catholicos ad illud rejiciendum incitarent, sicque
   plures in secta contineret odium et fuga novi baptismatis.  Abhorrebat
   enim ab omnium animis iteratus baptismus, ut pluribus exemplis probat
   Augustinus, lib. v. De baptismo, n. 6.  Videtur ergo prima specie
   Encratitis, ea, quam dixi, exstitisse causa, cur baptismum immutarent.
   Atque ita hunc locum interpretatur Tillemontius, tom. iv. p. 628.  Sic
   etiam illius exemplo interpretatus sum in Præf. novæ Cypriani operum
   editioni præmissa cap. 4. p. 12.  Sed huic interpretationi non convenit
   cum his quæ addit Basilius.  Vereri enim se significat ne Catholici,
   dum Encratitas ab hac baptismi immutatione deterrere volunt, nimium
   restricti sint et severi in eorum baptismo rejiciendo.  Sperabant ergo
   Catholici tardiores ad ejus modi baptisma Encratitas futuros, si illud
   Catholici ratum habere nollent; nedum ipsi Encratitæ baptismatis
   immutationem eo consilio induxerint, ut ejusmodi baptisma a Catholicis
   rejiceretur.  Quamobrem hæc verba, ut reditum sibi in Ecclesiam
   intercludant, non consilium et propositum Encratitarum designant, sed
   incommodum quod ex eorum facinore consequebatur; velut si dicamus
   aliquem scelus admittere, ut æternam sibi damnationem accersat."

   [2625] cf. note on p. 42.  St. Cyprian (Ep. lxx.) says that heretics
   who have no true altar cannot have oil sanctified by the altar.
   "Gregory of Nazianzus, Orat. (xlviii in Jul.) speaks of oil sanctified
   or consecrated on the spiritual or divine table; Optatus of Milevis (c.
   Don. vii. 102) says that this ointment is compounded (conditur) in the
   name of Christ; and the Pseudo-Dionysius (De Hierarch. Eccles. c. 4)
   mentions the use of the sign of the cross in the consecration of it."
   D.C.A. i. 355.

   [2626] This is the only known reference to these two bishops.

   [2627] "Respicit, ni falor, ad canonem 25 apostolorum, ad quem Balsamon
   et Zonaras observant nonnulla esse peccata, quibus excommunicatio, non
   solum depositio, infligitur; velut si quis pecunia, vel magistratus
   potentia, sacerdotium assequatur, ut sancitur Can. 29 et 30."  Ben.
   note.

   [2628] Nahum i. 9, LXX.

   [2629] "Duo veteres libri suntrimmou tes kardias."  Ben. note.

   [2630] cf. 1 Cor. ix. 27.

   [2631] John iv. 18.  For the more usual modern interpretation that the
   sixth union was an unlawful one, cf. Bengel.  Matrimonium hoc sextum
   non erat legitimum, vel non consummatum, aut desertio aliudve
   impedimentum intercesserat, ex altera utra parte.

   [2632] ton kanonikon.  The Greek is of either gender.  The Ben. note
   is:  Clericos sive eos qui in canone recensentur hac voce designari
   hactenus existimarunt Basilii interpretes, ac ipsi etiam Zonares et
   Balsamon.  Sed ut canonicas sive sacras virgines interpreter, plurimis
   rationum momentis adducor:  1. Basilius hoc nomine clericos appellare
   non solet, sed sacras virgines, ut persici potest ex epistolis 52 et
   175; 2. præscriptum Basilii non convenit in clericos, quorum nonnullis,
   nempe lectoribus et aliis ejus modi venia dabatur ineundi matrimonii,
   quamvis in canone recenserentur; 3. prohibet Basilius ejusmodi stupra
   quæ honesto matrimonii nomine prætexi solebant.  At id non inconcessum
   erat matrimonium, alios vero matrimonium post ordinationem inire nulla
   prorsus Ecclesia patiebatur, aut certe matrimonii pretium erat
   depositio.  Contra virginibus nubentibus non longior poena pluribus in
   locis imponebatur, quam digamis, ut perspicitur ex canone 18, ubi
   Basilius hance consuetudinem abrogat, ac virginum matrimonia instar
   adulterii existimat.

   [2633] So the mss.  But the Ben. note points out that there must be
   some error, if a sin knowingly committed was punished by
   excommunication for fifteen years (Canons lviii., lxii., lxiii.), and
   one unwittingly committed by a punishment of twice the duration.

   [2634] cf. 1 Tim. i. 20.

   [2635] The Ben. note continues:  "Deinde vero testatur Basilius eos
   fere hominis ætatem satanæ traditos fuisse.  At ætas hominis (genea)
   sæpe annorum viginti spatio existimatur; velut cum ait Dionysius
   Alexandrinus Alexandrinus apud Eusebium, lib. vii. cap. 21.  Israelitas
   in deserto fuisse duabus ætatibus.  Ipse Basilius in Epistola 201, quæ
   scripta est anno 375, Neocæsarienses incusat quod sibi jam totam fere
   hominis ætatem succenseant; quos tamen non ita pridem amicos habuerat;
   ac anno 568, Musonii morte affictos litteris amicissimis consolatus
   fuerat.  Sæculum apud Latinos non semper stricte sumitur; velut cum ait
   Hieronymus in Epist. 27 ad Marcellum, in Christi verbis explicandis per
   tanta jam sæcula tantorum ingenia sudasse; vel cum auctor libri De
   rebaptismate in Cyprianum tacito nomine invehitur, quod adversus prisca
   consulta post tot sæculorum tantam seriem nunc primum repente sine
   ratione insurgat, p. 357.  De hoc ergo triginta annorum numero non
   paucos deducendos esse crediderim.

   [2636] Matt. v. 32.

   [2637] 1 Cor. vi. 16.

   [2638] Jer. iii. 1.

   [2639] Prov. xviii. 22, LXX.

   [2640] The Ben. note is, Sequitur in hoc canone Basilius Romanas leges,
   quas tamen fatetur cum evangelio minus consentire.  Lex Constantini
   jubet in repudio mittendo a femina hæc sola crimina inquiri, si
   homicidam, vel medicamentarium, vel sepulcrorum dissolutorem maritum
   suum esse probaverit.  At eadem lege viris conceditur, ut adulteras
   uxores dimittant.  Aliud discrimen hoc in canone uxores inter et
   maritos ponitur, quod uxor injuste dimissa, si ab alia ducatur,
   adulterii notam non effugiat; dimissus autem injuste maritus nec
   adulter sit, si aliam ducat, nec quæ ab eo ducitur, adultera.  Cæterum
   Basilius ante episcopatum eodem jure uxorem ac maritum esse censebat.
   Nam in Moral. reg. 73statuit virum ab uxore, aut uxorem a viro non
   debere separari, nisi quis deprehendatur in adulterio.  Utrique pariter
   interdicit novis nuptiis, sive repudient, sive repudientur.

   [2641] 1 Cor. vii. 16.

   [2642] The Ben. note refers to the case of Dracontius, who had sworn
   that he would escape if he were ordained bishop, and so did; but was
   urged by Athanasius to discharge the duties of his diocese,
   notwithstanding his oath.

   [2643] On this obscure passage the Ben. note is:  Longinus presbyter
   erat in agro Mestiæ subjecto.  Sed cum is depositus essit ob aliquod
   delictum, ac forte honorem sacerdotii retineret, ut nonnumquam fiebat,
   Severus episcopus in ejus locum transtulit Cyriacum, quem antea
   Mindanis ordinaverat, ac jurare coegerat se Mindanis mansurum.  Nihil
   hac in re statui posse videbatur, quod non in magnam aliquam
   diffcultatem incurreret.  Nam si in agro Mestiæ subjecto Cyriacus
   remaneret, perjurii culpam sustinebat.  Si rediret Mindana, ager Mestiæ
   subjectus presbytero carebat, atque hujus incommodi culpa redundabat in
   caput Longini, qui ob delictum depositus fuerat.  Quid igitur
   Basilius?  Utrique occurrit incommodo; jubet agrum, qui Mastiæ
   subjectus erat Vasodis subjici, id est loco, cui subjecta erant
   Mindana.  Hoc ex remedio duo consequebatur Basilius, ut et ager ille
   presbytero non careret, et Cyriacus ibi remanens Mindana tamen redire
   censeretur, cum jam hic locus eidem ac Mindana chorepiscopo pareret.

   [2644] Exod. xxi. 19.

   [2645] Ap. Can. xiii. 14:  "It is clear from the Philosophumena of
   Hippolytus (ix. 12) that by the beginning of the 3d century the rule of
   monogamy for the clergy was well established, since he complains that
   in the days of Callistus digamist and trigamist bishops, and priests
   and deacons, began to be admitted into the clergy.'  Tertullian
   recognises the rule as to the clergy.  Thus in his De Exhortatione
   Castitatis (c. 7) he asks scornfully; Being a digamist, dost thou
   baptize?  Dost thou make the offering?'"  Dict. C. A. i. 552. Vide also
   Canon Bright, Notes on the Canons of the first four General Councils.
   On Can. Nic. viii. p. 27.

   [2646] The Ben. note quotes Balsamon, Zonaras, and Alexius Aristenus as
   remarking on this that Basil gives advice, not direction, and regards
   the hands, not the hearts, of soldiers as defiled; and as recalling
   that this canon was quoted in opposition to the Emperor Phocas when he
   wished to reckon soldiers as martyrs.  The canon was little regarded,
   as being contrary to general Christian sentiment. cf. Athan. Ep.
   xlviii. p. 557 of this edition:  "In war it is lawful and praiseworthy
   to destroy the enemy; accordingly not only are they who have
   distinguished themselves in the field held worthy of great honours, but
   monuments are put up proclaiming their achievements."

   [2647] cf. Can. Nic. xvii.  Canon Bright (On the Canons, etc., p. 56)
   remarks:  "It must be remembered that interest, called tokos and fenus,
   as the product of the principal, was associated in the early stages of
   society,--in Greece and Rome as well as in Palestine,--with the notion
   of undue profit extorted by a rich lender from the needy borrower (see
   Grote, Hist. Gr. ii. 311 H.; Arnold, Hist. Rome i. 282; Mommsen, Hist.
   R. i. 291).  Hence Tacitus says, sane vetus urbi fenebre malcum, et
   seditionum discordiarumque creberrima causa' (Ann. vi. 16), and Gibbon
   calls usury the inveterate grievance of the city, abolished by the
   clamours of the people, revived by their wants and idleness.'"  (v.
   314.)

   [2648] Ps. viii. 8.

   [2649] Gen. i. 20 and 21.

   [2650] 2 Kings v. 1.


     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CXCIX. [2692]

   Canonica Secunda.

   To Amphilochius, concerning the Canons.

   I wrote some time ago in reply to the questions of your reverence, but
   I did not send the letter, partly because from my long and dangerous
   illness I had not time to do so; partly because I had no one to send
   with it.  I have but few men with me who are experienced in travelling
   and fit for service of this kind.  When you thus learn the causes of my
   delay, forgive me.  I have been quite astonished at your readiness to
   learn and at your humility.  You are entrusted with the office of a
   teacher, and yet you condescend to learn, and to learn of me, who
   pretend to no great knowledge.  Nevertheless, since you consent, on
   account of your fear of God, to do what another man might hesitate to
   do, I am bound for my part to go even beyond my strength in aiding your
   readiness and righteous zeal.

   XVII.  You asked me about the presbyter Bianor--can he be admitted
   among the clergy, because of his oath?  I know that I have already
   given the clergy of Antioch a general sentence in the case of all those
   who had sworn with him; namely, that they should abstain from the
   public congregations, but might perform priestly functions in private.
   [2693]   Moreover, he has the further liberty for the performance of
   his ministerial functions, from the fact that his sacred duties lie not
   at Antioch, but at Iconium; for, as you have written to me yourself, he
   has chosen to live rather at the latter than at the former place.  The
   man in question may, therefore, be received; but your reverence must
   require him to shew repentance for the rash readiness of the oath which
   he took before the unbeliever, [2694] being unable to bear the trouble
   of that small peril.

   XVIII.  Concerning fallen virgins, who, after professing a chaste life
   before the Lord, make their vows vain, because they have fallen under
   the lusts of the flesh, our fathers, tenderly [2695] and meekly making
   allowance for the infirmities of them that fall, laid down that they
   might be received after a year, ranking them with the digamists.
   Since, however, by God's grace the Church grows mightier as she
   advances, and the order of virgins is becoming more numerous, it is my
   judgment that careful heed should be given both to the act as it
   appears upon consideration, and to the mind of Scripture, which may be
   discovered from the context.  Widowhood is inferior to virginity;
   consequently the sin of the widows comes far behind that of the
   virgins.  Let us see what Paul writes to Timothy.  "The young widows
   refuse:  for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they
   will marry; having damnation because they have cast off their first
   faith." [2696]   If, therefore, a widow lies under a very heavy charge,
   as setting at naught her faith in Christ, what must we think of the
   virgin, who is the bride of Christ, and a chosen vessel dedicated to
   the Lord?  It is a grave fault even on the part of a slave to give
   herself away in secret wedlock and fill the house with impurity, and,
   by her wicked life, to wrong her owner; but it is forsooth far more
   shocking for the bride to become an adulteress, and, dishonouring her
   union with the bridegroom, to yield herself to unchaste indulgence.
   The widow, as being a corrupted slave, is indeed condemned; but the
   virgin comes under the charge of adultery.  We call the man who lives
   with another man's wife an adulterer, and do not receive him into
   communion until he has ceased from his sin; and so we shall ordain in
   the case of him who has the virgin.  One point, however, must be
   determined beforehand, that the name virgin is given to a woman who
   voluntarily devotes herself to the Lord, renounces marriage, and
   embraces a life of holiness.  And we admit professions dating from the
   age of full intelligence. [2697]   For it is not right in such cases to
   admit the words of mere children.  But a girl of sixteen or seventeen
   years of age, in full possession of her faculties, who has been
   submitted to strict examination, and is then constant, and persists in
   her entreaty to be admitted, may then be ranked among the virgins, her
   profession ratified, and its violation rigorously punished.  Many girls
   are brought forward by their parents and brothers, and other kinsfolk,
   before they are of full age, and have no inner impulse towards a
   celibate life.  The object of the friends is simply to provide for
   themselves.  Such women as these must not be readily received, before
   we have made public investigation of their own sentiments.

   XIX.  I do not recognise the profession of men, except in the case of
   those who have enrolled themselves in the order of monks, and seem to
   have secretly adopted the celibate life.  Yet in their case I think it
   becoming that there should be a previous examination, and that a
   distinct profession should be received from them, so that whenever they
   may revert to the life of the pleasures of the flesh, they may be
   subjected to the punishment of fornicators.

   XX.  I do not think that any condemnation ought to be passed on women
   who professed virginity while in heresy, and then afterwards preferred
   marriage.  "What things soever the law saith, it saith to them who are
   under the law." [2698]   Those who have not yet put on Christ's yoke do
   not recognise the laws of the Lord.  They are therefore to be received
   in the church, as having remission in the case of these sins too, as of
   all, from their faith in Christ.  As a general rule, all sins formerly
   committed in the catechumenical state are not taken into account.
   [2699]   The Church does not receive these persons without baptism; and
   it is very necessary that in such cases the birthrights should be
   observed.

   XXI.  If a man living with a wife is not satisfied with his marriage
   and falls into fornication, I account him a fornicator, and prolong his
   period of punishment.  Nevertheless, we have no canon subjecting him to
   the charge of adultery, if the sin be committed against an unmarried
   woman.  For the adulteress, it is said, "being polluted shall be
   polluted," [2700] and she shall not return to her husband:  and "He
   that keepeth an adulteress is a fool and impious." [2701]   He,
   however, who has committed fornication is not to be cut off from the
   society of his own wife.  So the wife will receive the husband on his
   return from fornication, but the husband will expel the polluted woman
   from his house.  The argument here is not easy, but the custom has so
   obtained. [2702]

   XXII.  Men who keep women carried off by violence, if they carried them
   off when betrothed to other men, must not be received before removal of
   the women and their restoration to those to whom they were first
   contracted, whether they wish to receive them, or to separate from
   them.  In the case of a girl who has been taken when not betrothed, she
   ought first to be removed, and restored to her own people, and handed
   over to the will of her own people whether parents, or brothers, or any
   one having authority over her.  If they choose to give her up, the
   cohabitation may stand; but, if they refuse, no violence should be
   used.  In the case of a man having a wife by seduction, be it secret or
   by violence, he must be held guilty of fornication.  The punishment of
   fornicators is fixed at four years.  In the first year they must be
   expelled from prayer, and weep at the door of the church; in the second
   they may be received to sermon; in the third to penance; in the fourth
   to standing with the people, while they are withheld from the
   oblation.  Finally, they may be admitted to the communion of the good
   gift.

   XXIII.  Concerning men who marry two sisters, or women who marry two
   brothers a short letter of mine has been published, of which I have
   sent a copy to your reverence. [2703]   The man who has taken his own
   brother's wife is not to be received until he have separated from her.

   XXIV.  A widow whose name is in the list of widows, that is, who is
   supported [2704] by the Church, is ordered by the Apostle to be
   supported no longer when she marries. [2705]

   There is no special rule for a widower.  The punishment appointed for
   digamy may suffice.  If a widow who is sixty years of age chooses again
   to live with a husband, she shall be held unworthy of the communion of
   the good gift until she be moved no longer by her impure desire.  If we
   reckon her before sixty years, the blame rests with us, and not with
   the woman.

   XXV.  The man who retains as his wife the woman whom he has violated,
   shall be liable to the penalty of rape, but it shall be lawful for him
   to have her to wife.

   XXVI.  Fornication is not wedlock, nor yet the beginning of wedlock.
   Wherefore it is best, if possible, to put asunder those who are united
   in fornication.  If they are set on cohabitation, let them admit the
   penalty of fornication.  Let them be allowed to live together, lest a
   worse thing happen.

   XXVII.  As to the priest ignorantly involved in an illegal marriage,
   [2706] I have made the fitting regulation, that he may hold his seat,
   but must abstain from other functions.  For such a case pardon is
   enough.  It is unreasonable that the man who has to treat his own
   wounds should be blessing another, for benediction is the imparting of
   holiness.  How can he who through his fault, committed in ignorance, is
   without holiness, impart it to another?  Let him bless neither in
   public nor in private, nor distribute the body of Christ to others, nor
   perform any other sacred function, but, content with his seat of
   honour, let him beseech the Lord with weeping, that his sin, committed
   in ignorance, may be forgiven.

   XXVIII.  It has seemed to me ridiculous that any one should make a vow
   to abstain from swine's flesh.  Be so good as to teach men to abstain
   from foolish vows and promises.  Represent the use to be quite
   indifferent.  No creature of God, received with thanksgiving, is to be
   rejected. [2707]   The vow is ridiculous; the abstinence unnecessary.

   XXIX.  It is especially desirable that attention should be given to the
   case of persons in power who threaten on oath to do some hurt to those
   under their authority.  The remedy is twofold.  In the first place, let
   them be taught not to take oaths at random:  secondly, not to persist
   in their wicked determinations.  Any one who is arrested in the design
   of fulfilling an oath to injure another ought to shew repentance for
   the rashness of his oath, and must not confirm his wickedness under the
   pretext of piety.  Herod was none the better for fulfilling his oath,
   when, of course only to save himself from perjury, he became the
   prophet's murderer. [2708]   Swearing is absolutely forbidden, [2709]
   and it is only reasonable that the oath which tends to evil should be
   condemned.  The swearer must therefore change his mind, and not persist
   in confirming his impiety.  Consider the absurdity of the thing a
   little further.  Suppose a man to swear that he will put his brother's
   eyes out:  is it well for him to carry his oath into action?  Or to
   commit murder? or to break any other commandment?  "I have sworn, and I
   will perform it," [2710] not to sin, but to "keep thy righteous
   judgments."  It is no less our duty to undo and destroy sin, than it is
   to confirm the commandment by immutable counsels.

   XXX.  As to those guilty of abduction we have no ancient rule, but I
   have expressed my own judgment.  The period is three years; [2711] the
   culprits and their accomplices to be excluded from service.  The act
   committed without violence is not liable to punishment, whenever it has
   not been preceded by violation or robbery.  The widow is independent,
   and to follow or not is in her own power.  We must, therefore, pay no
   heed to excuses.

   XXXI.  A woman whose husband has gone away and disappeared, and who
   marries another, before she has evidence of his death, commits
   adultery.  Clerics who are guilty of the sin unto death [2712] are
   degraded from their order, but not excluded from the communion of the
   laity.  Thou shalt not punish twice for the same fault. [2713]

   XXXIII.  Let an indictment for murder be preferred against the woman
   who gives birth to a child on the road and pays no attention to it.

   XXXIV.  Women who had committed adultery, and confessed their fault
   through piety, or were in any way convicted, were not allowed by our
   fathers to be publicly exposed, that we might not cause their death
   after conviction.  But they ordered that they should be excluded from
   communion till they had fulfilled their term of penance.

   XXXV.  In the case of a man deserted by his wife, the cause of the
   desertion must be taken into account.  If she appear to have abandoned
   him without reason, he is deserving of pardon, but the wife of
   punishment.  Pardon will be given to him that he may communicate with
   the Church.

   XXXVI.  Soldiers' wives who have married in their husbands' absence
   will come under the same principle as wives who, when their husbands
   have been on a journey, have not waited their return.  Their case,
   however, does admit of some concession on the ground of there being
   greater reason to suspect death.

   XXXVII.  The man who marries after abducting another man's wife will
   incur the charge of adultery for the first case; but for the second
   will go free.

   XXXVIII.  Girls who follow against their fathers' will commit
   fornication; but if their fathers are reconciled to them, the act seems
   to admit of a remedy.  They are not however immediately restored to
   communion, but are to be punished for three years.

   XXXIX.  The woman who lives with an adulterer is an adulteress the
   whole time. [2714]

   XL.  The woman who yields to a man against her master's will commits
   fornication; but if afterwards she accepts free marriage, she marries.
   The former case is fornication; the latter marriage.  The covenants of
   persons who are not independent have no validity.

   XLI.  The woman in widowhood, who is independent, may dwell with a
   husband without blame, if there is no one to prevent their
   cohabitation; for the Apostle says; "but if her husband be dead, she is
   at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the Lord." [2715]

   XLII.  Marriages contracted without the permission of those in
   authority, are fornication.  If neither father nor master be living the
   contracting parties are free from blame; just as if the authorities
   assent to the cohabitation, it assumes the fixity of marriage.

   XLIII.  He who smites his neighbour to death is a murderer, whether he
   struck first or in self defence.

   XLIV.  The deaconess who commits fornication with a heathen may be
   received into repentance and will be admitted to the oblation in the
   seventh year; of course if she be living in chastity.  The heathen who,
   after he has believed, takes to idolatry, returns to his vomit.  We do
   not, however, give up the body of the deaconess to the use of the
   flesh, as being consecrated.

   XLV.  If any one, after taking the name of Christianity, insults
   Christ, he gets no good from the name.

   XLVI.  The woman who unwillingly marries a man deserted at the time by
   his wife, and is afterwards repudiated, because of the return of the
   former to him, commits fornication, but involuntarily.  She will,
   therefore, not be prohibited from marriage; but it is better if she
   remain as she is. [2716]

   XLVII.  Encratitæ, [2717] Saccophori, [2718] and Apotactitæ [2719] are
   not regarded in the same manner as Novatians, since in their case a
   canon has been pronounced, although different; while of the former
   nothing has been said.  All these I re-baptize on the same principle.
   If among you their re-baptism is forbidden, for the sake of some
   arrangement, nevertheless let my principle prevail.  Their heresy is,
   as it were, an offshoot of the Marcionites, abominating, as they do,
   marriage, refusing wine, and calling God's creature polluted.  We do
   not therefore receive them into the Church, unless they be baptized
   into our baptism.  Let them not say that they have been baptized into
   Father, Son and Holy Ghost, inasmuch as they make God the author of
   evil, after the example of Marcion and the rest of the heresies.
   Wherefore, if this be determined on, more bishops ought to meet
   together in one place and publish the canon in these terms, that action
   may be taken without peril, and authority given to answers to questions
   of this kind.

   XLVIII.  The woman who has been abandoned by her husband, ought, in my
   judgment, to remain as she is.  The Lord said, "If any one leave [2720]
   his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, he causeth her to commit
   adultery;" [2721] thus, by calling her adulteress, He excludes her from
   intercourse with another man.  For how can the man being guilty, as
   having caused adultery, and the woman, go without blame, when she is
   called adulteress by the Lord for having intercourse with another man?

   XLIX.  Suffering violation should not be a cause of condemnation.  So
   the slave girl, if she has been forced by her own master, is free from
   blame.

   L.  There is no law as to trigamy:  a third marriage is not contracted
   by law.  We look upon such things as the defilements of the Church.
   But we do not subject them to public condemnation, as being better than
   unrestrained fornication. [2722]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2692] Placed in 375.

   [2693] The Ben. Ed. note:  "Sæpe vituperantur apud sanctos Patres, qui
   sacra in privatis ædibus sive domesticis oratoriis celebrant.  Hinc
   Irenæus, lib. iv. cap. 26, oportere ait eos, qui absistunt a principali
   successione et quocunque loco colligunt, suspectos habere, vel quasi
   hæreticos et malæ sententiæ, vel quasi scindentes et elatos et sibi
   placentes; aut rursus ut hypocritas quæstus gratia et vanæ gloriæ hoc
   operantes.  Basilius, in Psalm xxvii. n. 3:  Non igitur extra sanctam
   hanc aulam adorare oporet, sed intra ipsam, etc.  Similia habet
   Eusebius in eundem psalmum, p. 313.  Sic etiam Cyrillus Alexandrinus in
   libro adversus Anthropomorphitas, cap. 12, et in libro decimo De
   adorat., p. 356.  Sed his in locis perspicuum est hæreticorum aut
   schismaticorum synagogas notari, vel quas vocat Basilius, can. 1.
   parasunagogas, sive illicitos conventus a presbyteris aut episcopis
   rebellibus habitos, aut a populis disciplinæ expertibus.  At interdum
   graves causæ suberant, cur sacra in privatis ædibus impermissa non
   essent.  Ipsa persecutio necessitatem hujus rei sæpe afferebat, cum
   catholici episcoporum hæreticorum communionem fugerent, ut Sebastiæ
   ecclesiarum aditu prohiberentur.  Minime ergo mirum, si presbyteris
   Antiochenis eam sacerdotii perfunctionem Basilius reliquit, quæ et ad
   jurisjurandi religionem et ad temporum molestias accommodata
   videbatur.  Synodus Laodicena vetat, can. 58, in domibus fieri
   oblationem ab episcopis vel presbyteris.  Canon 31.  Trullanus id
   clericis non interdicit, modo accedat episcopi consenus.  Non inusitata
   fuisse ejusmodi sacra in domesticis oratoriis confirmat canon Basilii
   27, ubi vetatur, ne presbyter illicitis nuptiis implicantus privatim
   aut publice sacerdotii munere fungatur.  Eustathius Sebastenus Ancyræ
   cum Arianis in domibus communicavit, ut ex pluribus Basilii epistolis
   discimus, cum apertam ab eis communionem impetrare non posset."

   [2694] Videtur infidelis ille vir unus aliquis fuisse ex potentioribus
   Arianis ejusque furor idcirco in presbyteros Antiochenos incitatus quod
   hi ecclesiam absente Meletio regerent, ac maximam civium partem in
   illius fide et communione retinerent.

   [2695] hapalos, with four mss., al. haplos.

   [2696] 1 Tim. v. 11, 12.

   [2697] "Hoc Basilii decretum de professionis ætate citatur in canone
   quadragesimo synodi in Trullo" (a.d. 691) "et decem et septem anni quos
   Basilius requirit, ad decem rediguntur."

   [2698] Rom. iii. 19.

   [2699] "Male Angli in Pandectis et alit interpretes reddunt, quæ in
   catechumenica vita fiunt.  Non enim dicit Basilius ea non puniri quæ in
   hoc statu peccantur, sed tantum peccata ante baptismum commissa
   baptismo expiari, nec jam esse judicio ecclesiastico obnoxia.  Hinc
   observat Zonaras non pugnare hunc canonem cum canone quinto
   Neocæsariensi, in quo poenæ catechumenis peccantibus decernuntur."

   [2700] Jer. iii. 1.

   [2701] Prov. xviii. 22, LXX.

   [2702] "Non solus Basilius hanc consuetudinem secutus.  Auctor
   constitutionum apostolicarum sic loquitur lib. vi. cap. 14:  Qui
   corruptam retinet, naturæ legem violat:  quando quidem qui retinet
   adulteram, stultus est et impius.  Abscinde enim eam, inquit, a
   carnibus tuis.  Nam adjutrix non est, sed insidiatrix, quæ mentem ad
   alium declinarit.  Canon 8, Neocæsariensis laicis, quorum uxores
   adulterii convictæ, aditum ad ministerium ecclesiasticum claudit;
   clericis depositionis poenam irrogat, si adulteram nolint dimittere.
   Canon 65 Eliberitanus sic habet:  Si cujus clerici uxor fuerit mæchata,
   et scierit eam maritus suus mæchari, et non eam statim projecerit, nec
   in fine accipiat communionem.  Hermas lib. i, c. 2, adulteram ejici
   jubet, sed tamen poenitentem recipi.  S. Augustinus adulterium
   legitimam esse dimittendi causam pronuntiat, sed non necessariam, lib.
   ii. De Adulter. nuptiis, cap. 5, n. 13."

   [2703] Probably Letter clx. to Diodorus is referred to.

   [2704] Diakonoumenen.  So the Ben. Ed.  Another possible rendering is
   "received into the order of deaconesses."

   [2705] 1 Tim. v. 11, 12.

   [2706] "'Athesmo gamo."  Illicitas nuptias.

   [2707] 1 Tim. iv. 4.

   [2708] Matt. xiv. 10.

   [2709] Matt. v. 34.

   [2710] Ps. cxix. 106.

   [2711] The Ben. Ed. point out that in Canon xxii. four years is the
   allotted period, as in the case of fornicators.

   [2712] St. Basil on Isaiah iv. calls sins wilfully committed after full
   knowledge "sins unto death."  But in the same commentary he applies the
   same designation to sins which lead to hell.  The sense to be applied
   to the phrase in Canon xxxii. is to be learnt, according to the Ben.
   note, from Canons lxix. and lxx., where a less punishment is assigned
   to mere wilful sins unto death than in Canon xxxii.

   [2713] Nahum i. 9, LXX.

   [2714] Or, according to another reading, in every way.

   [2715] 1 Cor. vii. 39.

   [2716] This is Can. xciii. of the Council in Trullo.

   [2717] Generally reckoned rather as Manichæans than as here by Basil as
   Marcionites, but dualism was common to both systems.

   [2718] A Manichæan sect, who led a solitary life.  Death is threatened
   against them in a law of Theodosius dated a.d. 322 (Cod. Theod. lib.
   xvi. tit. 5, leg. 9), identified by the Ben. Ed. with the
   Hydroparastatæ.

   [2719] A Manichæan sect.  cf. Epiphanius ii. 18.  In the work of
   Macarius Magnes, published in Paris 1876, they are identified with the
   Encratites.

   [2720] katalipe for apoluse.

   [2721] Matt. v. 22.

   [2722] cf. however Canon iv., where trigamy is called polygamy or at
   best a limited fornication, and those guilty of it subjected to
   exclusion from the Eucharist.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CC. [2723]

   To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.

   I am attacked by sickness after sickness, and all the work given me,
   not only by the affairs of the Church, but by those who are troubling
   the Church, has detained me during the whole winter, and up to the
   present time.  It has been therefore quite impossible for me to send
   any one to you or to pay you a visit.  I conjecture that you are
   similarly situated; not, indeed, as to sickness, God forbid; may the
   Lord grant you continued health for carrying out His commandments.  But
   I know that the care of the Churches gives you the same distress as it
   does me.  I was now about to send some one to get me accurate
   information about your condition.  But when my well beloved son
   Meletius, who is moving the newly enlisted troops, reminded me of the
   opportunity of my saluting you by him, I gladly accepted the occasion
   to write and had recourse to the kind services of the conveyor of my
   letter.  He is one who may himself serve instead of a letter, both
   because of his amiable disposition, and of his being well acquainted
   with all which concerns me.  By him, then, I beseech your reverence
   especially to pray for me, that the Lord may grant to me a riddance
   from this troublesome body of mine; to His Churches, peace; and to you,
   rest; and, whenever you have settled the affairs of Lycaonia in
   apostolic fashion, as you have began, an opportunity to visit also this
   place.  Whether I be sojourning in the flesh, or shall have been
   already bidden to take my departure to the Lord, I hope that you will
   interest yourself in our part of the world, as your own, as indeed it
   is, strengthening all that is weak, rousing all that is slothful and,
   by the help of the Spirit Which abides in you, transforming everything
   into a condition well pleasing to the Lord.  My very honourable sons,
   Meletius and Melitius, whom you have known for some time, and know to
   be devoted to yourself, keep in your good care and pray for them.  This
   is enough to keep them in safety.  Salute in my name, I beg you, all
   who are with your holiness, both all the clergy, and all the laity
   under your pastoral care, and my very religious brothers and fellow
   ministers.  Bear in mind the memory of the blessed martyr Eupsychius,
   and do not wait for me to mention him again.  Do not take pains to come
   on the exact day, but anticipate it, and so give me joy, if I be yet
   living on this earth.  Till then may you, by the grace of the Holy One,
   be preserved for me and for God's Churches, enjoying health and wealth
   in the Lord, and praying for me.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2723] Placed in 375.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CCI. [2724]

   To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.

   I long to meet you for many reasons, that I may have the benefit of
   your advice in the matters I had in hand, and that on beholding you
   after a long interval I may have some comfort for your absence.  But
   since both of us are prevented by the same reasons, you by the illness
   which has befallen you, and I by the malady of longer standing which
   has not yet left me, let us, if you will, each forgive the other, that
   both may free ourselves from blame.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2724] Placed in 375.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CCII. [2725]

   To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.

   Under other circumstances I should think it a special privilege to meet
   with your reverence, but above all now, when the business which brings
   us together is of such great importance.  But so much of my illness as
   still clings to me is enough to prevent my stirring ever so short a
   distance.  I tried to drive as far as the martyrs [2726] and had a
   relapse almost into my old state.  You must therefore forgive me.  If
   the matter can be put off for a few days, I will, by God's grace join
   you, and share your anxieties.  If the business presses, do, by God's
   help, what has to be done; but reckon me as present with you and as
   participating in your worthy deeds.  May you, by the grace of the Holy
   One, be preserved to God's Church, strong and joyous in the Lord, and
   praying for me.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2725] Placed in 375.

   [2726] Tillemont conjectures that the drive was to St. Eupsychius, but
   the day of St. Eupsychius fell in September, which the Ben. note thinks
   too late for the date of this letter.  The memorials of St. Julitta and
   St. Gordius were also near Cæsarea, but their days fell in January,
   which the same note thinks too early.  Gregory of Nyssa (Migne iii. p.
   653) says that there were more altars in Cappadocia than in all the
   world, so that we need have no difficulty in supposing some saint whose
   date would synchronize with the letter.  Basil, however, may have tried
   to drive to the shrine of some martyr on some other day than the
   anniversary of his death.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CCIII. [2727]

   To the bishops of the sea coast. [2728]

   I have had a strong desire to meet you, but from time to time some
   hindrance has supervened and prevented my fulfilling my purpose.  I
   have either been hindered by sickness, and you know well how, from my
   early manhood to my present old age, this ailment has been my constant
   companion, brought up with me, and chastising me, by the righteous
   judgment of God, Who ordains all things in wisdom; or by the cares of
   the Church, or by struggles with the opponents of the doctrines of
   truth.  [Up to this day I live in much affliction and grief, having the
   feeling present before me, that you are wanting to me.  For when God
   tells me, who took on Him His sojourn in the flesh for the very purpose
   that, by patterns of duty, He might regulate our life, and might by His
   own voice announce to us the Gospel of the kingdom,--when He says, By
   this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
   another,' and whereas the Lord left His own peace to His disciples as a
   farewell gift, [2729] when about to complete the dispensation in the
   flesh, saying, Peace I leave with you, My peace I give you,' I cannot
   persuade myself that without love to others, and without, as far as
   rests with me, peaceableness towards all, I can be called a worthy
   servant of Jesus Christ.  I have waited a long while for the chance of
   your love paying us a visit.  For ye are not ignorant that we, being
   exposed to all, as rocks running out in the sea, sustain the fury of
   the heretical waves, which, in that they break around us, do not cover
   the district behind.  I say "we" in order to refer it, not to human
   power, but to the grace of God, Who, by the weakness of men shows His
   power, as says the prophet in the person of the Lord, Will ye not fear
   Me, who have placed the sand as a boundary to the sea?' for by the
   weakest and most contemptible of all things, the sand, the Mighty One
   has bounded the great and full sea.  Since, then, this is our position,
   it became your love to be frequent in sending true brothers to visit us
   who labour with the storm, and more frequently letters of love, partly
   to confirm our courage, partly to correct any mistake of ours.  For we
   confess that we are liable to numberless mistakes, being men, and
   living in the flesh.]

   2.  But hitherto, very honourable brethren, you have not given me my
   due; and this for two reasons.  Either you failed to perceive the
   proper course; or else, under the influence of some of the calumnies
   spread abroad about me, you did not think me deserving of being visited
   by you in love.  Now, therefore, I myself take the initiative.  I beg
   to state that I am perfectly ready to rid myself, in your presence, of
   the charges urged against me, but only on condition that my revilers
   are admitted to stand face to face with me before your reverences.  If
   I am convicted, I shall not deny my error.  You, after the conviction,
   will receive pardon from the Lord for withdrawing yourselves from the
   communion of me a sinner.  The successful accusers, too, will have
   their reward in the publication of my secret wickedness.  If, however,
   you condemn me before you have the evidence before you, I shall be none
   the worse, barring the loss I shall sustain of a possession I hold most
   dear--your love:  while you, for your part, will suffer the same loss
   in losing me, and will seem to be running counter to the words of the
   Gospel:  "Doth our law judge any man before it hear him?" [2730]   The
   reviler, moreover, if he adduce no proof of what he says, will be shewn
   to have got nothing from his wicked language but a bad name for
   himself.  For what name can be properly applied to the slanderer [2731]
   except that which he professes to bear by the very conduct of which he
   is guilty?  Let the reviler, therefore, appear not as slanderer, [2732]
   but as accuser; nay, I will not call him accuser, I will rather regard
   him as a brother, admonishing in love, and producing conviction for my
   amendment.  And you must not be hearers of calumny, but triers of
   proof.  Nor must I be left uncured, because my sin is not being made
   manifest.

   [3.  Let not this consideration influence you.  We dwell on the sea, we
   are exempt from the sufferings of the generality, we need no succour
   from others; so what is the good to us of foreign communion?'  For the
   same Lord Who divided the islands from the continent by the sea, bound
   the island Christians to those of the continent by love.  Nothing,
   brethren, separates us from each other, but deliberate estrangement.
   We have one Lord, one faith, the same hope.  The hands need each other;
   the feet steady each other.  The eyes possess their clear apprehension
   from agreement.  We, for our part, confess our own weakness, and we
   seek your fellow feeling.  For we are assured, that though ye are not
   present in body, yet by the aid of prayer, ye will do us much benefit
   in these most critical times.  It is neither decorous before men, nor
   pleasing to God, that you should make avowals which not even the
   Gentiles adopt, which know not God.  Even they, as we hear, though the
   country they live in be sufficient for all things, yet, on account of
   the uncertainty of the future, make much of alliances with each other,
   and seek mutual intercourse as being advantageous to them.  Yet we, the
   sons of fathers who have laid down the law that by brief notes the
   proofs of communion should be carried about from one end of the earth
   to the other, and that all should be citizens and familiars with all,
   now sever ourselves from the whole world, and are neither ashamed at
   our solitariness, nor shudder that on us is fallen the fearful prophecy
   of the Lord, Because of lawlessness abounding, the love of the many
   shall wax cold.']

   4.  Do not, most honourable brethren, do not suffer this.  Rather, by
   letters of peace and by salutations of love, comfort me for the past.
   You have made a wound in my heart by your former neglect.  Soothe its
   anguish, as it were, by a tender touch.  Whether you wish to come to
   me, and examine for yourselves into the truth of what you hear of my
   infirmities, or whether by the addition of more lies my sins are
   reported to you to be yet more grievous, I must accept even this.  I am
   ready to welcome you with open hands and to offer myself to the
   strictest test, only let love preside over the proceedings.  Or if you
   prefer to indicate any spot in your own district to which I may come
   and pay you the visit which is due, submitting myself, as far as may
   be, to examination, for the healing of the past, and the prevention of
   slander for the future, I accept this.  Although my flesh is weak, yet,
   as long as I breathe, I am responsible for the due discharge of every
   duty which may tend to the edification of the Churches of Christ.  Do
   not, I beseech you, make light of my entreaty.  Do not force me to
   disclose my distress to others.  Hitherto, brethren, as you are well
   aware, I have kept my grief to myself, for I blush to speak of your
   alienation from me to those of our communion who are at a distance.  I
   shrink at once from paining them and from gratifying those who hate
   me.  I alone am writing this now; but I send in the name of all the
   brethren in Cappadocia, who have charged me not to employ any chance
   messenger, but some one who, in case I should, from my anxiety not to
   be too prolix, leave out any points of importance, might supply them
   with the intelligence wherewith God has gifted him.  I refer to my
   beloved and reverend fellow presbyter Petrus.  Welcome him in love, and
   send him forth to me in peace, that he may be a messenger to me of good
   things.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2727] Placed in 375.

   [2728] On this letter Newman notes that Eustathius brought about a
   separation of a portion of the coast of Pontus from the Church of
   Cæsarea, which for a time caused Basil great despondency, as if he were
   being left solitary in all Christendom, without communion with other
   places.  With the advice of the bishops of Cappadocia, he addressed an
   expostulation with these separatists for not coming to him.  (Ch. of
   the Fathers, p. 95.)  The portion of the translation of this letter
   enclosed in brackets is Newman's.

   [2729] hexiterion doron.  cf. note on p. 46.

   [2730] John vii. 51.

   [2731] ton diaballonta.

   [2732] diabolos.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CCIV. [2733]

   To the Neocæsareans. [2734]

   1.  [There has been a long silence on both sides, revered and
   well-beloved brethren, just as if there were angry feelings between
   us.  Yet who is there so sullen and implacable towards the party which
   has injured him, as to lengthen out the resentment which has begun in
   disgust through almost a whole life of man?]  This [is happening in our
   case, no just occasion of estrangement existing, as far as I myself
   know, but on the contrary, there being, from the first, many strong
   reasons for the closest friendship and unity.  The greatest and first
   is this, our Lord's command, pointedly saying, "By this shall all men
   know that ye are my disciples if ye have love one to another." [2735]
   ]  Again, the apostle clearly sets before us the good of charity where
   he tells us that love is the fulfilling of the law; [2736] and again
   where he says that charity is a good thing to be preferred to all great
   and good things, in the words, "Though I speak with tongues of men and
   of angels and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass or a
   tinkling cymbal.  And though I have the gift of prophecy and understand
   all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that
   I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.  And
   though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor and though I give my body
   to be burnt and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing." [2737]
   Not that each of the points enumerated could be performed without love,
   but that the Holy One wishes, as He Himself has said, to attribute to
   the commandment super-eminent excellency by the figure of hyperbole.
   [2738]

   2.  [Next, if it tend much towards intimacy to have the same teachers,
   there are to you and to me the same teachers of God's mysteries, and
   spiritual Fathers, who from the beginning were the founders of your
   Church.  I mean the great Gregory, and all who succeeding in order to
   the throne of your episcopate, like stars rising one after another,
   have tracked the same course, so as to leave the tokens of the heavenly
   polity most clear to all who desire them.]  And if natural
   relationships are not to be despised, but are greatly conducive to
   unbroken union and fellowship, these rights also exist naturally for
   you and me.  [Why is it, then, O venerable among cities, for through
   you I address the whole city, that no civil writing comes from you, no
   welcome voice, but your ears are open to those who aim at slander?]  I
   am therefore the more bound to groan, the more I perceive the end they
   have in view.  There is no doubt as to who is the originator of the
   slander. [2739]   He is known by many evil deeds, but is best
   distinguished by this particular wickedness, and it is for this reason
   that the sin is made his name. [2740]   But you must put up with my
   plain speaking.  You have opened both ears to my slanderers.  You
   heartily welcome all you hear without any enquiry.  Not one of you
   distinguishes between lies and truth.  Who ever suffered for lack of
   wicked accusations when struggling all alone?  Who was ever convicted
   of lying in the absence of his victim?  What plea does not sound
   plausible to the hearers when the reviler persists that such and such
   is the case, and the reviled is neither present nor hears what is urged
   against him?  Does not even the accepted custom of this world teach
   you, in reference to these matters, that if any one is to be a fair and
   impartial hearer, he must not be entirely led away by the first
   speaker, but must wait for the defence of the accused, that so truth
   may be demonstrated by a comparison of the arguments on both sides?
   "Judge righteous judgment." [2741]   This precept is one of those most
   necessary for salvation.

   3.  When I say this I am not forgetful of the words of the Apostle, who
   fled from human tribunals and reserved the defence of all his life for
   the unerring judgment seat, when he said, "With me it is a very small
   thing that I should be judged of you or of man's judgment." [2742]
   Your ears have been preoccupied by lying slanders, slanders that have
   touched my conduct, slanders that have touched my faith in God.
   Nevertheless, knowing, as I do, that three persons at once are injured
   by the slanderer, his victim, his hearer, and himself; as to my own
   wrong, I would have held my tongue, be sure; not because I despise your
   good opinion, (how could I, writing now as I do and earnestly pleading
   as I do that I may not lose it?) but because I see that of the three
   sufferers the one who is least injured is myself.  It is true that I
   shall be robbed of you, but you are being robbed of the truth, and he
   who is at the bottom of all this is parting me from you, but he is
   alienating himself from the Lord, inasmuch as no one can be brought
   near to the Lord by doing what is forbidden.  Rather then for your
   sakes than for mine, rather to rescue you from unendurable wrong am I
   pleading.  For who could suffer a worse calamity than the loss of the
   most precious of all things, the truth?

   4.  [What say I, brethren?  Not that I am a sinless person; not that my
   life is not full of numberless faults.  I know myself; and indeed I
   cease not my tears for my sins, if by any means I may be able to
   appease my God, and to escape the punishment threatened against them.
   But this I say:  let him who judges me, hunt for motes in my eye, if he
   can say that his own is clear.]  I own, brethren, that I need the care
   of the sound and healthy, and need much of it.  If he cannot say that
   it is clear, and the clearer it is the less will he say so--(for it is
   the part of the perfect not to exalt themselves; if they do they will
   certainly come under the charge of the pride of the Pharisee, who,
   while justifying himself, condemned the publican) let him come with me
   to the physician; let him not "judge before the time until the Lord
   come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
   will make manifest the counsels of the hearts." [2743]   Let him
   remember the words, "Judge not, and ye shall not be judged;" [2744] and
   "Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned." [2745]   [In a word,
   brethren, if my offences admit of cure, why does not such an one obey
   the teacher of the Churches, "Reprove, exhort, rebuke"? [2746]   If, on
   the other hand, my iniquity be past cure, why does he not withstand me
   to the face, and, by publishing my transgressions, deliver the Churches
   from the mischief which I bring on them?]  Do not put up with the
   calumny uttered against me within the teeth. [2747]   This is the abuse
   which any slave-girl from the grindstone might utter; this is the kind
   of fine shewing-off you might expect from any street vagabond; their
   tongues are whetted for any slander.  But [there are bishops; let
   appeal be made to them.  There is a clergy in each of God's dioceses;
   [2748] let the most eminent be assembled.  Let whoso will, speak
   freely, that I may have to deal with a charge, not a slander.]  Let my
   secret wickedness be brought into full view; let me no longer be hated,
   but admonished as a brother.  It is more just that we sinners should be
   pitied by the blessed and the sinless, than that we should be treated
   angrily.

   5.  [If the fault be a point of faith, let the document be pointed out
   to me.  Again, let a fair and impartial inquiry be appointed.  Let the
   accusation be read; let it be brought to the test, whether it does not
   arise from ignorance in the accuser, not from blame in the matter of
   the writing.  For right things often do not seem such to those who are
   deficient in accurate judgment.  Equal weights seem unequal when the
   arms of the balance are of different sizes.]  Men whose sense of taste
   is destroyed by sickness, sometimes think honey sour.  A diseased eye
   does not see many things which do exist, and notes many things which do
   not exist.  The same thing frequently takes place with regard to the
   force of words, when the critic is inferior to the writer.  The critic
   ought really to set out with much the same training and equipment as
   the author.  A man ignorant of agriculture is quite incapable of
   criticising husbandry, and the distinctions between harmony and discord
   can only be adequately judged by a trained musician.  But any one who
   chooses will set up for a literary critic, though he cannot tell us
   where he went to school, or how much time was spent in his education,
   and knows nothing about letters at all.  I see clearly that, even in
   the case of the words [2749] of the Holy Spirit, the investigation of
   the terms is to be attempted not by every one, but by him who has the
   spirit of discernment, as the Apostle has taught us, in the differences
   of gifts;--"For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to
   another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by
   the same Spirit; to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit; to
   another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another
   discerning of spirits." [2750]   If, therefore, my gifts are spiritual,
   he who wishes to judge them must shew proof of his own possession of
   the gift of "discerning of spirits."  If, on the contrary, as he
   calumniously contends, my gifts are of the wisdom of this world, let
   him shew that he is an adept in this world's wisdom, and I will submit
   myself to his verdict.  And [let no one suppose that I am making
   excuses to evade the charge.  I put it into your hands, dearest
   brethren, to investigate for yourselves the points alleged against me.
   Are you so slow of intelligence as to be wholly dependent upon
   advocates for the discovery of the truth?  If the points in question
   seem to you to be quite plain of themselves, persuade the jesters to
   drop the dispute.  [If there be anything you do not understand, put
   questions to me, through appointed persons who will do justice to me;
   or ask of me explanations in writing.  And take all kinds of pains that
   nothing may be left unsifted.

   6.  What clearer evidence can there be of my faith, than that I was
   brought up by my grandmother, blessed woman, who came from you?  I mean
   the celebrated Macrina who taught me the words of the blessed Gregory;
   which, as far as memory had preserved down to her day, she cherished
   herself, while she fashioned and formed me, while yet a child, upon the
   doctrines of piety.  And when I gained the capacity of thought, my
   reason being matured by full age, I travelled over much sea and land,
   and whomsoever I found walking in the rule of godliness delivered,


     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter CCXVII.

   To Amphilochius, the Canons. [2826]

   On my return from a long journey (for I have been into Pontus on
   ecclesiastical business, and to visit my relations) with my body weak
   and ill, and my spirits considerably broken, I took your reverence's
   letter into my hand.  No sooner did I receive the tokens of that voice
   which to me is of all voices the sweetest, and of that hand that I love
   so well, than I forgot all my troubles.  And if I was made so much more
   cheerful by the receipt of your letter, you ought to be able to
   conjecture at what value I price your actual presence.  May this be
   granted me by the Holy One, whenever it may be convenient to you and
   you yourself send me an invitation.  And if you were to come to the
   house at Euphemias it would indeed be pleasant for me to meet you,
   escaping from my vexations here, and hastening to your unfeigned
   affection.  Possibly also for other reasons I may be compelled to go as
   far as Nazianzus by the sudden departure of the very God-beloved bishop
   Gregory.  How or why this has come to pass, so far I have no
   information. [2827]   The man about whom I had spoken to your
   excellency, and whom you expected to be ready by this time, has, you
   must know, fallen ill of a lingering disease, and is moreover now
   suffering from an affection of the eyes, arising from his old complaint
   and from the illness which has now befallen him, and he is quite unfit
   to do any work.  I have no one else with me.  It is consequently
   better, although the matter was left by them to me, for some one to be
   put forward by them.  And indeed one cannot but think that the
   expressions were used merely as a necessary form, and that what they
   really wished was what they originally requested, that the person
   selected for the leadership should be one of themselves.  If there is
   any one of the lately baptized, [2828] whether Macedonius approve or
   not, let him be appointed.  You will instruct him in his duties, the
   Lord, Who in all things cooperates with you, granting you His grace for
   this work also.

   LI.  As to the clergy, the Canons have enjoined without making any
   distinction that one penalty is assigned for the lapsed,--ejection from
   the ministry, whether they be in orders [2829] or remain in the
   ministry which is conferred without imposition of hands.

   LII.  The woman who has given birth to a child and abandoned it in the
   road, if she was able to save it and neglected it, or thought by this
   means to hide her sin, or was moved by some brutal and inhuman motive,
   is to be judged as in a case of murder.  If, on the other hand, she was
   unable to provide for it. and the child perish from exposure and want
   of the necessities of life, the mother is to be pardoned.

   LIII.  The widowed slave is not guilty of a serious fall if she adopts
   a second marriage under colour of rape.  She is not on this ground open
   to accusation.  It is rather the object than the pretext which must be
   taken into account, but it is clear that she is exposed to the
   punishment of digamy. [2830]

   LIV.  I know that I have already written to your reverence, so far as I
   can, on the distinctions to be observed in cases of involuntary
   homicide, [2831] and on this point I can say no more.  It rests with
   your intelligence to increase or lessen the severity of the punishment
   as each individual case may require.

   LV.  Assailants of robbers, if they are outside, are prohibited from
   the communion of the good thing. [2832]   If they are clerics they are
   degraded from their orders.  For, it is said, "All they that take the
   sword shall perish with the sword." [2833]

   LVI.  The intentional homicide, who has afterwards repented, will be
   excommunicated from the sacrament [2834] for twenty years.  The twenty
   years will be appointed for him as follows:  for four he ought to weep,
   standing outside the door of the house of prayer, beseeching the
   faithful as they enter in to offer prayer in his behalf, and confessing
   his own sin.  After four years he will be admitted among the hearers,
   and during five years will go out with them.  During seven years he
   will go out with the kneelers, [2835] praying.  During four years he
   will only stand with the faithful, and will not take part in the
   oblation.  On the completion of this period he will be admitted to
   participation of the sacrament.

   LVII.  The unintentional homicide will be excluded for ten years from
   the sacrament.  The ten years will be arranged as follows:  For two
   years he will weep, for three years he will continue among the hearers;
   for four he will be a kneeler; and for one he will only stand.  Then he
   will be admitted to the holy rites.

   LVIII.  The adulterer will be excluded from the sacrament for fifteen
   years.  During four he will be a weeper, and during five a hearer,
   during four a kneeler, and for two a slander without communion.

   LIX.  The fornicator will not be admitted to participation in the
   sacrament for seven years; [2836] weeping two, hearing two, kneeling
   two, and standing one:  in the eighth he will be received into
   communion.

   LX.  The woman who has professed virginity and broken her promise will
   complete the time appointed in the case of adultery in her continence.
   [2837]   The same rule will be observed in the case of men who have
   professed a solitary life and who lapse.

   LXI.  The thief, if he have repented of his own accord and charged
   himself, shall only be prohibited from partaking of the sacrament for a
   year; if he be convicted, for two years.  The period shall be divided
   between kneeling and standing.  Then let him be held worthy of
   communion.

   LXII.  He who is guilty of unseemliness with males will be under
   discipline for the same time as adulterers.

   LXIII.  He who confesses his iniquity in the case of brutes shall
   observe the same time in penance.

   LXIV.  Perjurers shall be excommunicated for ten years; weeping for
   two, hearing for three, kneeling for four, and standing only during one
   year; then they shall be held worthy of communion.

   LXV.  He who confesses magic or sorcery shall do penance for the time
   of murder, and shall be treated in the same manner as he who convicts
   himself of this sin.

   LXVI.  The tomb breaker shall be excommunicated for ten years, weeping
   for two, hearing for three, kneeling for four, standing for one, then
   he shall be admitted.

   LXVII.  Incest with a sister shall incur penance for the same time as
   murder.

   LXVIII.  The union of kindred within the prohibited degrees of
   marriage, if detected as having taken place in acts of sin, shall
   receive the punishment of adultery. [2838]

   LXIX.  The Reader who has intercourse with his betrothed before
   marriage, shall be allowed to read after a year's suspension, remaining
   without advancement.  If he has had secret intercourse without
   betrothal, he shall be deposed from his ministry.  So too the minister.
   [2839]

   LXX.  The deacon who has been polluted in lips, and has confessed his
   commission of this sin, shall be removed from his ministry.  But he
   shall be permitted to partake of the sacrament together with the
   deacons.  The same holds good in the case of a priest.  If any one be
   detected in a more serious sin, whatever be his degree, he shall be
   deposed. [2840]

   LXXI.  Whoever is aware of the commission of any one of the
   aforementioned sins, and is convicted without having confessed, shall
   be under punishment for the same space of time as the actual
   perpetrator.

   LXXII.  He who has entrusted himself [2841] to soothsayers, or any such
   persons, shall be under discipline for the same time as the homicide.

   LXXIII.  He who has denied Christ, and sinned against the mystery of
   salvation, ought to weep all his life long, and is bound to remain in
   penitence, being deemed worthy of the sacrament in the hour of death,
   through faith in the mercy of God.

   LXXIV.  If, however, each man who has committed the former sins is made
   good, through penitence, [2842] he to whom is committed by the
   loving-kindness of God the power of loosing and binding [2843] will not
   be deserving of condemnation, if he become less severe, as he beholds
   the exceeding greatness of the penitence of the sinner, so as to lessen
   the period of punishment, for the history in the Scriptures informs us
   that all who exercise penitence [2844] with greater zeal quickly
   receive the loving-kindness of God. [2845]

   LXXV.  The man who has been polluted with his own sister, either on the
   father's or the mother's side, must not be allowed to enter the house
   of prayer, until he has given up his iniquitous and unlawful conduct.
   And, after he has come to a sense of that fearful sin, let him weep for
   three years standing at the door of the house of prayer, and entreating
   the people as they go in to prayer that each and all will mercifully
   offer on his behalf their prayers with earnestness to the Lord.  After
   this let him be received for another period of three years to hearing
   alone, and while hearing the Scriptures and the instruction, let him be
   expelled and not be admitted to prayer.  Afterwards, if he has asked it
   with tears and has fallen before the Lord with contrition of heart and
   great humiliation, let kneeling be accorded to him during other three
   years.  Thus, when he shall have worthily shown the fruits of
   repentance, let him be received in the tenth year to the prayer of the
   faithful without oblation; and after standing with the faithful in
   prayer for two years, then, and not till then, let him be held worthy
   of the communion of the good thing.

   LXXVI.  The same rule applies to those who take their own daughters in
   law.

   LXXVII.  He who abandons the wife, lawfully united to him, is subject
   by the sentence of the Lord to the penalty of adultery.  But it has
   been laid down as a canon by our Fathers that such sinners should weep
   for a year, be hearers for two years, in kneeling for three years,
   stand with the faithful in the seventh; and thus be deemed worthy of
   the oblation, if they have repented with tears. [2846]

   LXXVIII.  Let the same rule hold good in the case of those who marry
   two sisters, although at different times. [2847]

   LXXIX.  Men who rage after their stepmothers are subject to the same
   canon as those who rage after their sisters. [2848]

   LXXX.  On polygamy the Fathers are silent, as being brutish and
   altogether inhuman.  The sin seems to me worse than fornication.  It is
   therefore reasonable that such sinners should be subject to the canons;
   namely a year's weeping, three years kneeling and then reception.
   [2849]

   LXXXI.  During the invasion of the barbarians many men have sworn
   heathen oaths, tasted things unlawfully offered them in magic temples
   and so have broken their faith in God.  Let regulations be made in the
   case of these men in accordance with the canons laid down by our
   Fathers. [2850]   Those who have endured grievous tortures and have
   been forced to denial, through inability to sustain the anguish, may be
   excluded for three years, hearers for two, kneelers for three, and so
   be received into communion.  Those who have abandoned their faith in
   God, laying hands on the tables of the demons and swearing heathen
   oaths, without under going great violence, should be excluded for three
   years, hearers for two.  When they have prayed for three years as
   kneelers, and have stood other three with the faithful in supplication,
   then let them be received into the communion of the good thing.

   LXXXII.  As to perjurers, if they have broken their oaths under violent
   compulsion, they are under lighter penalties and may therefore be
   received after six years.  If they break their faith without
   compulsion, let them be weepers for two years, hearers for three, pray
   as kneelers for five, during two be received into the communion of
   prayer, without oblation, and so at last, after giving proof of due
   repentance, they shall be restored to the communion of the body of
   Christ.

   LXXXIII.  Consulters of soothsayers and they who follow heathen
   customs, or bring persons into their houses to discover remedies and to
   effect purification, should fall under the canon of six years.  After
   weeping a year, hearing a year, kneeling for three years and standing
   with the faithful for a year so let them be received.

   LXXXIV.  I write all this with a view to testing the fruits of
   repentance. [2851]   I do not decide such matters absolutely by time,
   but I give heed to the manner of penance.  If men are in a state in
   which they find it hard to be weaned from their own ways and choose
   rather to serve the pleasures of the flesh than to serve the Lord, and
   refuse to accept the Gospel life, there is no common ground between me
   and them.  In the midst of a disobedient and gainsaying people I have
   been taught to hear the words "Save thy own soul." [2852]   Do not then
   let us consent to perish together with such sinners.  Let us fear the
   awful judgment.  Let us keep before our eyes the terrible day of the
   retribution of the Lord.  Let us not consent to perish in other men's
   sins, for if the terrors of the Lord have not taught us, if so great
   calamities have not brought us to feel that it is because of our
   iniquity that the Lord has abandoned us, and given us into the hands of
   barbarians, that the people have been led captive before our foes and
   given over to dispersion, because the bearers of Christ's name have
   dared such deeds; if they have not known nor understood that it is for
   these reasons that the wrath of God has come upon us, what common
   ground of argument have I with them?

   But we ought to testify to them day and night, alike in public and in
   private.  Let us not consent to be drawn away with them in their
   wickedness.  Let us above all pray that we may do them good, and rescue
   them from the snare of the evil one.  If we cannot do this, let us at
   all events do our best to save our own souls from everlasting
   damnation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2826] The third canonical letter, written on Basil's return from
   Pontus, in 375.

   [2827] This is the sudden disappearance of Gregory from Nazianzus at
   the end of 375, which was due at once to his craving for retirement and
   his anxiety not to complicate the appointment of a successor to his
   father (who died early in 374) in the see of Nazianzus.  He found a
   refuge in the monastery of Thecla at the Isaurian Seleucia.  (Carm. xi.
   549.)

   [2828] The Ben. note appositely points out that any astonishment, such
   as expressed by Tillemont, at the consecration of a neophyte, is quite
   out of place, in view of the exigencies of the times and the practice
   of postponing baptism.  St. Ambrose at Milan and Nectarius at
   Constantinople were not even "neophytes," but were actually unbaptized
   at the time of their appointment to their respective sees.  "If there
   is any one among the lately baptized," argues the Ben. note, is
   tantamount to saying "If there is any one fit to be bishop."

   [2829] eite en bathuo.  This is understood by Balsamon and Zonaras to
   include Presbyters, Deacons, and sub-deacons; while the ministry
   conferred without imposition of hands refers to Readers, Singers,
   Sacristans, and the like.  Alexius Aristenus ranks Singers and Readers
   with the higher orders, and understands by the lower, keepers of the
   sacred vessels, candle-lighters, and chancel door keepers.  The Ben.
   note inclines to the latter view on the ground that the word "remain"
   indicates a category where there was no advance to a higher grade, as
   was the case with Readers and Singers.

   [2830] cf. Can. xxx. p. 239.

   [2831] i.e. in Canon viii. p. 226 and Canon xi. p. 228.

   [2832] Here reading, punctuation, and sense are obscure.  The Ben. Ed.
   have exo men ontes, tes koinonias eirgontai, and render "Si sint quidem
   laici, a boni communione arcentur."  But exo ontes, standing alone,
   more naturally means non-Christians.  Balsamon and Zonaras in Pandects
   have exo men ontes tes 'Ekklesias eirgontai tes koinonias tou agathou.

   [2833] Matt. xxvi. 52.

   [2834] hagiasmasi.  The Ben. Ed. render Sacramento.  In the Sept. (e.g.
   Amos vii. 13) the word=sanctuary.  In patristic usage both S. and P.
   are found for the Lord's Supper, or the consecrated elements; e.g.
   hagiasma in Greg. Nyss., Ep. Canon. Can. v.  The plural as in this
   place "frequentius."  (Suicer s.v.)

   [2835] meta ton en hupoptosei.  The hupopiptontes or substrati
   constituted the third and chief station in the oriental system of
   penance, the first and second being the prosklaiontes, flentes or
   weepers, and the akroomenos, audientes, or hearers.  In the Western
   Church it is the substrati who are commonly referred to as being in
   penitence, and the Latin versions of the Canons of Ancyra by Dionysius
   Exiguus and Martin of Braga render hupopiptontes and hupoptosis by
   poenitentis and poenitentia.  In Basil's Canon xxii. p. 238, this
   station is specially styled metanoia.  cf. D.C.A. ii. 1593.  "Metanoia
   notat poenitentiam eorum qui ob delicta sua in ecclesia epitimiois
   esophronizonto (Zonaras, Ad. Can. v. Conc. Antioch, p. 327), quique
   dicebantur oi en metanoia ontes.  Chrysostom, Hom. iii. in Epist. ad
   Eph. in S. Coenæ communione clamabat kerux, hosoi en metanoi& 139;
   apelthete pantes."  Suicer s.v.

   [2836] cf. Can. xxii. p. 228.  The Ben. note is "Laborant Balsamon et
   Zonaras in hoc canone conciliando cum vicesimo secundo, atque id causæ
   afferunt, cur in vicesimo secundo quatuor anni, septem in altero
   decernantur, quod Basilius in vicesimo secundo antiqua Patrum placita
   sequatur, suam in altero propriam sententiam exponat.  Eundem hunc
   canonem Alexius Aristenus, ut clarum et perspicuum, negat explicatione
   indigere.  Videbat nimirum doctissimus scriptor duplicem a Basilio
   distingui fornicationem, leviorem alteram, alteram graviorem levior
   dicitur, quæ inter personas matrimonio solutas committitur:  gravior,
   cum conjugati hominis libido in mulierem solutam erumpit.  Priori anni
   quatuor, septem alteri imponuntur.  Manifesta res est ex canone 21, ubi
   conjugati peccatum cum soluta fornicationem appellat Basilius, ac
   longioribus poenis coerceri, non tamen instar adulterii, testatur.  In
   canone autem 77 eum qui legitiman uxorem dimittit, et aliam ducit,
   adulterum quidem esse ex Domini sententia testatur, sed tamen ex
   canonibus Patrum annos septem decernit, non quindecim, ut in adulterio
   cum aliena uxore commisso.  Secum ergo non pugnat cum fornicationi nunc
   annos quatuor, nunc septem, adulterio nunc septem, nunc quindecim
   indicit.  Eamdem in sententiam videtur accipiendus canon quartus
   epistolæ Sancti Gregorii Nysseni ad Letoium.  Nam cum fornicationi
   novem annos, adulterio decem et octo imponit, gravior illa intelligenda
   fornicatio, quam conjugatur cum soluta committit.  Hinc ilium
   adulterium videri fatetur his qui accuratius examinant.

   [2837] cf. Can. xviii.  Augustine (De Bono Viduitatis, n. 14)
   represents breaches of the vows of chastity as graver offenses than
   breaches of the vows of wedlock.  The rendering of te oikonomi& 139;
   tes kath' heauten zoes by continency is illustrated in the Ben. note by
   Hermas ii. 4 as well as by Basil, Canon xiv and xliv.

   [2838] This Canon is thus interpreted by Aristenus, Matrimonium cum
   propinqua legibus prohibitum eadem ac adulterium poena castigatur:  et
   cum diversæ sint adulterorum poenoe sic etiam pro ratione
   propinquitatis tota res temperabitur.  Hinc duas sorores ducenti vii.
   anni poenitentioe irrogantur, ut in adulterio cum muliere libera
   commisso. non xv. ut in graviore adulterio, or does it mean that
   incestuous fornication shall be treated as adultery?

   [2839] By minister Balsamon and Zonaras understand the subdeacon.
   Aristenus understands all the clergy appointed without imposition of
   hands.  The Ben. ed. approve the latter.  cf. n. on Canon li. p. 256,
   and Letter liv. p. 157.

   [2840] On the earlier part of the canon the Ben. note says:  "Balsamon,
   Zonaras, et Aristenus varia commentantur in hunc canonem, sed a mente
   Basilii multum abludentia.  Liquet enim hoc labiorum peccatum, cui
   remissior poena infligitur ipsa actione, quam Basilius minime
   ignoscendam esse judicat, levius existimari debere.  Simili ratione
   sanctus Pater in cap. vi. Isaiæ n. 185, p. 516, labiorum peccata
   actionibus, ut leviora, opponit, ac prophetæ delecta non ad actionem et
   operationem erupisse, sed labiis tenus constitisse observat.  In eodem
   commentario n. 170, p. 501, impuritatis peccatum variis gradibus
   constare demonstrat, inter quos enumerat rhemata phthoropoia, verba ad
   corruptelam apta, homilias machras, longas confabulationes, quibus ad
   stuprum pervenitur.  Ex his perspici arbitror peccatum aliquod in hoc
   canone designari, quod ipsa actione levius sit:  nedum ea suspicari
   liceat, quæ Basilii interpretibus in mentem venerunt.  Sed tamen cum
   dico Basilium in puniendis labiorum peccatis leniorem esse, non
   quodlibet turpium sermonum genus, non immunda colloquia (quomodo enim
   presbyteris hoc vitio pollutis honorem cathedræ reliquisset?), sed
   ejusmodi intelligenda est peccandi voluntas, quæ foras quidem aliquo
   sermone prodit, sed tamen quominus in actum erumpat, subeunte meliori
   cogitatione, reprimitur.  Quemadmodum enim peccata, quæ sola
   cogitatione committuntur, idcirca leviora esse pronuntiat Basilius,
   comment. in Isaiam n. 115, p. 459, et n. 243, p. 564, qui repressa est
   actionis turpitudo; ita hoc loco non quælibet labiorum peccata; non
   calumnias, non blasphemias, sed ea tantum lenius tractat, quæ adeo
   gravia non erant, vel etiam ob declinatam actionis turpitudinem, ut
   patet ex his verbis, seque eo usque peccasse confessus est, aliquid
   indulgentiæ merere videbantur." On the word kathairethesetai it is
   remarked:  "In his canonibus quos de clericorum peccatis edidit
   Basilius, duo videntur silentio prætermissa.  Quæri enim possit 1^o cur
   suspensionis poenam soli lectori ac ministro, sive subdiacono, imponat,
   diaconis autem et presbyteris depositionem absque ulla prorsus
   exceptione infligat, nisi quod eis communionem cum diaconis et
   presbyteris relinquit, si peccatum non ita grave fuerit.  Erat tamen
   suspensionis poena in ipsos presbyteros non inusitata, ut patet ex
   plurimis apostolicis canonibus, in quibus presbyteri ac etiam ipsi
   episcopi segregantur, ac postea, si sese non emendaverint, deponuntur.
   Forte hæc reliquit Basilius episcopo dijudicanda quemadmodum ejusdem
   arbitrio permittet in canonibus 74 et 84, ut poenitentiæ tempus
   imminuat, si bonus evasint is qui peccavit.  2^o Hæc etiam possit
   institui quæstio, utrumne in gravissimis quidem criminibus poenitentiam
   publicam depositioni adjercerit.  Adhibita ratio in Canone 3, cur
   aliquid discriminis clericos inter et laicos ponendum sit, non solum ad
   gravia peccata, sed etiam ad gravissima pertinet.  Ait enim æquum esse
   ut, cum laici post poenitentiam in eumdem locum restituantur, clerici
   vero non restituantur, liberalius et mitius cum clericis agatur.
   Nolebat ergo clericos lapsos quadruplicem poenitentiæ gradum
   percurrere.  Sed quemadmodum lapso in fornicationem diacono non statim
   communionem reddit, sed ejus conversionem et morum emendationem
   probandam esse censit, ut ad eumdem canonem tertium observavimus, ita
   dubium esse non potest quin ad criminis magnitudinem probandi modum et
   tempus accommodaverit.

   [2841] The Ben. ed. suppose for the purpose of learning sorcery.  cf.
   Can. lxxxiii., where a lighter punishment is assigned to consulters of
   wizards.

   [2842] exomologoumenos.  "The verb in St. Matt. xi. 25 expresses
   thanksgiving and praise, and in this sense was used by many Christian
   writers (Suicer, s.v.).  But more generally in the early Fathers it
   signifies the whole course of penitential discipline, the outward act
   and performance of penance.  From this it came to mean that public
   acknowledgment of sin which formed so important a part of penitence.
   Irenæus (c. Hær. i. 13, § 5) speaks of an adulterer who, having been
   converted, passed her whole life in a state of penitence
   (exomologoumene, in exomologesi); and (ib. iii. 4) of Cerdon often
   coming into the church and confessing his errors (exomologoumenos)."
   D.C.A. i. 644.

   [2843] Here we see "binding and loosing" passing from the Scriptural
   sense of declaring what acts are forbidden and committed (Matt. xvi. 19
   and xxiii. 4.  See note of Rev. A. Carr in Cambridge Bible for Schools)
   into the later ecclesiastical sense of imposing and remitting penalties
   for sin.  The first regards rather moral obligation, and, as is implied
   in the force of the tenses alike in the passages of St. Matthew cited
   and in St. John xx. 23, the recognition and announcement of the divine
   judgment already passed on sins and sinners; the later regards the
   imposition of disciplinary penalties.

   [2844] tous exomologmoumenous.

   [2845] e.g. according to the Ben. note, Manasseh and Hezekiah.

   [2846] The Ben. note points out the St. Basil refers to the repudiation
   of a lawful wife from some other cause than adultery.  It remarks that
   though Basil does not order it to be punished as severely as adultery
   there is no doubt that he would not allow communion before the
   dismissal of the unlawful wife.  It proceeds "illud autem difficilius
   est statuere, quid de matrimonio post ejectam uxorem adulteram
   contracto senserit.  Ratum a Basilio habitum fuisse ejusmodi
   matrimonium pronuntiat Aristentus.  Atque id quidem Basilius, conceptis
   verbis non declarat; sed tamen videtur hac in re a saniori ac meliori
   sententia discessisse.  Nam 1^o maritum injuste dimissum ab alio
   matrimonio non excludit, ut vidimus in canonibus 9 et 35.  Porro non
   videtur jure dimittenti denegasse, quod injuste dimisso concedebat.
   2^o  Cum jubeat uxorem adulteram ejici, vix dubium est quin matrimonium
   adulterio uxoris fuisset mariti, ac multo durior, quam uxoris conditio,
   si nec adulteram retinere, necaliam ducere integrum fuisset.

   [2847] cf. Letter clx. p. 212.

   [2848] The Ben. note is Prima specie non omnino perspicuum est utrum
   sorores ex utroque parente intelligat, an tantum ex alterutro.  Nam cum
   in canone 79 eos qui suas nurus accipiunt non severius puniat, quam cui
   cum sorore ex matre vel ex patre rem habent, forte videri posset idem
   statuere de iis qui in novercas insaniunt.  Sed tamen multo probabilius
   est eamdem illis poenam imponi, ac iis qui cum sorore ex utroque
   parente contaminantur.  Non enim distinctione utitur Basilius ut in
   canone 75; nec mirum si peccatum cum noverca gravius quam cum nuru, ob
   factam patri injuriam, judicavit.

   [2849] i.e.probably only into the place of standers.  Zonaras and
   Balsamon understand by polygamy a fourth marriage; trigamy being
   permitted (cf. Canon l. p. 240) though discouraged.  The Ben. annotator
   dissents, pointing out that in Canon iv. Basil calls trigamy, polygamy,
   and quoting Gregory of Nazianzus (Orat. 31) as calling a third marriage
   paranomia .  Maran confirms this opinion by the comparison of the
   imposition on polygamy of the same number of years of penance as are
   assigned to trigamy in Canon iv.  "Theodore of Canterbury a.d. 687
   imposes a penance of seven years on trigamists but pronounces the
   marriages valid (Penitential, lib. 1. c. xiv. § 3).  Nicephorus of
   Constantinople, a.d. 814, suspends trigamists for five years.  (Hard.
   Concil. tom. iv. p. 1052.)  Herard of Tours, a.d. 858 declares any
   greater number of wives than two to be unlawful (Cap cxi. ibid. tom.v.
   p. 557).  Leo the Wise, Emperor of Constantinople, was allowed to marry
   three wives without public remonstrance, but was suspended from
   communion by the patriarch Nicholas when he married a fourth.  This led
   to a council being held at Constantinople, a.d. 920, which finally
   settled the Greek discipline on the subject of third and fourth
   marriages.  It ruled that the penalty for a fourth marriage was to be
   excommunication and exclusion from the church; for a third marriage, if
   a man were forty years old, suspension for five years, and admission to
   communion thereafter only on Easter day.  If he were thirty years old,
   suspension for four years, and admission to communion thereafter only
   three times a year."  Dict. Christ. Ant. ii. p. 1104.

   [2850] The Ben. n. thinks that the Fathers of Ancyra are meant, whose
   authority seems to have been great in Cappadocia and the adjacent
   provinces.

   [2851] metanoias.  cf. note on p. 256; here the word seems to include
   both repentance and penance.

   [2852] Gen. xix. 17, lxx.
