# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume IV.   Athanasius - Select Writings and Letters
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume IV.
# father: athanasius
# work: Defense Against the Arians (Apologia Contra Arianos)
# latin_match_candidate: Apologia contra Arianos
# clavis: CPG-2123
# extracted: 2026-09-24
# note: Public-domain Schaff/Robertson English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
   Introduction to Apologia Contra Arianos.

   ------------------------

   "This Apology," says Montfaucon, "is the most authentic source of the
   history of the Church in the first half of the fourth century.
   Athanasius is far superior to any other historians of the period, both
   from his bearing for the most part a personal testimony to the facts he
   relates, and from his great accuracy and use of actual documents. On
   the other hand, Rufinus, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, must not be used
   without extreme caution, unless they adduce documents, which is seldom
   the case." The Apology' is a personal defence by Athanasius against the
   charges laid against him by the Eusebian party, and does not directly
   concern matters of doctrine. After the Council of Nicæa, the Eusebian
   policy had been to oust the principal opponents from their sees on
   personal grounds, so as to pave the way for the abrogation of the
   Nicene formula. The attack upon Athanasius began in 331, but without
   success. It was renewed at Cæsarea and Tyre in 334-335, and resulted in
   the exile of Athanasius to Treveri, 336. His return in 337 was followed
   by a Synod at Antioch which deposed' him (close of 338), and by his
   expulsion in favour of Gregory (339). Then follow the intervention of
   Julius (339-340), and the Council of Sardica (343), which resulted in
   the eventual return of Athanasius in the autumn of 346. (The details
   are given more fully in the Prolegomena, ch. ii. §§4-6). After this
   latter date, and before the relapse of Valens and Ursacius which
   followed upon the death of Constans, Athanasius drew up a collection of
   documents in proof of his innocence, connecting them together by an
   explanatory narrative. (1) The charges against him related to events
   alleged to have occurred before the year 332 (extortion of money,
   subvention of the rebel Philumenus, the chalice of Ischyras, murder and
   mutilation of the bishop Arsenius): the principal evidence as to their
   falsehood was comprised in the proceedings of the Councils of Tyre and
   Jerusalem, and of the commission of enquiry sent by the assembled
   bishops to the Mareotis. (2) The judicial investigations which proved
   the innocence of Athanasius took place first at Rome under Julius,
   secondly at Sardica under Hosius; and were followed by the recognition
   of his innocence on the part of the Emperor Constantius, of bishops in
   various parts of the world, and lastly of some of his chief accusers.

   The method of defence now adopted by Athanasius was firstly to show how
   complete that recognition had been: this he does by a series of
   documents from the eve of his departure to Rome down to the recantation
   of Ursacius and Valens soon after his return to Alexandria: these
   documents cover eight years (339-347) previous to the composition of
   the Apology (§§1-58). Having shewn the completeness of his acquittal,
   he next gives the evidence upon which it was based. Accordingly the
   second part (§§59-90) of the Apology deals with facts and documents
   earlier than those comprised in the first. Hence the inversion of
   chronological sequence (præposterus ordo, Montf.) as between the two
   parts.

   Referring the reader to the Prolegomena for a connected view of the
   history of which this Apology is the primary source, it will suffice
   for our present purpose to enumerate the documents quoted, with the
   briefest possible statement of their contents and bearing upon the
   general purpose of the work. It should be noted that while in the first
   part the documents follow one another in strict chronological order,
   those of the second part fall into groups within which the matters are
   arranged as best suits the argument, and not in order of time. In the
   following list the probable or approximate date of each document is
   given.

   a. DOCUMENTS IN THE FIRST PART (general subject, the vindication of
   Athanasius before the bishops of the Christian world).

   i. Documents Prior to the Council of Sardica (§§1-35).

   1. §§3-19 (end of 338 or beginning of 339). Circular of Egyptian
   bishops reciting the election of Athanasius, the plots and charges
   against him, the history of the Mareotic Commission, the testimony
   available in his defence, and requesting all bishops to join in
   vindicating him.

   2. §§20-35 (340 a.d.). Letter of Julius to the Eusebian bishops (at the
   request of a Roman Council) remonstrating with their discourteous reply
   to a former letter, reciting the history of the intrigues against
   Athanasius, pressing them with their disrespect to the Synod of Nicæa,
   with their evasion of the invitation to the Council at Rome,
   vindicating Athanasius (on the ground of documentary proof of his
   innocence, and on that of the irregularity of the proceedings against
   him) and Marcellus (upon his own statement of belief), lastly,
   insisting on the propriety of a reference of the questions at issue to
   the whole Church, and upon the precedent giving the Roman Church a
   decisive voice in questions affecting that of Alexandria.

   ii. Council of Sardica (§§36-50).

   3. §§36-40 (a.d. 343) Letter of the Council to the Church of
   Alexandria, reciting the intrigues against Athanasius, and the
   confirmation by the council of his acquittal by Julius, encouraging the
   Alexandrine Church to patience, and announcing that they have requested
   the Emperors to give effect to their decisions.

   4. §§41-43 (same date). Letter of the Council to the bishops of Egypt
   and Libya: identical with No. 3, except that it omits the reference to
   certain presbyters of Alexandria, and mentions several Arian leaders by
   name.

   5. §§44-50 (same date). Circular letter of the Council, reciting the
   occasion of its assembling, the behaviour of the Eastern bishops, the
   violence inflicted by them upon orthodox bishops, the breakdown of the
   charges brought by them against Athanasius, and the purgation of
   Marcellus and Asclepas, who are pronounced innocent, while the Arian
   leaders are deposed and anathematised. The signatures follow of over
   280 bishops, most of whom signed afterwards while the letter was in
   circulation.

   iii. Documents Forming a Sequel to the Council of Sardica (§§51-58).

   6-8. §51. Letters of Constantius to Athanasius before and after death
   of Gregory.

   6. (a.d. 345). Expressing sympathy with his sufferings, and inviting
   him to court; he has written to Constans to ask him to allow Athanasius
   to return.

   7. (same year, later). Urging the same invitation.

   8. (346, winter, or early spring). A similar summons, but more
   pressing.

   9. §52 (same year). Letter of Julius to the Church of Alexandria,
   eulogising Athanasius, complimenting them for their constancy, and
   congratulating them upon his return.

   10. §54 (same year). Circular letter of Constantius to the Church at
   large, announcing the restoration of Athanasius and the cessation of
   all decrees against him, with indemnity to all in his communion.

   11. §55 (same date). Letter of Constantius to the Church of Alexandria.
   Announcement of the restoration of Athanasius, with exhortation to
   peace, and warning against disturbances.

   12. §56 (same date). To the Prefect of Egypt and other officials.
   Revocation of decrees against those in communion with Athanasius, and
   restoration of their immunities.

   13. §57 (same year, autumn). Letter of the bishops of Palestine to the
   Egyptian Church congratulating them on the restoration of Athanasius.

   14. §58 (a.d. 347). Letter of Valens and Ursacius to Julius
   unreservedly withdrawing their allegations against Athanasius,
   anathematizing Arius and his heresy, and at the same time promising to
   take the consequences of their offence if required by Julius to do so.

   15. ib. (same year). Letter of the same to Athanasius, with a greeting
   and assurance that they are in communion with him and with the Church.

   b. DOCUMENTS IN THE SECOND PART.

   i. Letters of Constantine Previous to the Council of Tyre (§§59-63).

   16. §59 (a.d. 331). A fragment, urging Athanasius with threats to admit
   to communion all (Arians) who wish it.

   17. §61 (same year). Letter to the people of Alexandria, remonstrating
   with them for their dissensions and stigmatising the calumnies against
   Athanasius (about the affair of Philumenus).

   ii. 18. §64 (332). Confession of Ischyras, that he had been compelled
   by the violence of certain Meletians to fabricate false charges against
   Athanasius.

   iii. The Affair of Arsenius (§§65-70).

   19. §67 (probably 332). Intercepted letter of the presbyter Pinnes to
   John Arcaph, warning him of the discovery of the plot, and begging him
   to drop the matter.

   20. §68 (same year). Letter of Constantine to Athanasius, expressing
   indignation at the charges concerning Arsenius and Ischyras, and
   bidding him publish this letter in vindication of himself.

   21. §66 (same year). Letter of Alexander, Bishop of Thessalonica,
   praising Serapion, the son of an old friend, and congratulating
   Athanasius on the exposure of the plot about Arsenius.

   22. §69 (same year). Letter of Arsenius to Athanasius, offering
   submission and requesting communion with the Church.

   23. §70 (same year). Letter of Constantine to John Arcaph accepting his
   reconciliation to Athanasius, and summoning him to court.

   iv. Proceedings at Tyre in 335 (§§71-83).

   24. §77. Address to the Council by the Egyptian Bishop, complaining of
   the presence of partizan judges, of the rejection of their evidence,
   and of the proposed constitution of the Mareotic Commission.

   25. §71. (Written a.d. 327, but put in as evidence at Tyre by
   Athanasius in the matter of Ischyras, after the exposure of the plot
   concerning Arsenius). List of Meletian Bishops and Clergy presented to
   Alexander of Alexandria shortly before his death, and not containing
   the name of Ischyras.

   26. §78. Protest addressed by the Egyptian Bishops to Count Dionysius,
   repeating the above complaints (in No. 24), and requesting him to stop
   the irregularities.

   27. §80. Alexander of Thessalonica to Dionysius, warning him of the
   conspiracy against Athanasius, and of the character of the Mission to
   the Mareotis.

   28. §81. Letter of Dionysius to the Council, strongly remonstrating
   against their proceedings.

   29. §79. Letter of the Egyptian Bishops to Dionysius appealing to the
   Emperor.

   30-32. Protests made by Egyptian Clergy against the proceedings of the
   Mareotic Commission.

   30. §73. Clergy of Alexandria to the Commissioners, protesting against
   the exclusion of all independent persons from the proceedings.

   31. §§74, 75. Clergy of the Mareotis to the Council, giving an account
   of the facts concerning Ischyras, and of the ex-parte character of the
   proceedings of the Commission.

   32. §76. The same to the Prefect and other officials of Egypt (dated
   Sep. 8, 335), denying upon oath the tale of Ischyras, and requesting
   them to forward their statement to the Emperor.

   v. Documents Subsequent to the Council of Tyre (§§84-88).

   33. §86 (335). Constantine to the Bishops assembled at Tyre, summoning
   them to give an account of their proceedings.

   34. §84. The Council of Jerusalem to the Church of Alexandria,
   announcing that Arius has been received to communion.

   35. §87 (June 17, 337). Constantine II. to the Church of Alexandria
   (upon the death of Constantine, whose purpose he claims to be carrying
   out), announcing the restoration of Athanasius.

   36. §85 (perhaps in 337, but possibly as early as 335). Order by
   Flavius Hemerius for the erection of a church for Ischyras.

   The two concluding sections (89, 90) of the Apology are a postscript
   added during the troubles under Constantius (about 358, see Introd. to
   Hist. Ar.). He points to the sufferings which many bishops, including
   Hosius and Liberius, had endured rather than surrender his cause, as
   fresh evidence of their belief in his innocence. He refuses to see any
   detraction from the force of this argument in the fall of the two
   bishops mentioned.

   The importance to the historian of this collection of documents need
   not be dwelt upon. If the charges in dispute seem trivial and even
   grotesque, they none the less illustrate the temper of the parties
   concerned, and the character of the controversy during the very
   important twenty years which end with the death of Constans and the
   reign of Constantius over the undivided Empire.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Defence Against the Arians.

   ------------------------

   Introduction.

   1. I supposed that, after so many proofs of my innocence had been
   given, my enemies would have shrunk from further enquiry, and would now
   have condemned themselves for their false accusations of others. But as
   they are not yet abashed, though they have been so clearly convicted,
   but, as insensible to shame, persist in their slanderous reports
   against me, professing to think that the whole matter ought to be tried
   over again (not that they may have judgment passed on them, for that
   they avoid, but in order to harass me, and to disturb the minds of the
   simple); I therefore thought it necessary to make my defence unto you,
   that you may listen to their murmurings no longer, but may denounce
   their wickedness and base calumnies. And it is only to you, who are men
   of sincere minds, that I offer a defence: as for the contentious, I
   appeal confidently to the decisive proofs which I have against them.
   For my cause needs no further judgment; for judgment has already been
   given, and not once or twice only, but many times. First of all, it was
   tried in my own country in an assembly of nearly one hundred of its
   Bishops [472] ; a second time at Rome, when, in consequence of letters
   from Eusebius, both they and we were summoned, and more than fifty
   Bishops met [473] ; and a third time in the great Council assembled at
   Sardica by order of the most religious Emperors Constantius and
   Constans, when my enemies were degraded as false accusers, and the
   sentence that was passed in my favour received the suffrages of more
   than three hundred Bishops, out of the provinces of Egypt, Libya, and
   Pentapolis, Palestine, Arabia, Isauria, Cyprus, Pamphylia, Lycia,
   Galatia, Dacia, Moesia, Thrace, Dardania, Macedonia, Epirus, Thessaly,
   Achaia, Crete, Dalmatia, Siscia, Pannonia, Noricum, Italy, Picenum,
   Tuscany, Campania, Calabria, Apulia, Bruttia, Sicily, the whole of
   Africa, Sardinia, Spain, Gaul, and Britain.

   Added to these was the testimony [474] of Ursacius and Valens, who had
   formerly calumniated me, but afterwards changed their minds, and not
   only gave their assent to the sentence that was passed in my favour,
   but also confessed that they themselves and the rest of my enemies were
   false accusers; for men who make such a change and such a recantation
   of course reflect upon Eusebius and his fellows, for with them they had
   contrived the plot against me. Now after a matter has been examined and
   decided on such clear evidence by so many eminent Bishops, every one
   will confess that further discussion is unnecessary; else, if an
   investigation be instituted at this time, it may be again discussed and
   again investigated, and there will be no end to such trifling.

   2. Now the decision of so many Bishops was sufficient to confound those
   who would still fain pretend some charge against me. But when my
   enemies also bear testimony in my favour and against themselves,
   declaring that the proceedings against me were a conspiracy, who is
   there that would not be ashamed to doubt any longer? The law requires
   that in the mouth of two or three witnesses [475] judgments shall be
   settled, and we have here this great multitude of witnesses in my
   favour, with the addition of the proofs afforded by my enemies; so much
   so that those who still continue opposed to me no longer attach any
   importance to their own arbitrary [476] judgment, but now have recourse
   to violence, and in the place of fair reasoning seek to injure [477]
   those by whom they were exposed. For this is the chief cause of
   vexation to them, that the measures they carried on in secret,
   contrived by themselves in a corner, have been brought to light and
   disclosed by Valens and Ursacius; for they are well aware that their
   recantation while it clears those whom they have injured, condemns
   themselves.

   Indeed this led to their degradation in the Council of Sardica, as
   mentioned before; and with good reason; for, as the Pharisees of old,
   when they undertook the defence of Paul [478] , fully exposed the
   conspiracy which they and the Jews had formed against him; and as the
   blessed David was proved to be persecuted unjustly when the persecutor
   confessed, I have sinned, my son David [479] ;' so it was with these
   men; being overcome by the truth they made a request, and delivered it
   in writing to Julius, Bishop of Rome. They wrote also to me requesting
   to be on terms of peace with me, though they have spread such reports
   concerning me; and probably even now they are covered with shame, on
   seeing that those whom they sought to destroy by the grace of the Lord
   are still alive. Consistently also with this conduct they anathematized
   Arius and his heresy; for knowing that Eusebius and his fellows had
   conspired against me in behalf of their own misbelief, and of nothing
   else, as soon as they had determined to confess their calumnies against
   me, they immediately renounced also that antichristian heresy for the
   sake of which they had falsely asserted them.

   The following are the letters written in my favour by the Bishops in
   the several Councils and first the letter of the Egyptian Bishops.

   Encyclical Letter of the Council of Egypt.

   The holy Council assembled at Alexandria out of Egypt, the Thebais,
   Libya, and Pentapolis, to the Bishops of the Catholic Church
   everywhere, brethren beloved and greatly longed for in the Lord,
   greeting.

   3. Dearly beloved brethren, we might have put forth a defence of our
   brother Athanasius as respects the conspiracy of Eusebius and his
   fellows against him, and complained of his sufferings at their hands,
   and have exposed all their false charges, either at the beginning of
   their conspiracy or upon his arrival at Alexandria. But circumstances
   did not permit it then, as you also know; and lately, after the return
   of the Bishop Athanasius, we thought that they would be confounded and
   covered with shame at their manifest injustice: in consequence we
   prevailed with ourselves to remain silent. Since, however, after all
   his severe sufferings, after his retirement into Gaul, after his
   sojourn in a foreign and far distant country in the place of his own,
   after his narrow escape from death through their calumnies, but thanks
   to the clemency of the Emperor,--distress which would have satisfied
   even the most cruel enemy,--they are still insensible to shame, are
   again acting insolently against the Church and Athanasius; and from
   indignation at his deliverance venture on still more atrocious schemes
   against him, and are ready with an accusation, fearless of the words in
   holy Scripture [480] , A false witness shall not be unpunished;' and,
   The mouth that belieth slayeth the soul;' we therefore are unable
   longer to hold our peace, being amazed at their wickedness and at the
   insatiable love of contention displayed in their intrigues.

   For see, they cease not to disturb the ear of royalty with fresh
   reports against us; they cease not to write letters of deadly import,
   for the destruction of the Bishop who is the enemy of their impiety.
   For again have they written to the Emperors against him; again they
   wish to conspire against him, charging him with a butchery which has
   never taken place; again they wish to shed his blood, accusing him of a
   murder that never was committed (for at that former time would they
   have murdered him by their calumnies, had we not had a kind Emperor);
   again they are urgent, to say the least, that he should be sent into
   banishment, while they pretend to lament the miseries of those alleged
   to have been exiled by him. They lament before us things that have
   never been done, and, not satisfied with what has been done to him,
   desire to add thereto other and more cruel treatment. So mild are they
   and merciful, and of so just a disposition; or rather (for the truth
   shall be spoken) so wicked are they and malicious; obtaining respect
   through fear and by threats, rather than by their piety and justice, as
   becomes Bishops. They have dared in their letters to the Emperors to
   pour forth language such as no contentious person would employ even
   among those that are without; they have charged him with a number of
   murders and butcheries, and that not before a Governor, or any other
   superior officer, but before the three Augusti; nor shrink they from
   any journey however long, provided only all greater courts may be
   filled with their accusations. For indeed, dearly beloved, their
   business consists in accusations, and that of the most solemn
   character, forasmuch as the tribunals to which they make their appeal
   are the most solemn of any upon earth. And what other end do they
   propose by these investigations, except to move the Emperor to capital
   punishment?

   4. Their own conduct therefore, and not that of Athanasius, is the
   fittest subject for lamentation and mourning, and one would more
   properly lament them, for such actions ought to be bewailed, since it
   is written, Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore
   for him that goeth away, for he shall return no more [481] .' For their
   whole letter contemplates nothing but death; and their endeavour is to
   kill, whenever they may be permitted, or if not, to drive into exile.
   And this they were permitted to do by the most religious father of the
   Emperors, who gratified their fury by the banishment of Athanasius
   [482] , instead of his death. Now that this is not the conduct even of
   ordinary Christians, scarcely even of heathens, much less of Bishops,
   who profess to teach others righteousness, we suppose that your
   Christian consciences must at once perceive. How can they forbid others
   to accuse their brethren, who themselves become their accusers, and
   that to the Emperors? How can they teach compassion for the misfortunes
   of others, who cannot rest satisfied even with our banishment? For
   there was confessedly a general sentence of banishment against us
   Bishops, and we all looked upon ourselves as banished men: and now
   again we consider ourselves as restored with Athanasius to our native
   places, and instead of our former lamentations and mourning over him,
   as having the greatest encouragement and grace,--which may the Lord
   continue to us, nor suffer Eusebius and his fellows to destroy?

   Even if their charges against him were true, here is a certain charge
   against them, that against the precept of Christianity, and after his
   banishment and trials, they have assaulted him again, and accuse him of
   murder, and butchery, and other crimes, which they sound in the royal
   ears against the Bishops. But how manifold is their wickedness, and
   what manner of men think you them, when every word they speak is false,
   every charge they bring a calumny, and there is no truth whatever
   either in their mouths or their writings! Let us then at length enter
   upon these matters, and meet their last charges. This will prove, that
   in their former representations in the Council [483] and at the trial
   their conduct was dishonourable, or rather their words untrue, besides
   exposing them for what they have now advanced.

   5. We are indeed ashamed to make any defence against such charges. But
   since our reckless accusers lay hold of any charge, and allege that
   murders and butcheries were committed after the return of Athanasius,
   we beseech you to bear with our answer though it be somewhat long; for
   circumstances constrain us. No murder has been committed either by
   Athanasius or on his account, since our accusers, as we said before,
   compel us to enter upon this humiliating defence. Slaughter and
   imprisonment are foreign to our Church. No one did Athanasius commit
   into the hands of the executioner; and the prison, so far as he was
   concerned, was never disturbed. Our sanctuaries are now, as they have
   always been, pure, and honoured only with the Blood of Christ and His
   pious worship. Neither Presbyter nor Deacon was destroyed by
   Athanasius; he perpetrated no murder, he caused the banishment of no
   one. Would that they had never caused the like to him, nor given him
   actual experience of it! No one here has been banished on his account;
   no one at all except Athanasius himself, the Bishop of Alexandria, whom
   they banished, and whom, now that he is restored, they again seek to
   entangle in the same or even a more cruel plot than before, setting
   their tongues to speak all manner of false and deadly words against
   him.

   For, behold, they now attribute to him the acts of the magistrates; and
   although they plainly confess in their letter that the Prefect of Egypt
   passed sentence upon certain persons, they now are not ashamed to
   impute this sentence to Athanasius; and that, though he had not at the
   time entered Alexandria, but was yet on his return from his place of
   exile. Indeed he was then in Syria; since we must needs adduce in
   defence his length of way from home, that a man may not be responsible
   for the actions of a Governor or Prefect of Egypt. But supposing
   Athanasius had been in Alexandria, what were the proceedings of the
   Prefect to Athanasius? However, he was not even in the country; and
   what the Prefect of Egypt did was not done on ecclesiastical grounds,
   but for reasons which you will learn from the records, which, after we
   understood what they had written, we made diligent enquiry for, and
   have transmitted to you. Since then they now raise a cry against
   certain things which were never done either by him or for him, as
   though they had certainly taken place, and testify against such evils
   as though they were assured of their existence; let them inform us from
   what Council they obtained their knowledge of them, from what proofs,
   and from what judicial investigation? But if they have no such evidence
   to bring forward, and nothing but their own mere assertion, we leave it
   to you to consider as regards their former charges also, how the things
   took place, and why they so speak of them. In truth, it is nothing but
   calumny, and a plot of our enemies, and a temper of ungovernable mood,
   and an impiety in behalf of the Arian madmen which is frantic against
   true godliness, and desires to root out the orthodox, so that
   henceforth the advocates of impiety may preach without fear whatever
   doctrines they please. The history of the matter is as follows:--

   6. When Arius, from whom the heresy of the Arian madmen has its name,
   was cast out of the Church for his impiety by Bishop Alexander, of
   blessed memory, Eusebius and his fellows, who are the disciples and
   partners of his impiety, considering themselves also to have been
   ejected, wrote frequently to Bishop Alexander, beseeching him not to
   leave the heretic Arius out of the Church [484] . But when Alexander in
   his piety towards Christ refused to admit that impious man, they
   directed their resentment against Athanasius, who was then a Deacon,
   because in their busy enquiries they had heard that he was much in the
   familiarity of Bishop Alexander, and much honoured by him. And their
   hatred of him was greatly increased after they had experience of his
   piety towards Christ, in the Council assembled at Nicæa [485] , wherein
   he spoke boldly against the impiety of the Arian madmen. But when God
   raised him to the Episcopate, their long-cherished malice burst forth
   into a flame, and fearing his orthodoxy and resistance of their
   impiety, they (and especially Eusebius [486] , who was smitten with a
   consciousness of his own evil doings), engaged in all manner of
   treacherous designs against him. They prejudiced the Emperor against
   him; they frequently threatened him with Councils; and at last
   assembled at Tyre; and to this day they cease not to write against him,
   and are so implacable that they even find fault with his appointment to
   the Episcopate [487] , taking every means of shewing their enmity and
   hatred towards him, and spreading false reports for the sole purpose of
   thereby vilifying his character.

   However, the very misrepresentations which they now are making do but
   convict their former statements of being falsehoods, and a mere
   conspiracy against him. For they say, that after the death of Bishop
   Alexander, a certain few having mentioned the name of Athanasius, six
   or seven Bishops elected him clandestinely in a secret place:' and this
   is what they wrote to the Emperors, having no scruple about asserting
   the greatest falsehoods. Now that the whole multitude and all the
   people of the Catholic Church assembled together as with one mind and
   body, and cried, shouted, that Athanasius should be Bishop of their
   Church, made this the subject of their public prayers to Christ, and
   conjured us to grant it for many days and nights, neither departing
   themselves from the Church, nor suffering us to do so; of all this we
   are witnesses, and so is the whole city, and the province too. Not a
   word did they speak against him, as these persons represented, but gave
   him the most excellent titles they could devise, calling him good,
   pious, Christian, an ascetic [488] , a genuine Bishop. And that he was
   elected by a majority of our body in the sight and with the
   acclamations of all the people, we who elected him also testify, who
   are surely more credible witnesses than those who were not present, and
   now spread these false accounts.

   But yet Eusebius finds fault with the appointment of Athanasius,--he
   who perhaps never received any appointment to his office at all; or if
   he did, has himself rendered it invalid [489] . For he had first the
   See of Berytus, but leaving that he came to Nicomedia. He left the one
   contrary to the law, and contrary to the law invaded the other; having
   deserted his own without affection, and holding possession of another's
   without reason; he lost his love for the first in his lust for another,
   without even keeping to that which he obtained at the prompting of his
   lust. For, behold, withdrawing himself from the second, again he takes
   possession of another's [490] , casting an evil eye all around him upon
   the cities of other men, and thinking that godliness [491] consists in
   wealth and in the greatness of cities, and making light of the heritage
   of God to which he had been appointed; not knowing that where' even two
   or three are gathered in the name of the' Lord, there' is the Lord in
   the midst of them;' not considering the words of the Apostle, I will
   not boast in another man's labours;' not perceiving the charge which he
   has given, Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed.' For if
   this expression applies to a wife, how much more does it apply to a
   Church, and to the same Episcopate; to which whosoever is bound ought
   not to seek another, lest he prove an adulterer according to holy
   Scripture.

   7. But though conscious of these his own misdoings, he has boldly
   undertaken to arraign the appointment of Athanasius, to which
   honourable testimony has been borne by all, and he ventures to reproach
   him with his deposition, though he has been deposed himself, and has a
   standing proof of his deposition in the appointment of another in his
   room. How could either he or Theognius [492] depose another, after they
   had been deposed themselves, which is sufficiently proved by the
   appointment of others in their room? For you know very well that there
   were appointed instead of them Amphion to Nicomedia and Chrestus to
   Nicæa, in consequence of their own impiety and connection with the
   Arian madmen, who were rejected by the Ecumenic Council. But while they
   desire to set aside that true Council, they endeavour to give that name
   to their own unlawful combination [493] ; while they are unwilling that
   the decrees of the Council should be enforced, they desire to enforce
   their own decisions; and they use the name of a Council, while they
   refuse to submit themselves to one so great as this. Thus they care not
   for Councils, but only pretend to do so in order that they may root out
   the orthodox, and annul the decrees of the true and great Council
   against the Arians, in support of whom, both now and heretofore, they
   have ventured to assert these falsehoods against the Bishop Athanasius.
   For their former statements resembled those they now falsely make,
   viz., that disorderly meetings were held at his entrance [494] , with
   lamentation and mourning, the people indignantly refusing to receive
   him. Now such was not the case, but, quite the contrary, joy and
   cheerfulness prevailed, and the people ran together, hastening to
   obtain the desired sight of him. The churches were full of rejoicings,
   and thanksgivings were offered up to the Lord everywhere; and all the
   Ministers and Clergy beheld him with such feelings, that their souls
   were possessed with delight, and they esteemed that the happiest day of
   their lives. Why need we mention the inexpressible joy that prevailed
   among us Bishops, for we have already said that we counted ourselves to
   have been partakers in his sufferings?

   8. Now this being confessedly the truth of the matter, although it is
   very differently represented by them, what weight can be attached to
   that Council or trial of which they make their boast? Since they
   presume thus to interfere in a case which they did not witness, which
   they have not examined, and for which they did not meet, and to write
   as though they were assured of the truth of their statements, how can
   they claim credit respecting these matters for the consideration of
   which they say that they did meet together? Will it not rather be
   believed that they have acted both in the one case and in the other out
   of enmity to us? For what kind of a Council of Bishops was then held?
   Was it an assembly which aimed at the truth? Was not almost every one
   among them our enemy [495] ? Did not the attack of Eusebius and his
   fellows upon us proceed from their zeal for the Arian madness? Did they
   not urge on the others of their party? Have we not always written
   against them as professing the doctrines of Arius? Was not Eusebius of
   Cæsarea in Palestine accused by our confessors of sacrificing to idols
   [496] ? Was not George proved to have been deposed by the blessed
   Alexander [497] ? Were not they charged with various offences, some
   with this, some with that?

   How then could such men entertain the purpose of holding a meeting
   against us? How can they have the boldness to call that a Council, at
   which a Count presided, which an executioner attended, and where an
   usher [498] instead of the Deacons of the Church introduced us into
   Court; and where the Count only spoke, and all present held their
   peace, or rather obeyed his directions [499] ? The removal of those
   Bishops who seemed to deserve it was prevented at his desire; and when
   he gave the order we were dragged about by soldiers;--or rather
   Eusebius and his fellows gave the order, and he was subservient to
   their will. In short, dearly beloved, what kind of Council was that,
   the object of which was banishment and murder at the pleasure of the
   Emperor? And of what nature were their charges?--for here is matter of
   still greater astonishment. There was one Arsenius whom they declared
   to have been murdered; and they also complained that a chalice
   belonging to the sacred mysteries had been broken.

   Now Arsenius is alive, and prays to be admitted to our communion. He
   waits for no other testimony to prove that he is still living, but
   himself confesses it, writing in his own person to our brother
   Athanasius, whom they positively asserted to be his murderer. The
   impious wretches were not ashamed to accuse him of having murdered a
   man who was at a great distance from him, being separated by so great a
   distance, whether by sea or land, and whose abode at that time no one
   knew. Nay, they even had the boldness to remove him out of sight, and
   place him in concealment, though he had suffered no injury; and, if it
   had been possible, they would have transported him to another world,
   nay, or have taken him from life in earnest, so that either by a true
   or false statement of his murder they might in good earnest destroy
   Athanasius. But thanks to divine Providence for this also which
   permitted them not to succeed in their injustice, but presented
   Arsenius [500] alive to the eyes of all men, who has clearly proved
   their conspiracy and calumnies. He does not withdraw from us as
   murderers, nor hate us as having injured him (for indeed he has
   suffered no evil at all); but he desires to hold communion with us; he
   wishes to be numbered among us, and has written to this effect.

   9. Nevertheless they laid their plot against Athanasius, accusing him
   of having murdered a person who was still alive; and those same men are
   the authors of his banishment [501] . For it was not the father of the
   Emperors, but their calumnies, that sent him into exile. Consider
   whether this is not the truth. When nothing was discovered to the
   prejudice of our fellow-minister Athanasius, but still the Count
   threatened him with violence, and was very zealous against him, the
   Bishop [502] fled from this violence and went up [503] to the most
   religious Emperor, where he protested against the Count and their
   conspiracy against him, and requested either that a lawful Council of
   Bishops might be assembled, or that the Emperor would himself receive
   his defence concerning the charges they brought against him. Upon this
   the Emperor wrote in anger, summoning them before him, and declaring
   that he would hear the cause himself, and for that purpose he also
   ordered a Council to be held. Whereupon Eusebius and his fellows went
   up and falsely charged Athanasius, not with the same offences which
   they had published against him at Tyre, but with an intention of
   detaining the vessels laden with corn, as though Athanasius had been
   the man to pretend that he could stop the exports of corn from
   Alexandria to Constantinople [504] .

   Certain of our friends were present at the palace with Athanasius, and
   heard the threats of the Emperor upon receiving this report. And when
   Athanasius cried out upon the calumny, and positively declared that it
   was not true, (for how, he argued, should he a poor man, and in a
   private station, be able to do such a thing?) Eusebius did not hesitate
   publicly to repeat the charge, and swore that Athanasius was a rich
   man, and powerful, and able to do anything; in order that it might
   thence be supposed that he had used this language. Such was the
   accusation these venerable Bishops proffered against him. But the grace
   of God proved superior to their wickedness, for it moved the pious
   Emperor to mercy, who instead of death passed upon him the sentence of
   banishment. Thus their calumnies, and nothing else, were the cause of
   this. For the Emperor, in the letter which he previously wrote,
   complained of their conspiracy, censured their machinations, and
   condemned the Meletians as unscrupulous and deserving of execration; in
   short, expressed himself in the severest terms concerning them. For he
   was greatly moved when he heard the story of the dead alive; he was
   moved at hearing of murder in the case of one alive, and not deprived
   of life. We have sent you the letter.

   10. But these marvellous men, Eusebius and his fellows, to make a show
   of refuting the truth of the case, and the statements contained in this
   letter, put forward the name of a Council, and ground its proceedings
   upon the authority of the Emperor. Hence the attendance of a Count at
   their meeting, and the soldiers as guards of the Bishops, and royal
   letters compelling the attendance of any persons whom they required.
   But observe here the strange character of their machinations, and the
   inconsistency of their bold measures, so that by some means or other
   they may take Athanasius away from us. For if as Bishops they claimed
   for themselves alone the judgment of the case, what need was there for
   the attendance of a Count and soldiers? or how was it that they
   assembled under the sanction of royal letters? Or if they required the
   Emperor's countenance and wished to derive their authority from him,
   why were they then annulling his judgment? and when he declared in the
   letter which he wrote, that the Meletians were calumniators,
   unscrupulous, and that Athanasius was most innocent, and made much stir
   about the pretended murder of the living, how was it that they
   determined that the Meletians had spoken the truth, and that Athanasius
   was guilty of the offence; and were not ashamed to make the living
   dead, living both after the Emperor's judgment, and at the time when
   they met together, and who even until this day is amongst us? So much
   concerning the case of Arsenius.

   11. And as for the cup belonging to the mysteries, what was it, or
   where was it broken by Macarius? for this is the report which they
   spread up and down. But as for Athanasius, even his accusers would not
   have ventured to blame him, had they not been suborned by them.
   However, they attribute the origin of the offence to him; although it
   ought not to be imputed even to Macarius who is clear of it. And they
   are not ashamed to parade the sacred mysteries before Catechumens, and
   worse than that, even before heathens [505] : whereas, they ought to
   attend to what is written, It is good to keep close the secret of a
   king [506] ;' and as the Lord has charged us, Give not that which is
   holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine [507] .'
   We ought not then to parade the holy mysteries before the uninitiated,
   lest the heathen in their ignorance deride them, and the Catechumens
   being over-curious be offended. However, what was the cup, and where
   and before whom was it broken? It is the Meletians who make the
   accusation, who are not worthy of the least credit, for they have been
   schismatics and enemies of the Church, not of a recent date, but from
   the times of the blessed Peter, Bishop and Martyr [508] . They formed a
   conspiracy against Peter himself; they calumniated his successor
   Achillas; they accused Alexander even before the Emperor; and being
   thus well versed in these arts, they have now transferred their enmity
   to Athanasius, acting altogether in accordance with their former
   wickedness. For as they slandered those that have been before him, so
   now they have slandered him. But their calumnies and false accusations
   have never prevailed against him until now, that they have got Eusebius
   and his fellows for their assistants and patrons, on account of the
   impiety which these have adopted from the Arian madmen, which has led
   them to conspire against many Bishops, and among the rest Athanasius.

   Now the place where they say the cup was broken, was not a Church;
   there was no Presbyter in occupation of the place; and the day on which
   they say that Macarius did the deed, was not the Lord's day. Since then
   there was no church there; since there was no one to perform the sacred
   office; and since the day did not require the use of it [509] ; what
   was this cup belonging to the mysteries, and when, or where was it
   broken? There are many cups, it is plain, both in private houses, and
   in the public market; and if a person breaks one of them, he is not
   guilty of impiety. But the cup which belongs to the mysteries, and
   which if it be broken intentionally, makes the perpetrator of the deed
   an impious person, is found only among those who lawfully preside. This
   is the only description that can be given of this kind of cup; there is
   none other; this you legally give to the people to drink; this you have
   received according to the canon of the Church [510] ; this belongs only
   to those who preside over the Catholic Church, for to you only it
   appertains to administer the Blood of Christ, and to none besides. But
   as he who breaks the cup belonging to the mysteries is an impious
   person, much more impious is he who treats the Blood of Christ with
   contumely: and he does so who does this [511] ' contrary to the rule of
   the Church. (We say this, not as if a cup even of the schismatics was
   broken by Macarius, for there was no cup there at all; how should there
   be? where there was neither Lord's house nor any the belonging to the
   Church, nay, it was not the time of the celebration of the mysteries).
   Now such a person is the notorious Ischyras, who was never appointed to
   his office by the Church, and when Alexander admitted the Presbyters
   that had been ordained by Meletius, he was not even numbered amongst
   them; and therefore did not receive ordination even from that quarter.

   12. By what means then did Ischyras become a Presbyter? who was it that
   ordained him? was it Colluthus? for this is the only supposition that
   remains. But it is well known and no one has any doubt about the matter
   that Colluthus died a Presbyter, and that every ordination of his was
   invalid, and that all that were ordained by him during the schism were
   reduced to the condition of laymen, and in that rank appear in the
   congregation. How then can it be believed that a private person,
   occupying a private house had in his possession a sacred chalice? But
   the truth is, they gave the name of Presbyter at the time to a private
   person, and gratified him with this title to support him in his
   iniquitous conduct towards us; and now as the reward of his accusations
   they procure for him the erection of a Church [512] . So that this man
   had then no Church; but as the reward of his malice and subserviency to
   them in accusing us, he receives now what he had not before; nay,
   perhaps they have even remunerated his services with the Episcopate,
   for so he goes about reporting, and accordingly behaves towards us with
   great insolence. Thus are such rewards as these now bestowed by Bishops
   upon accusers and calumniators though indeed it is reasonable, in the
   case of an accomplice, that as they have made him a partner in their
   proceedings, so they should also make him their associate in their own
   Episcopate. But this is not all; give ear yet further to their
   proceedings at that time.

   13. Being unable to prevail against the truth, though they had thus set
   themselves in array against it, and Ischyras having proved nothing at
   Tyre, but being shewn to be a calumniator, and the calumny ruining
   their plot, they defer proceedings for fresh evidence, and profess that
   they are going to send to the Mareotis certain of their party to
   enquire diligently into the matter. Accordingly they dispatched
   secretly, with the assistance of the civil power, persons to whom we
   openly objected on many accounts, as being of the party of Arius, and
   therefore our enemies; namely, Diognius [513] , Maris, Theodorus,
   Macedonius, and two others, young both in years and mind [514] ,
   Ursacius and Valens from Pannonia; who, after they had undertaken this
   long journey for the purpose of sitting in judgment upon their enemy,
   set out again from Tyre for Alexandria. They did not shrink from
   becoming witnesses themselves, although they were the judges, but
   openly adopted every means of furthering their design, and undertook
   any labour or journey whatsoever in order to bring to a successful
   issue the conspiracy which was in progress. They left the Bishop
   Athanasius detained in a foreign country while they themselves entered
   their enemy's city, as if to have their revel both against his Church
   and against his people. And what was more outrageous still, they took
   with them the accuser Ischyras, but would not permit Macarius, the
   accused person, to accompany them, but left him in custody at Tyre. For
   Macarius the Presbyter of Alexandria' was made answerable for the
   charge far and near.

   14. They therefore entered Alexandria alone with the accuser, their
   partner in lodging, board, and cup; and taking with them Philagrius the
   Prefect of Egypt they proceeded to the Mareotis, and there carried on
   the so-called investigation by themselves, all their own way, with the
   forementioned person. Although the Presbyters frequently begged that
   they might be present, they would not permit them. The Presbyters both
   of the city and of the whole country desired to attend, that they might
   detect who and whence the persons were who were suborned by Ischyras.
   But they forbade the Ministers to be present, while they carried on the
   examination concerning church, cup, table, and the holy things, before
   the heathen; nay, worse than that, they summoned heathen witnesses
   during the enquiry concerning a cup belonging to the mysteries; and
   those persons who they affirmed were taken out of the way by Athanasius
   by summons of the Receiver-general, and they knew not where in the
   world they were, these same individuals they brought forward before
   themselves and the Prefect only, and avowedly used their testimony,
   whom they affirmed without shame to have been secreted by the Bishop
   Athanasius.

   But here too their only object is to effect his death, and so they
   again pretend that persons are dead who are still alive, following the
   same method they adopted in the case of Arsenius. For the men are
   living, and are to be seen in their own country; but to you who are at
   a great distance from the spot they make a great stir about the matter
   as though they had disappeared, in order that, as the evidence is so
   far removed from you, they may falsely accuse our brother-minister, as
   though he used violence and the civil power; whereas they themselves
   have in all respects acted by means of that power and the countenance
   of others. For their proceedings in the Mareotis were parallel to those
   at Tyre; and as there a Count attended with military assistance, and
   would permit nothing either to be said or done contrary to their
   pleasure, so here also the Prefect of Egypt was present with a band of
   men, frightening all the members of the Church, and permitting no one
   to give true testimony. And what was the strangest thing of all, the
   persons who came, whether as judges or witnesses, or, what was more
   likely, in order to serve their own purposes and those of Eusebius,
   lived in the same place with the accuser, even in his house, and there
   seemed to carry on the investigation as they pleased.

   15. We suppose you are not ignorant what outrages they committed at
   Alexandria; for they are reported everywhere. Naked swords [515] were
   at work against the holy virgins and brethren; scourges were at work
   against their persons, esteemed honourable in the sight of God, so that
   their feet were lamed by the stripes, whose souls are whole and sound
   in purity and all good works [516] . The trades were excited against
   them; and the heathen multitude was set to strip them naked, to beat
   them, wantonly to insult them, and to threaten them with their altars
   and sacrifices. And one coarse fellow, as though license had now been
   given them by the Prefect in order to gratify the Bishops, took hold of
   a virgin by the hand, and dragged her towards an altar that happened to
   be near, imitating the practice of compelling to offer sacrifice in
   time of persecution. When this was done, the virgins took to flight,
   and a shout of laughter was raised by the heathen against the Church;
   the Bishops being in the place, and occupying the very house where this
   was going on; and from which, in order to obtain favour with them, the
   virgins were assaulted with naked swords, and were exposed to all kinds
   of danger, and insult, and wanton violence. And this treatment they
   received on a fast-day [517] , and at the hands of persons who
   themselves were feasting with the Bishops indoors.

   16. Foreseeing these things, and reflecting that the entrance of
   enemies into a place is no ordinary calamity, we protested against this
   commission. And Alexander [518] , Bishop of Thessalonica, considering
   the same, wrote to the people residing there, discovering the
   conspiracy, and testifying of the plot. They indeed reckon him to be
   one of themselves, and account him a partner in their designs; but they
   only prove thereby the violence they have exercised towards him. For
   even the profligate Ischyras himself was only induced by fear and
   violence to proceed in the matter, and was obliged by force to
   undertake the accusation. As a proof of this, he wrote himself to our
   brother Athanasius [519] , confessing that nothing of the kind that was
   alleged had taken place there, but that he was suborned to make a false
   statement. This declaration he made, though he was never admitted by
   Athanasius as a Presbyter, nor received such a title of grace from him,
   nor was entrusted by way of recompense with the erection of a Church,
   nor expected the bribe of a Bishopric; all of which he obtained from
   them in return for undertaking the accusation. Moreover, his whole
   family held communion with us [520] , which they would not have done
   had they been injured in the slightest degree.

   17. Now to prove that these things are facts and not mere assertions,
   we have the testimony [521] of all the Presbyters of the Mareotis [522]
   , who always accompany the Bishop in his visitations, and who also
   wrote at the time against Ischyras. But neither those of them who came
   to Tyre were allowed to declare the truth [523] , nor could those who
   remained in the Mareotis obtain permission to refute the calumnies of
   Ischyras [524] . The copies also of the letters of Alexander, and of
   the Presbyters, and of Ischyras will prove the same thing. We have sent
   also the letter of the father of the Emperors, in which he expresses
   his indignation that the murder of Arsenius was charged upon any one
   while the man was still alive; as also his astonishment at the variable
   and inconsistent character of their accusations with respect to the
   cup; since at one time they accused the Presbyter Macarius, at another
   the Bishop Athanasius, of having broken it with his hands. He declares
   also on the one hand that the Meletians are calumniators, and on the
   other that Athanasius is perfectly innocent.

   And are not the Meletians calumniators, and above all John [525] , who
   after coming into the Church, and communicating with us, after
   condemning himself, and no longer taking any part in the proceedings
   respecting the cup, when he saw Eusebius and his fellows zealously
   supporting the Arian madmen, though they had not the daring to
   co-operate with them openly, but were attempting to employ others as
   their masks, undertook a character, as an actor in the heathen theatres
   [526] ? The subject of the drama was a contest of Arians; the real
   design of the piece being their success, but John and his partizans
   being put on the stage and playing the parts, in order that under
   colour of these, the supporters of the Arians in the garb of judges
   might drive away the enemies of their impiety, firmly establish their
   impious doctrines, and bring the Arians into the Church. And those who
   wish to drive out true religion strive all they can to prevail by
   irreligion; they who have chosen the part of that impiety which wars
   against Christ, endeavour to destroy the enemies thereof, as though
   they were impious persons; and they impute to us the breaking of the
   cup, for the purpose of making it appear that Athanasius, equally with
   themselves, is guilty of impiety towards Christ.

   For what means this mention of a cup belonging to the mysteries by
   them? Whence comes this religious regard for the cup among those who
   support impiety towards Christ? Whence comes it that Christ's cup is
   known to them who know not Christ? How can they who profess to honour
   that cup, dishonour the God of the cup? or how can they who lament over
   the cup, seek to murder the Bishop who celebrates the mysteries
   therewith? for they would have murdered him, had it been in their
   power. And how can they who lament the loss of the throne that was
   Episcopally covered [527] , seek to destroy the Bishop that sat upon
   it, to the end that both the throne may be without its Bishop, and that
   the people may be deprived of godly doctrine? It was not then the cup,
   nor the murder, nor any of those portentous deeds they talk about, that
   induced them to act thus; but the forementioned heresy of the Arians,
   for the sake of which they conspired against Athanasius and other
   Bishops, and still continue to wage war against the Church.

   Who are they that have really been the cause of murders and
   banishments? Is it not these? Who are they that, availing themselves of
   external support, conspire against the Bishops? Are not Eusebius and
   his fellows the men, and not Athanasius, as they say in their letters?
   Both he and others have suffered at their hands. Even at the time of
   which we speak, four Presbyters [528] of Alexandria, though they had
   not even proceeded to Tyre, were banished by their means. Who then are
   they whose conduct calls for tears and lamentations? Is it not they,
   who after they have been guilty of one course of persecution, do not
   scruple to add to it a second, but have recourse to all manner of
   falsehood, in order that they may destroy a Bishop who will not give
   way to their impious heresy? Hence arises the enmity of Eusebius and
   his fellows; hence their proceedings at Tyre; hence their pretended
   trials; hence also now the letters which they have written even without
   any trial, expressing the utmost confidence in their statements; hence
   their calumnies before the father of the Emperors, and before the most
   religious Emperors themselves.

   18. For it is necessary that you should know what is now reported to
   the prejudice of our fellow-minister Athanasius, in order that you may
   thereby be led to condemn their wickedness, and may perceive that they
   desire nothing else but to murder him. A quantity of corn was given by
   the father of the Emperors for the support of certain widows, partly of
   Libya, and partly certain out of Egypt. They have all received it up to
   this time, Athanasius getting nothing therefrom, but the trouble of
   assisting them. But now, although the recipients themselves make no
   complaint, but acknowledge that they have received it, Athanasius has
   been accused of selling all the corn, and appropriating the profits to
   his own use: and the Emperor wrote to this effect about it, charging
   him with the offence in consequence of the calumnies which had been
   raised against him. Now who are they which have raised these calumnies?
   Is it not those who after they have been guilty of one course of
   persecution, scruple not to set on foot another? Who are the authors of
   those letters which are said to have come from the Emperor? Are not the
   Arians, who are so zealous against Athanasius, and scruple not to speak
   and write anything against him? No one would pass over persons who have
   acted as they have done, in order to entertain suspicion of others.
   Nay, the proof of their calumny appears to be most evident for they are
   anxious under cover of it, to take away the corn from the Church, and
   to give it to the Arians. And this circumstance more than any other,
   brings the matter home to the authors of this design and their
   principals, who scrupled neither to set on foot a charge of murder
   against Athanasius, as a base means of prejudicing the Emperor against
   him, nor yet to take away from the Clergy of the Church the subsistence
   of the poor, in order that in fact they might make gain for the
   heretics.

   19. We have sent also the testimony of our fellow-ministers in Libya,
   Pentapolis, and Egypt, from which likewise you may learn the false
   accusations which have been brought against Athanasius. And these
   things they do, in order that, the professors of true godliness being
   henceforth induced by fear to remain quiet, the heresy of the impious
   Arians may be brought in in its stead. But thanks be to your piety,
   dearly beloved, that you have frequently anathematized the Arians in
   your letters, and have never given them admittance into the Church. The
   exposure of Eusebius and his fellows is also easy and ready at hand.
   For behold, after their former letters concerning the Arians, of which
   also we have sent you copies, they now openly stir up the Arian madmen
   against the Church, though the whole Catholic Church has anathematized
   them; they have appointed a Bishop [529] over them; they distract the
   Churches with threats and alarms, that they may gain assistants in
   their impiety in every part. Moreover, they send Deacons to the Arian
   madmen, who openly join their assemblies; they write letters to them,
   and receive answers from them, thus making schisms in the Church, and
   holding communion with them; and they send to every part, commending
   their heresy, and repudiating the Church, as you will perceive from the
   letters they have addressed to the Bishop of Rome [530] and perhaps to
   yourselves also. You perceive therefore, dearly beloved, that these
   things are not undeserving of vengeance: they are indeed dreadful and
   alien from the doctrine of Christ.

   Wherefore we have assembled together, and have written to you, to
   request of your Christian wisdom to receive this our declaration and
   sympathize with our brother Athanasius, and to shew your indignation
   against Eusebius and his fellows who have essayed such things, in order
   that such malice and wickedness may no longer prevail against the
   Church. We call upon you to be the avengers of such injustice,
   reminding you of the injunction of the Apostle, Put away from among
   yourselves that wicked person [531] .' Wicked indeed is their conduct,
   and unworthy of your communion. Wherefore give no further heed to them,
   though they should again write to you against the Bishop Athanasius
   (for all that proceeds from them is false); not even though they
   subscribe their letter with names [532] of Egyptian Bishops. For it is
   evident that it will not be we who write, but the Meletians [533] , who
   have ever been schismatics, and who even unto this day make
   disturbances and raise factions in the Churches. For they ordain
   improper persons, and all but heathens; and they are guilty of such
   actions as we are ashamed to set down in writing, but which you may
   learn from those whom we have sent unto you, who will also deliver to
   you our letter.

   20. Thus wrote the Bishops of Egypt to all Bishops, and to Julius,
   Bishop of Rome.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [472] The Council of Sardica says eighty; which is a usual number in
   Egyptian Councils. (vid. Tillemont, vol. 8. p. 74.) There were about
   ninety Bishops in Egypt, the Thebais, and Libya. The present Council
   was held [at the end of 338 or possibly at the beginning of 339]. Its
   synodal Epistle is contained below, §3, and is particularly addressed
   to Pope Julius, §20.

   [473] This was held in 340. Julius's Letter is found below, §21.

   [474] Vid. infr. §58. This was a.d. 347.

   [475] Deut. xvii. 6.

   [476] hos ethelesan. vid. infr. §14. de Decr. §3. de Syn. §13. Ep. Æg.
   §5.

   [477] This implies that Valens and Ursacius were subjected to some kind
   of persecution, which is natural [most improbable]. They relapsed in
   351, when Constantius on the death of Constans came into possession of
   his brother's dominions; and professed to have been forced to their
   former recantation by the latter Emperor.

   [478] Acts xxiii. 9.

   [479] 1 Sam. xxvi. 21.

   [480] Prov. xix. 5; Wisd. i. 11.

   [481] Jer. xxii. 10.

   [482] Hist. Ar. 50.

   [483] Of Tyre. See below, §71.

   [484] Cf. de Syn. 17.

   [485] Cf. Socr. i. 8.

   [486] Cf. Nicomedia.

   [487] The Eusebians alleged that, fifty-four Bishops of the two parties
   of S. Alexander and Meletius being assembled for the election, and
   having sworn to elect by the common voice, six or seven of these broke
   their oaths in favour of S. Athanasius, whom no one had thought of, and
   consecrated him in secret to the great surprise and scandal of both
   ecclesiastical and lay persons. vid. Socr. ii. 17. Philostorgius (a.d.
   425) adds particulars, explanatory or corrective of this statement, of
   which the Bishops in the text do not seem to have heard; viz., that
   Athanasius with his party one night seized on the Church of St.
   Dionysius, and compelled two Bishops whom he found there to consecrate
   him against their will; that he was in consequence anathematized by all
   the other Bishops, but that, fortifying himself in his position, he
   sent in his election to the Emperor, and by this means obtained its
   confirmation. H. E. ii. 16. It appears, in matter of fact, that S.
   Athan. was absent at time of his election; as Socrates says, in order
   to avoid it, or as Epiphanius, on business at the Court; these reasons
   are compatible. [Cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §4, and Gwatkin's note, quoted
   there.]

   [488] It is contested whether S. Athan. was ever one of S. Antony's
   monks, the reading of a passage in the commencement of his Vit. Ant.,
   which would decide the question, varying in different mss. The word
   "ascetic" is used of those who lived a life, as afterwards followed in
   Monasteries, in the Ante-Nicene times. [See D.C.B. 1. 181^a, and
   Prolegg. ch. ii. §1 ad fin, and Introd. to Vit. Ant.]

   [489] The Canons of Nicæa and Sardica were absolute against
   translation, but, as Bingham observes, Antiqu. vi. 4. §6, only as a
   general rule. The so-called Apostolical Canons except "a reasonable
   cause" and the sanction of a Council; one of the Councils of Carthage
   prohibits them when subserving ambitious views, and except for the
   advantage of the Church. Vid. list of translations in Socr. Hist. vii.
   36. Cassiodor. Hist. xii. 8. Niceph. Hist. xiv. 39. Coteler. adds
   others ad Can. Apost. 14. [cf. Hist Ari. 7.]

   [490] i.e. Constantinople on the expulsion of Paul.

   [491] 1 Tim. vi. 5; Matt. xviii. 20; 2 Cor. x. 15; 1 Cor. vii. 27.

   [492] Or Theognis; he was, as well as Eusebius, a pupil of Lucian's,
   and was deposed together with him after the Nicene Council for
   communicating with Arians. [They were not ecclesiastically deposed, but
   exiled by the Emperor, see Prolegg. ch. ii. §§3 (1) and (2) c, 6 (1).]
   Constantine banished them to Gaul; they were recalled in the course of
   two or three years. He was dead by the date of the Council of Sardica.

   [493] Eusebian Council of Tyre, a.d. 335.

   [494] On his return from Gaul, Nov. 23, a.d. 337. [Prolegg. ch. ii. §6
   (1).]

   [495] Cf. §77.

   [496] At the Council of Tyre, Potamo, an Egyptian Bishop and Confessor
   asked Eusebius what had happened to him in prison during the
   persecution, Epiph. Hær. 68, 7, as if hinting at his cowardice. It
   appears that Eusebius was prisoner at Cæsarea with S. Pamphilus; yet he
   never mentions the fact himself, which is unlike him, if it was
   producible. [The insinuation of Potammon was groundless: see Dic. C.
   Biog. ii. 311.]

   [497] George, Bishop of Laodicea, had been degraded when a priest by S.
   Alexander, for his profligate habits as well as his Arianism. Athan.
   speaks of him elsewhere as reprobated even by his party. de Fug. 26.
   [Cf. §49, de Syn. 17. Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) c, 2.]

   [498] Conventarius.

   [499] Hist. Ari. 11, and below §§36, 71.

   [500] §65.

   [501] By Constantine into Gaul, a.d. 336.

   [502] The circumstances of this appeal, which are related by Athan.
   below, §86, are thus summed up by Gibbon; "Before the final sentence
   could be pronounced at Tyre, the intrepid primate threw himself into a
   bark which was ready to hoist sail for the imperial city. The request
   of a formal audience might have been opposed or eluded; but Athanasius
   concealed his arrival, watched the moment of Constantine's return from
   an adjacent villa, and boldly encountered his angry sovereign as he
   passed on horseback through the principal street of Constantinople. So
   strange an apparition excited his surprise and indignation; and the
   guards were ordered to remove the importunate suitor; but his
   resentment was subdued by involuntary respect; and the haughty spirit
   of the Emperor was awed by the courage and eloquence of a Bishop, who
   implored his justice and awakened his conscience." Decl. and Fall, xxi.
   Athan. was a small man in person.

   [503] i.e. to Constantinople.

   [504] §87.

   [505] This period, when Christianity was acknowledged by the state but
   not embraced by the population, is just the time when we hear most of
   this Reserve as a principle. While Christians were but a sect,
   persecution enforced a discipline, and when they were commensurate with
   the nation, faith made it unnecessary. We are now returned to the state
   of the fourth century.

   [506] Tob. xii. 7.

   [507] Matt. vii. 6.

   [508] [Cf. §59, and Ep. Æg. 22, Prolegg. ch. ii. §2 init.]

   [509] This seems to imply that the Holy Communion was only celebrated
   on Sundays in the Egyptian Churches. [Cf. §§63, 74, 76.]

   [510] Vid. Can. Ap. 65.

   [511] 1 Cor. xi. 25.

   [512] Cf. §85.

   [513] Vid. also Ep. Æg. 7. Euseb. Vit. C. iv. 43. Hilar. ad Const. i.
   5. Fragm. ii. 12. [Diognius' is another form of Theognius' or Theognis.
   See Prolegg. ch. ii. §5.]

   [514] Vid. also Ep. Æg. 7. Euseb. Vit. C. iv. 43. Hilar. ad Const. i.
   5. Fragm. ii. 12. [Diognius' is another form of Theognius' or Theognis.
   See Prolegg. ch. ii. §5.]

   [515] Cf. Encycl. 3, Apol. Const. 33.

   [516] Hist. Arian. 12.

   [517] [Not in Lent, for the commission were at Alexandria in September,
   see the date of the protest, infra, §76.]

   [518] This Alexander had been one of the Nicene Fathers, in 325, and
   had the office of publishing their decrees in Macedonia, Greece, &c. He
   was at the Council of Jerusalem ten years after, at which the Church of
   the Holy Sepulchre was consecrated, and afterwards Arius admitted to
   communion. His influence with the Court party seems to have been great,
   judging from Count Dionysius's tone in speaking of him. Infr. §§66, 80,
   81.

   [519] Infr. §64.

   [520] Vid infr. §63 fin. §85 fin.

   [521] Infr. §74.

   [522] The district, called Mareotis from a neighbouring lake, lay in
   the territory and diocese of Alexandria, to the south-west. It
   consisted of various large villages, with handsome Churches, and
   resident Priests, and of hamlets which had none; of the latter was
   "Irene of Secontarurus)" (infr. §85.) where Ischyras lived.

   [523] Infr. §79.

   [524] §72 fin.

   [525] Arcaph. infr. 65 fin., head of the Meletians.

   [526] Vid. infr. §37, 46. and de Syn. 32, note.

   [527] Cathedræ velatæ, see Bingh. viii. 6. §10.

   [528] Vid. their names infr. §40.

   [529] Pistus.

   [530] Vid. infr. §21.

   [531] 1 Cor. v. 13.

   [532] The Eusebians availed themselves of the subscriptions of the
   Meletians, as at Philippopolis, Hilar. Fragm. 3.

   [533] Infr. §73.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chapter II.--Letter of Julius to the Eusebians at Antioch.

   Eusebius and his fellows wrote also to Julius, and thinking to frighten
   me, requested him to call a council, and to be himself the judge, if he
   so pleased [534] . When therefore I went up to Rome, Julius wrote to
   Eusebius and his fellows as was suitable, and sent moreover two of his
   own Presbyters [535] , Elpidius and Philoxenus [536] . But they, when
   they heard of me, were thrown into confusion, as not expecting my going
   up thither; and they declined the proposed Council, alleging
   unsatisfactory reasons for so doing, but in truth they were afraid lest
   the things should be proved against them which Valens and Ursacius
   afterwards confessed [537] . However, more than fifty Bishops
   assembled, in the place where the Presbyter Vito held his congregation;
   and they acknowledged my defence, and gave me the confirmation [538]
   both of their communion and their love. On the other hand, they
   expressed great indignation against Eusebius and his fellows, and
   requested that Julius would write to the following effect to those of
   their number who had written to him. Which accordingly he did, and sent
   it by the hand of Count Gabianus.

   The Letter of Julius.

   Julius to his dearly beloved brethren [539] , Danius, Flacillus,
   Narcissus, Eusebius, Maris, Macedonius, Theodorus, and their friends,
   who have written to me from Antioch, sends health in the Lord.

   21. I have read your letter [540] which was brought to me by my
   Presbyters Elpidius and Philoxenus, and I am surprised to find that,
   whereas I wrote to you in charity and with conscious sincerity, you
   have replied to me in an unbecoming and contentious temper; for the
   pride and arrogance of the writers is plainly exhibited in that letter.
   Yet such feelings are inconsistent with the Christian faith; for what
   was written in a charitable spirit ought likewise to be answered in a
   spirit of charity and not of contention. And was it not a token of
   charity to send Presbyters to sympathize with them that are in
   suffering, and to desire those who had written to me to come thither,
   that the questions at issue might obtain a speedy settlement, and all
   things be duly ordered, so that our brethren might no longer be exposed
   to suffering, and that you might escape further calumny? But something
   seems to shew that your temper is such, as to force us to conclude that
   even in the terms in which you appeared to pay honour to us, you have
   expressed yourselves under the disguise of irony. The Presbyters also
   whom we sent to you, and who ought to have returned rejoicing, did on
   the contrary return sorrowful on account of the proceedings they had
   witnessed among you. And I, when I had read your letter, after much
   consideration, kept it to myself, thinking that after all some of you
   would come, and there would be no need to bring it forward, lest if it
   should be openly exhibited, it should grieve many of our brethren here.
   But when no one arrived, and it became necessary that the letter should
   be produced, I declare to you, they were all astonished, and were
   hardly able to believe that such a letter had been written by you at
   all; for it is expressed in terms of contention rather than of charity.

   Now if the author of it wrote with an ambition of exhibiting his power
   of language, such a practice surely is more suitable for other
   subjects: in ecclesiastical matters, it is not a display of eloquence
   that is needed, but the observance of Apostolic Canons, and an earnest
   care not to offend one of the little ones of the Church. For it were
   better for a man, according to the word of the Church, that a millstone
   were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the sea, than
   that he should offend even one of the little ones [541] . But if such a
   letter was written, because certain persons have been aggrieved on
   account of their meanness of spirit towards one another (for I will not
   impute it to all); it were better not to entertain any such feeling of
   offence at all, at least not to let the sun go down upon their
   vexation; and certainly not to give it room to exhibit itself in
   writing.

   22. Yet what has been done that is a just cause of vexation? or in what
   respect was my letter to you such? Was it, that I invited you to be
   present at a council? You ought rather to have received the proposal
   with joy. Those who have confidence in their proceedings, or as they
   choose to term them, in their decisions, are not wont to be angry, if
   such decision is inquired into by others; they rather shew all
   boldness, seeing that if they have given a just decision, it can never
   prove to be the reverse. The Bishops who assembled in the great Council
   of Nicæa agreed, not without the will of God, that the decisions of one
   council should be examined in another [542] , to the end that the
   judges, having before their eyes that other trial which was to follow,
   might be led to investigate matters with the utmost caution, and that
   the parties concerned in their sentence might have assurance that the
   judgment they received was just, and not dictated by the enmity of
   their former judges. Now if you are unwilling that such a practice
   should be adopted in your own case, though it is of ancient standing,
   and has been noticed and recommended by the great Council, your refusal
   is not becoming; for it is unreasonable that a custom which had once
   obtained in the Church, and been established by councils, should be set
   aside by a few individuals.

   For a further reason they cannot justly take offence in this point.
   When the persons whom you, Eusebius and his fellows, dispatched with
   your letters, I mean Macarius the Presbyter, and Martyrius and
   Hesychius the Deacons, arrived here, and found that they were unable to
   withstand the arguments of the Presbyters who came from Athanasius, but
   were confuted and exposed on all sides, they then requested me to call
   a Council together, and to write to Alexandria to the Bishop
   Athanasius, and also to Eusebius and his fellows, in order that a just
   judgment might be given in presence of all parties. And they undertook
   in that case to prove all the charges which had been brought against
   Athanasius. For Martyrius and Hesychius had been publicly refuted by
   us, and the Presbyters of the Bishop Athanasius had withstood them with
   great confidence: indeed, if one must tell the truth, Martyrius and his
   fellows had been utterly overthrown; and this it was that led them to
   desire that a Council might be held. Now supposing that they had not
   desired a Council, but that I had been the person to propose it, in
   discouragement of those who had written to me, and for the sake of our
   brethren who complain that they have suffered injustice; even in that
   case the proposal would have been reasonable and just, for it is
   agreeable to ecclesiastical practice, and well pleasing to God. But
   when those persons, whom you, Eusebius and his fellows, considered to
   be trustworthy, when even they wished me to call the brethren together,
   it was inconsistent in the parties invited to take offence, when they
   ought rather to have shewn all readiness to be present. These
   considerations shew that the display of anger in the offended persons
   is petulant, and the refusal of those who decline to meet the Council
   is unbecoming, and has a suspicious appearance. Does any one find
   fault, if he sees that done by another, which he would allow if done by
   himself? If, as you write, each council has an irreversible force, and
   he who has given judgment on a matter is dishonoured, if his sentence
   is examined by others; consider, dearly beloved, who are they that
   dishonour councils? who are setting aside the decisions of former
   judges? Not to inquire at present into every individual case, lest I
   should appear to press too heavily on certain parties, the last
   instance that has occurred, and which every one who hears it must
   shudder at, will be sufficient in proof of the others which I omit.

   23. The Arians who were excommunicated for their impiety by Alexander,
   the late Bishop of Alexandria, of blessed memory, were not only
   proscribed by the brethren in the several cities, but were also
   anathematised by the whole body assembled together in the great Council
   of Nicæa. For theirs was no ordinary offence, neither had they sinned
   against man, but against our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, the Son of the
   living God. And yet these persons who were proscribed by the whole
   world, and branded in every Church, are said now to have been admitted
   to communion again; which I think even you ought to hear with
   indignation. Who then are the parties who dishonour a council? Are not
   they who have set at nought the votes of the Three hundred [543] , and
   have preferred impiety to godliness? The heresy of the Arian madmen was
   condemned and proscribed by the whole body of Bishops everywhere; but
   the Bishops Athanasius and Marcellus have many supporters who speak and
   write in their behalf. We have received testimony in favour of
   Marcellus [544] , that he resisted the advocates of the Arian doctrines
   in the Council of Nicæa; and in favour of Athanasius [545] , that at
   Tyre nothing was brought home to him, and that in the Mareotis, where
   the Reports against him are said to have been drawn up, he was not
   present. Now you know, dearly beloved, that ex parte proceedings are of
   no weight, but bear a suspicious appearance. Nevertheless, these things
   being so, we, in order to be accurate, and neither shewing any
   prepossession in favour of yourselves, nor of those who wrote in behalf
   of the other party, invited those who had written to us to come hither;
   that, since there were many who wrote in their behalf, all things might
   be enquired into in a council, and neither the guiltless might be
   condemned, nor the person on his trial be accounted innocent. We then
   are not the parties who dishonour a council, but they who at once and
   recklessly have received the Arians whom all had condemned, and
   contrary to the decision of the judges. The greater part of those
   judges have now departed, and are with Christ; but some of them are
   still in this life of trial, and are indignant at learning that certain
   persons have set aside their judgment.

   24. We have also been informed of the following circumstance by those
   who were at Alexandria. A certain Carpones, who had been excommunicated
   by Alexander for Arianism, was sent hither by one Gregory with certain
   others, also excommunicated for the same heresy. However, I had learnt
   the matter also from the Presbyter Macarius, and the Deacons Martyrius
   and Hesychius. For before the Presbyters of Athanasius arrived they
   urged me to send letters to one Pistus at Alexandria, though at the
   same time the Bishop Athanasius was there. And when the Presbyters of
   the Bishop Athanasius came, they informed me that this Pistus was an
   Arian, and that he had been excommunicated [546] by the Bishop
   Alexander and the Council of Nicæa, and then ordained [547] by one
   Secundus, whom also the great Council excommunicated as an Arian. This
   statement Martyrius and his fellows did not gainsay, nor did they deny
   that Pistus had received his ordination from Secundus. Now consider,
   after this who are most justly liable to blame? I, who could not be
   prevailed upon to write to the Arian Pistus; or those, who advised me
   to do dishonour to the great Council, and to address the irreligious as
   if they were religious persons? Moreover, when the Presbyter Macarius,
   who had been sent hither by Eusebius with Martyrius and the rest, heard
   of the opposition which had been made by the Presbyters of Athanasius,
   while we were expecting his appearance with Martyrius and Hesychius, he
   departed in the night, in spite of a bodily ailment; which leads us to
   conjecture that his departure arose from shame on account of the
   exposure which had been made concerning Pistus. For it is impossible
   that the ordination of the Arian Secundus should be considered valid in
   the Catholic Church. This would indeed be dishonour to the Council, and
   to the Bishops who composed it, if the decrees they framed, as in the
   presence of God, with such extreme earnestness and care, should be set
   aside as worthless.

   25. If, as you write [548] , the decrees of all Councils ought to be of
   force, according to the precedent in the case of Novatus [549] and Paul
   of Samosata, all the more ought not the sentence of the Three hundred
   to be reversed, certainly a general Council ought not to be set at
   nought by a few individuals. For the Arians are heretics as they, and
   the like sentence has been passed both against one and the other. And,
   after such bold proceedings as these, who are they that have lighted up
   the flame of discord? for in your letter you blame us for having done
   this. Is it we, who have sympathised with the sufferings of the
   brethren, and have acted in all respects according to the Canon; or
   they who contentiously and contrary to the Canon have set aside the
   sentence of the Three hundred, and dishonoured the Council in every
   way? For not only have the Arians been received into communion, but
   Bishops also have made a practice of removing from one place to another
   [550] . Now if you really believe that all Bishops have the same and
   equal authority [551] , and you do not, as you assert, account of them
   according to the magnitude of their cities; he that is entrusted with a
   small city ought to abide in the place committed to him, and not from
   disdain of his trust to remove to one that has never been put under
   him; despising that which God has given him, and making much of the
   vain applause of men. You ought then, dearly beloved, to have come and
   not declined, that the matter may be brought to a conclusion; for this
   is what reason demands.

   But perhaps you were prevented by the time fixed upon for the Council,
   for you complain in your letter that the interval before the day we
   appointed [552] was too short. But this, beloved, is a mere excuse. Had
   the day forestalled any when on the journey, the interval allowed would
   then have been proved to be too short. But when persons do not wish to
   come, and detain even my Presbyters up to the month of January [553] ,
   it is the mere excuse of those who have no confidence in their cause;
   otherwise, as I said before, they would have come, not regarding the
   length of the journey, not considering the shortness of the time, but
   trusting to the justice and reasonableness of their cause. But perhaps
   they did not come on account of the aspect of the times [554] , for
   again you declare in your letter, that we ought to have considered the
   present circumstances of the East, and not to have urged you to come.
   Now if as you say you did not come because the times were such, you
   ought to have considered such times beforehand, and not to have become
   the authors of schism, and of mourning and lamentation in the Churches.
   But as the matter stands, men, who have been the cause of these things,
   shew that it is not the times that are to blame, but the determination
   of those who will not meet a Council.

   26. But I wonder also how you could ever have written that part of your
   letter, in which you say, that I alone wrote, and not to all of you,
   but to Eusebius and his fellows only. In this complaint one may
   discover more of readiness to find fault than of regard for truth. I
   received the letters against Athanasius from none other than Martyrius,
   Hesychius and their fellows, and I necessarily wrote to them who had
   written against him. Either then Eusebius and his fellows ought not
   alone to have written, apart from you all, or else you, to whom I did
   not write, ought not to be offended that I wrote to them who had
   written to me. If it was right that I should address my letter to you
   all, you also ought to have written with them: but now considering what
   was reasonable, I wrote to them, who had addressed themselves to me,
   and had given me information. But if you were displeased because I
   alone wrote to them, it is but consistent that you should also be
   angry, because they wrote to me alone. But for this also, beloved,
   there was a fair and not unreasonable cause. Nevertheless it is
   necessary that I should acquaint you that, although I wrote, yet the
   sentiments I expressed were not those of myself alone, but of all the
   Bishops throughout Italy and in these parts. I indeed was unwilling to
   cause them all to write, lest the others should be overpowered by their
   number. The Bishops however assembled on the appointed day, and agreed
   in these opinions, which I again write to signify to you; so that,
   dearly beloved, although I alone address you, yet you may be assured
   that these are the sentiments of all. Thus much for the excuses, not
   reasonable, but unjust and suspicious, which some of you have alleged
   for your conduct.

   27. Now although what has already been said were sufficient to shew
   that we have not admitted to our communion our brothers Athanasius and
   Marcellus either too readily, or unjustly, yet it is but fair briefly
   to set the matter before you. Eusebius and his fellows wrote formerly
   against Athanasius and his fellows, as you also have written now; but a
   great number of Bishops out of Egypt and other provinces wrote in his
   favour. Now in the first place, your letters against him are
   inconsistent with one another, and the second have no sort of agreement
   with the first, but in many instances the former are answered by the
   latter, and the latter are impeached by the former. Now where there is
   this contradiction in letters, no credit whatever is due to the
   statements they contain. In the next place if you require us to believe
   what you have written, it is but consistent that we should not refuse
   credit to those who have written in his favour; especially, considering
   that you write from a distance, while they are on the spot, are
   acquainted with the man, and the events which are occurring there, and
   testify in writing to his manner of life, and positively affirm that he
   has been the victim of a conspiracy throughout.

   Again, a certain Bishop Arsenius was said at one time to have been made
   away with by Athanasius, but we have learned that he is alive, nay,
   that he is on terms of friendship with him. He has positively asserted
   that the Reports drawn up in the Mareotis were ex parte ones; for that
   neither the Presbyter Macarius, the accused party, was present, nor yet
   his Bishop, Athanasius himself. This we have learnt, not only from his
   own mouth, but also from the Reports which Martyrius, Hesychius and
   their fellows, brought to us [555] ; for we found on reading them, that
   the accuser Ischyras was present there, but neither Macarius, nor the
   Bishop Athanasius; and that the Presbyters of Athanasius desired to
   attend, but were not permitted. Now, beloved, if the trial was to be
   conducted honestly, not only the accuser, but the accused also ought to
   have been present. As the accused party Macarius attended at Tyre, as
   well as the accuser Ischyras, when nothing was proved, so not only
   ought the accuser to have gone to the Mareotis, but also the accused,
   so that in person he might either be convicted, or by not being
   convicted might shew the falseness of the accusation. But now, as this
   was not the case, but the accuser only went out thither, with those to
   whom Athanasius objected, the proceedings wear a suspicious appearance.

   28. And he complained also that the persons who went to the Mareotis
   went against his wish, for that Theognius, Maris, Theodorus, Ursacius,
   Valens, and Macedonius, who were the persons they sent out, were of
   suspected character. This he shewed not by his own assertions merely,
   but from the letter of Alexander who was Bishop of Thessalonica; for he
   produced a letter written by him to Dionysius [556] , the Count who
   presided in the Council, in which he shews most clearly that there was
   a conspiracy on foot against Athanasius. He has also brought forward a
   genuine document, all in the handwriting of the accuser Ischyras
   himself [557] , in which he calls God Almighty to witness that no cup
   was broken, nor table overthrown, but that he had been suborned by
   certain persons to invent these accusations. Moreover, when the
   Presbyters of the Mareotis arrived [558] , they positively affirmed
   that Ischyras was not a Presbyter of the Catholic Church and that
   Macarius had not committed any such offence as the other had laid to
   his charge. The Presbyters and Deacons also who came to us testified in
   the fullest manner in favour of the Bishop Athanasius, strenuously
   asserting that none of those things which were alleged against him were
   true, but that he was the victim of a conspiracy.

   And all the Bishops of Egypt and Libya wrote and protested [559] that
   his ordination was lawful and strictly ecclesiastical, and that all
   that you had advanced against him was false, for that no murder had
   been committed, nor any persons despatched on his account, nor any cup
   broken, but that all was false. Nay, the Bishop Athanasius also shewed
   from the ex parte reports drawn up in the Mareotis, that a catechumen
   was examined and said [560] , that he was within with Ischyras, at the
   time when they say Macarius the Presbyter of Athanasius burst into the
   place; and that others who were examined said,--one, that Ischyras was
   in a small cell,--and another, that he was lying down behind the door,
   being sick at that very time, when they say Macarius came thither. Now
   from these representations of his, we are naturally led to ask the
   question, How was it possible that a man who was lying behind the door
   sick could get up, conduct the service, and offer? and how could it be
   that Oblations were offered when catechumens were within [561] ? for if
   there were catechumens present, it was not yet the time for presenting
   the Oblations. These representations, as I said, were made by the
   Bishop Athanasius, and he showed from the reports, what was also
   positively affirmed by those who were with him, that Ischyras has never
   been a presbyter at all in the Catholic Church, nor has ever appeared
   as a presbyter in the assemblies of the Church; for not even when
   Alexander admitted those of the Meletian schism, by the indulgence of
   the great Council, was he named by Meletius among his presbyters, as
   they deposed [562] ; which is the strongest argument possible that he
   was not even a presbyter of Meletius; for otherwise, he would certainly
   have been numbered with the rest. Besides, it was shewn also by
   Athanasius from the reports, that Ischyras had spoken falsely in other
   instances: for he set up a charge respecting the burning of certain
   books, when, as they pretend, Macarius burst in upon them, but was
   convicted of falsehood by the witnesses he himself brought to prove it.

   29. Now when these things were thus represented to us, and so many
   witnesses appeared in his favour, and so much was advanced by him in
   his own justification, what did it become us to do? what did the rule
   of the Church require of us, but that we should not condemn him, but
   rather receive him and treat him like a Bishop, as we have done?
   Moreover, besides all this he continued here a year and six months
   [563] , expecting the arrival of yourselves and of whoever chose to
   come, and by his presence he put everyone to shame, for he would not
   have been here, had he not felt confident in his cause; and he came not
   of his own accord, but on an invitation by letter from us, in the
   manner in which we wrote to you [564] . But still you complain after
   all of our transgressing the Canons. Now consider; who are they that
   have so acted? we who received this man with such ample proof of his
   innocence, or they who, being at Antioch at the distance of six and
   thirty posts [565] , nominated a stranger to be Bishop, and sent him to
   Alexandria with a military force; a thing which was not done even when
   Athanasius was banished into Gaul, though it would have been done then,
   had he been really proved guilty of the offence. But when he returned,
   of course he found his Church unoccupied and waiting for him.

   30. But now I am ignorant under what colour these proceedings have been
   carried on. In the first place, if the truth must be spoken, it was not
   right, when we had written to summon a council, that any persons should
   anticipate its decisions: and in the next place, it was not fitting
   that such novel proceedings should be adopted against the Church. For
   what canon of the Church, or what Apostolical tradition warrants this,
   that when a Church was at peace, and so many Bishops were in unanimity
   with Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria, Gregory should be sent
   thither, a stranger to the city, not having been baptized there, nor
   known to the general body, and desired neither by Presbyters, nor
   Bishops, nor Laity--that he should be appointed at Antioch, and sent to
   Alexandria, accompanied not by presbyters, nor by deacons of the city,
   nor by bishops of Egypt, but by soldiers? for they who came hither
   complained that this was the case.

   Even supposing that Athanasius was in the position of a criminal after
   the Council, this appointment ought not to have been made thus
   illegally and contrary to the rule of the Church, but the Bishops of
   the province ought to have ordained one in that very Church, of that
   very Priesthood, of that very Clergy [566] ; and the Canons received
   from the Apostles ought not thus to be set aside. Had this offence been
   committed against any one of you, would you not have exclaimed against
   it, and demanded justice as for the transgression of the Canons? Dearly
   beloved, we speak honestly, as in the presence of God, and declare,
   that this proceeding was neither pious, nor lawful, nor ecclesiastical.
   Moreover, the account which is given of the conduct of Gregory on his
   entry into the city, plainly shews the character of his appointment. In
   such peaceful times, as those who came from Alexandria declared them to
   have been, and as the Bishops also represented in their letters, the
   Church was set on fire; Virgins were stripped; Monks were trodden under
   foot; Presbyters and many of the people were scourged and suffered
   violence; Bishops were cast into prison; multitudes were dragged about
   from place to place; the holy Mysteries [567] , about which they
   accused the Presbyter Macarius, were seized upon by heathens and cast
   upon the ground; and all to constrain certain persons to admit the
   appointment of Gregory. Such conduct plainly shews who they are that
   transgress the Canons. Had the appointment been lawful, he would not
   have had recourse to illegal proceedings to compel the obedience of
   those who in a legal way resisted him. And notwithstanding all this,
   you write that perfect peace prevailed in Alexandria and Egypt. Surely
   not, unless the work of peace is entirely changed, and you call such
   doings as these peace.

   31. I have also thought it necessary to point out to you this
   circumstance, viz. that Athanasius positively asserted that Macarius
   was kept at Tyre under a guard of soldiers, while only his accuser
   accompanied those who went to the Mareotis; and that the Presbyters who
   desired to attend the inquiry were not permitted to do so, while the
   said inquiry respecting the cup and the Table was carried on before the
   Prefect and his band, and in the presence of Heathens and Jews. This at
   first seemed incredible, but it was proved to have been so from the
   Reports; which caused great astonishment to us, as I suppose, dearly
   beloved, it does to you also. Presbyters, who are the ministers of the
   Mysteries, are not permitted to attend, but an enquiry concerning
   Christ's Blood and Christ's Body is carried on before an external
   judge, in the presence of Catechumens, nay, worse than that, before
   Heathens and Jews, who are in ill repute in regard to Christianity.
   Even supposing that an offense had been committed, it should have been
   investigated legally in the Church and by the Clergy, not by heathens
   who abhor the Word and know not the Truth. I am persuaded that both you
   and all men must perceive the nature and magnitude of this sin. Thus
   much concerning Athanasius.

   32. With respect to Marcellus [568] , forasmuch as you have charged him
   also of impiety towards Christ, I am anxious to inform you, that when
   he was here, he positively declared that what you had written
   concerning him was not true; but being nevertheless requested by us to
   give an account of his faith, he answered in his own person with the
   utmost boldness, so that we recognised that he maintains nothing
   outside the truth. He made a confession [569] of the same godly
   doctrines concerning our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ as the Catholic
   Church confesses; and he affirmed that he had held these opinions for a
   very long time, and had not recently adopted them: as indeed our
   Presbyters [570] , who were at a former date present at the Council of
   Nicæa, testified to his orthodoxy; for he maintained then, as he has
   done now, his opposition to Arianism (on which points it is right to
   admonish you, lest any of you admit such heresy, instead of abominating
   it as alien from sound doctrine [571] ). Seeing then that he professed
   orthodox opinions, and had testimony to his orthodoxy, what, I ask
   again in his case, ought we to have done, except to receive him as a
   Bishop, as we did, and not reject him from our communion? These things
   I have written, not so much for the purpose of defending their cause,
   as in order to convince you, that we acted justly and canonically in
   receiving these persons, and that you are contentious without a cause.
   But it is your duty to use your anxious endeavours and to labour by
   every means to correct the irregularities which have been committed
   contrary to the Canon, and to secure the peace of the Churches; so that
   the peace of our Lord which has been given to us [572] may remain, and
   the Churches may not be divided, nor you incur the charge of being
   authors of schism. For I confess, your past conduct is an occasion of
   schism rather than of peace.

   33. For not only the Bishops Athanasius and Marcellus and their fellows
   came hither and complained of the injustice that had been done them,
   but many other Bishops also [573] , from Thrace, from Coele-Syria, from
   Phoenicia and Palestine, and Presbyters, not a few, and others from
   Alexandria and from other parts, were present at the Council here, and
   in addition to their other statements, lamented before all the
   assembled Bishops the violence and injustice which the Churches had
   suffered, and affirmed that similar outrages to those which had been
   committed in Alexandria had occurred in their own Churches, and in
   others also. Again there lately came Presbyters with letters from Egypt
   and Alexandria, who complained that many Bishops and Presbyters who
   wished to come to the Council were prevented; for they said that, since
   the departure of Athanasius [574] even up to this time, Bishops who are
   confessors [575] have been beaten with stripes, that others have been
   cast into prison, and that but lately aged men, who have been an
   exceedingly long period in the Episcopate, have been given up to be
   employed in the public works, and nearly all the Clergy of the Catholic
   Church with the people are the objects of plots and persecutions.
   Moreover they said that certain Bishops and other brethren had been
   banished for no other reason than to compel them against their will to
   communicate with Gregory and his Arian associates. We have heard also
   from others, what is confirmed by the testimony of the Bishop
   Marcellus, that a number of outrages, similar to those which were
   committed at Alexandria, have occurred also at Ancyra in Galatia [576]
   . And in addition to all this, those who came to the Council reported
   against some of you (for I will not mention names) certain charges of
   so dreadful a nature that I have declined setting them down in writing:
   perhaps you also have heard them from others. It was for this cause
   especially that I wrote to desire you to come, that you might be
   present to hear them, and that all irregularities might be corrected
   and differences healed. And those who were called for these purposes
   ought not to have refused, but to have come the more readily, lest by
   failing to do so they should be suspected of what was alleged against
   them, and be thought unable to prove what they had written.

   34. Now according to these representations, since the Churches are thus
   afflicted and treacherously assaulted, as our informants positively
   affirmed, who are they that have lighted up a flame of discord [577] ?
   We, who grieve for such a state of things and sympathize with the
   sufferings of the brethren, or they who have brought these things
   about? While then such extreme confusion existed in every Church, which
   was the cause why those who visited us came hither, I wonder how you
   could write that unanimity prevailed in the Churches. These things tend
   not to the edification of the Church, but to her destruction; and those
   who rejoice in them are not sons of peace, but of confusion: but our
   God is not a God of confusion, but of peace [578] . Wherefore, as the
   God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows, it was from a regard for
   your good name, and with prayers that the Churches might not fall into
   confusion, but might continue as they were regulated by the Apostles,
   that I thought it necessary to write thus unto you, to the end that you
   might at length put to shame those who through the effects of their
   mutual enmity have brought the Churches to this condition. For I have
   heard, that it is only a certain few [579] who are the authors of all
   these things.

   Now, as having bowels of mercy, take ye care to correct, as I said
   before, the irregularities which have been committed contrary to the
   Canon, so that if any mischief has already befallen, it may be healed
   through your zeal. And write not that I have preferred the communion of
   Marcellus and Athanasius to yours, for such like complaints are no
   indications of peace, but of contentiousness and hatred of the
   brethren. For this cause I have written the foregoing, that you may
   understand that we acted not unjustly in admitting them to our
   communion, and so may cease this strife. If you had come hither, and
   they had been condemned, and had appeared unable to produce reasonable
   evidence in support of their cause, you would have done well in writing
   thus. But seeing that, as I said before, we acted agreeably to the
   Canon, and not unjustly, in holding communion with them, I beseech you
   for the sake of Christ, suffer not the members of Christ to be torn
   asunder, neither trust to prejudices, but seek rather the peace of the
   Lord. It is neither holy nor just, in order to gratify the petty
   feeling of a few persons, to reject those who have never been condemned
   and thereby to grieve the Spirit [580] . But if you think that you are
   able to prove anything against them, and to confute them face to face
   let those of you who please come hither: for they also promised that
   they would be ready to establish completely the truth of those things
   which they have reported to us.

   35. Give us notice therefore of this, dearly beloved, that we may write
   both to them, and to the Bishops who will have again to assemble, so
   that the accused may be condemned in the presence of all, and confusion
   no longer prevail in the Churches. What has already taken place is
   enough: it is enough surely that Bishops have been sentenced to
   banishment in the presence of Bishops; of which it behoves me not to
   speak at length, lest I appear to press too heavily on those who were
   present on those occasions. But if one must speak the truth, matters
   ought not to have proceeded so far; their petty feeling ought not to
   have been suffered to reach the present pitch. Let us grant the
   "removal," as you write, of Athanasius and Marcellus, from their own
   places, yet what must one say of the case of the other Bishops and
   Presbyters who, as I said before, came hither from various parts, and
   who complained that they also had been forced away, and had suffered
   the like injuries? O beloved, the decisions of the Church are no longer
   according to the Gospel, but tend only to banishment and death [581] .
   Supposing, as you assert, that some offence rested upon those persons,
   the case ought to have been conducted against them, not after this
   manner, but according to the Canon of the Church. Word should have been
   written of it to us all [582] , that so a just sentence might proceed
   from all. For the sufferers were Bishops, and Churches of no ordinary
   note, but those which the Apostles themselves had governed in their own
   persons [583] .

   And why was nothing said to us concerning the Church of the
   Alexandrians in particular? Are you ignorant that the custom has been
   for word to be written first to us, and then for a just decision to be
   passed from this place [584] ? If then any such suspicion rested upon
   the Bishop there, notice thereof ought to have been sent to the Church
   of this place; whereas, after neglecting to inform us, and proceeding
   on their own authority as they pleased, now they desire to obtain our
   concurrence in their decisions, though we never condemned him. Not so
   have the constitutions [585] of Paul, not so have the traditions of the
   Fathers directed; this is another form of procedure, a novel practice.
   I beseech you, readily bear with me: what I write is for the common
   good. For what we have received from the blessed Apostle Peter [586] ,
   that I signify to you; and I should not have written this, as deeming
   that these things were manifest unto all men, had not these proceedings
   so disturbed us. Bishops are forced away from their sees and driven
   into banishment, while others from different quarters are appointed in
   their place; others are treacherously assailed, so that the people have
   to grieve for those who are forcibly taken from them, while, as to
   those who are sent in their room, they are obliged to give over seeking
   the man whom they desire, and to receive those they do not.

   I ask of you, that such things may no longer be, but that you will
   denounce in writing those persons who attempt them; so that the
   Churches may no longer be afflicted thus, nor any Bishop or Presbyter
   be treated with insult, nor any one be compelled to act contrary to his
   judgment, as they have represented to us, lest we become a
   laughing-stock among the heathen, and above all, lest we excite the
   wrath of God against us. For every one of us shall give account in the
   Day of judgment [587] of the things which he has done in this life. May
   we all be possessed with the mind of God! so that the Churches may
   recover their own Bishops, and rejoice evermore in Jesus Christ our
   Lord; through Whom to the Father be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

   I pray for your health in the Lord, brethren dearly beloved and greatly
   longed for.

   36. Thus wrote the Council of Rome by Julius, Bishop of Rome.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [534] a.d. 339. vid. Hist. Arian. §11. [Socrates (iii. 5) and Sozomenus
   (ii. 8, &c.), confuse the Antiochene Synod, which sent the letter
   referred to, with the Synod of the Dedication' held in 341 a.d., after
   the receipt of the letter of Julius.]

   [535] Vito and Vincentius, Presbyters, had represented Silvester at
   Nicæa. Liberius sent Vincentius, Bishop, and Marcellus, Bishop, to
   Constantius; and again Lucifer, Bishop, and Eusebius, Bishop. [The
   practice was common to all bishops, not peculiar to that of Rome.] S.
   Basil suggests that Damasus should send legates into the East, Ep. 69.
   The Council of Sardica, Can. 5, recognised the Pope's power of sending
   legates into foreign Provinces to hear certain appeals; "ut de Latere
   suo Presbyterum mittat." [It conferred the power (1) upon Julius (2)
   without any right of initiative, in Can. 3; Can. 5 simply regulates the
   exercise of the power thus conferred. The genuineness of these Canons
   has been disputed: at Rome they were quoted in the fifth century as
   Nicene.'] vid. Thomassin. de Eccl. Disc. Part I. ii. 117. [D.C.B. iii.
   530, D.C.A. 197, 1658.]

   [536] [Date uncertain; see Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (1) sub fin., and note
   there.]

   [537] Infr. §58.

   [538] Vid. infr. §36.

   [539] By Danius, which had been considered the same name as Dianius,
   Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, Montfaucon in loc. understands the
   notorious Arian Bishop of Nicæa, called variously Diognius (supr.
   §13.), Theognius (infr §28.), Theognis (Philost. Hist. ii. 7.),
   Theogonius, (Theod. Hist. i. 19.), and assigns some ingenious and
   probable reasons for his supposition. [Danius' was the Bishop of
   Cæsarea in Cappad., he also signs at Philippopolis. See D.C.B. under
   Dianius and Basil.] Flacillus, Arian Bishop of Antioch, as Athan. names
   him, is called Placillus (in S. Jerome's Chronicon, p. 785.), Placitus
   (Soz. iii. 5.), Flacitus (Theod. Hist. i. 21.). Theodorus was Arian
   Bishop of Heraclea, whose Comments on the Psalms are supposed to be
   those which bear his name in Corderius's Catena. [He was not a thorough
   Arian.]

   [540] Some of the topics contained in the Eusebian Letter are specified
   in Julius's answer. It acknowledged, besides, the high dignity of the
   [church] of Rome, as being a "School (phrontisterion) of Apostles and a
   Metropolis of orthodoxy from the beginning," but added that "doctors
   came to it from the east; and they ought not themselves to hold the
   second place, for they were superior in virtue, though not in their
   Church." And they said that they would hold communion with Julius if he
   would agree to their depositions and substitutions in the Eastern Sees.
   Soz. iii. 8.

   [541] Matt. xviii. 6.

   [542] As this determination does not find a place among the now
   received Canons of the Council, the passage in the text becomes of
   great moment in the argument in favour of the twenty Canons extant in
   Greek being but a portion of those passed at Nicæa. vid. Alber.
   Dissert. in Hist. Eccles. vii. Abraham Ecchellensis has argued on the
   same side (apud Colet. Concil. t. ii. p. 399. Ed. Ven. 1728), also
   Baronius, though not so strongly, Ann. 325. nn. 157 &c. and Montfaucon
   in loc. Natalis Alexander, Sæc. 4. Dissert. 28 argues against the
   larger number, and Tillemont, Mem. vi. 674. [But it is far more likely
   that Julius is making a free use of Can. Nic. 5; the Arabic canons are
   apparently referred to in the above note: no one now defends them.]

   [543] The number of the Fathers at the Nicene Council is generally
   considered to have been 318, the number of Abraham's servants, Gen.
   xiv. 14. Anastasius (Hodeg. 3. fin.) referring to the first three
   Ecumenical Councils, speaks of the faith of the 318, the 150, and the
   200. [Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1).]

   [544] Cf. §32.

   [545] Cf. §73.

   [546] Cf. supr. Depos. Ar.

   [547] Cf. Ep. Æg. 7, 19, Hist. Ar. 63.

   [548] Vid. also Hilar. Fragm. iii. 20.

   [549] The instance of Novatian makes against the Eusebians, because for
   some time after Novatian was condemned in the West, his cause was
   abandoned in the East. Tillemont, Mem. t. 7. p. 277.

   [550] Vid. supr. §6.

   [551] Cyprian. de Unit. Eccl. 4.

   [552] prothesmia

   [553] a.d. 340.

   [554] The Persian war. Hist. Arian. §11.

   [555] Infr. §83 fin.

   [556] Infr. §80.

   [557] §64.

   [558] §74.

   [559] Supr. §6.

   [560] Infr. §83.

   [561] Bingh. Ant. X. v. 8.

   [562] Infr. §71.

   [563] Spring of 339 a.d. to autumn of 340.

   [564] Hist. Ar. 9.

   [565] Or rather, halts, monai. They are enumerated in the Itinerary of
   Antoninus, and are set down on Montfaucon's plate. The route passes
   over the Delta to Pelusium, and then coasts all the way to Antioch.
   These monai were day's journeys, Coustant in Hilar. Psalm 118, Lit. 5.
   2. or half a day's journey, Herman. ibid; and were at unequal
   intervals, Ambros. in Psalm 118, Serm. 5. §5. Gibbon says that by the
   government conveyances, "it was easy to travel an 100 miles in a day
   along the Roman roads." ch. ii. Mone or mansio properly means the
   building, where soldiers or other public officers rested at night
   (hence its application to monastic houses). Such buildings included
   granaries, stabling, &c. vid. Con. Theod. ed. Gothofr. 1665. t. 1. p.
   47, t. 2. p. 507. Du Cange Gloss. t. 4. p. 426. Col. 2.

   [566] Vid. Bingh. Ant. II. xi.

   [567] Athan. only suggests this, supr. Encyc. 3. S. Hilary says the
   same of the conduct of the Arians at Toulouse; "Clerks were beaten with
   clubs; Deacons bruised with lead; nay, even on Christ Himself (the
   Saints understand my meaning) hands were laid." Contr. Constant. 11.

   [568] Julius here acquits Marcellus; but he is considered heretical by
   S. Epiphanius, loc. cit. S. Basil. Epp. 69, 125, 263, 265. S.
   Chrysostom in Hebr. Hom. ii. 2. Theodoret, Hær. ii. 10. vid. Petav. de
   Trin. i. 13. who condemns him, and Bull far more strongly, Def. F. N.
   ii. 1. §9. Montfaucon defends him (in a special Dissertation, Collect.
   Nov. tom. 2.) and Tillemont. Mem. tom. 7. p. 513, and Natalis Alex.
   Sæc. iv. Dissert. 30. [Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) c.]

   [569] Vid. Epiph. Hær. 72. 2, 3. and §47. infr.

   [570] Vincentius and Vito.

   [571] 1 Tim. i. 10.

   [572] Joh. xiv. 27.

   [573] The names of few are known; perhaps Marcellus, Asclepas, Paul of
   Constantinople, Lucius of Adrianople. vid. Montf. in loc. Tillem. Mem.
   tom. 7. p. 272.

   [574] These outrages took place immediately on the dismission of
   Elpidius and Philoxenus, the Pope's legates, from Antioch. Athan. Hist.
   Ar. 12.

   [575] e.g. Sarapammon and Potamo, both Confessors, who were of the
   number of the Nicene Fathers, and had defended Athan. at Tyre, were,
   the former banished, the latter beaten to death. vid. infr. Hist. Ar.
   12.

   [576] The Pseudo-Sardican Council, i.e. that of Philippopolis, retort
   this accusation on the party of Marcellus; Hilar. Fragm. iii. 9. but
   the character of the outrages fixes them on the Arians, vid. infr. §45,
   note [There were doubtless outrages on both sides].

   [577] Vid. supr. §25.

   [578] 1 Cor. xiv. 33.

   [579] Ad Ep. Æg. 5. de Syn. 5.

   [580] Eph. iv. 30.

   [581] Hist. Arian. §67.

   [582] Coustant in loc. fairly insists on the word "all," as shewing
   that S. Julius does not here claim the prerogative of judging by
   himself all Bishops whatever, and that what follows relates merely to
   the Church of Alexandria.

   [583] St. Peter (Greg. M. Epist. vii. Ind. 15. 40.) or St. Mark (Leo
   Ep. 9.) at Alexandria. St. Paul at Ancyra in Galatia (Tertull. contr.
   Marcion. iv. 5.) vid. Coustant. in loc.

   [584] Socrates says somewhat differently, "Julius wrote back....that
   they acted against the Canons, because they had not called him to a
   Council, the Ecclesiastical Canon commanding that the Churches ought
   not to make Canons beside the will of the Bishop of Rome." Hist. ii.
   17. Sozomen in like manner, "for it was a sacerdotal law, to declare
   invalid whatever was transacted beside the will of the Bishop of the
   Romans." Hist. iii. 10. vid. Pope Damasus ap. Theod. Hist. v. 10. Leon.
   Epist. 14. &c. In the passage in the text the prerogative of the Roman
   see is limited, as Coustant observes, to the instance of Alexandria;
   and we actually find in the third century a complaint lodged against
   its Bishop Dionysius with the Pope. [Prolegg. ch. iv. §4.]

   [585] diataxeis. St. Paul says houtos en tais ekklesiais diatassomai 1
   Cor. vii. 17. ta de loipa diataxomai. Ibid. xi. 34. vid. Pearson, Vind.
   Ignat. p. 298. Hence Coustant in col. Athan. would suppose Julius to
   refer to 1 Cor. v. 4. which Athan. actually quotes, Ep. Encycl. §2.
   supr. p. 93. Pearson, loc. cit. considers the diataxeis of the
   Apostles, as a collection of regulation and usages, which more or less
   represented, or claimed to represent, what may be called St. Paul's
   rule, or St. Peter's rule, &c. Cotelier considers the diataxeis as the
   same as the didachai, the "doctrine" or "teaching" of the Apostles.
   Præfat. in Const. Apost. So does Beveridge, Cod. Can. Illustr. ii. 9.
   §5.

   [586] [Petri] in Sede sua vivit potestas et excellit auctoritas. Leon.
   Serm. iii. 3. vid. contra Barrow on the Supremacy, p. 116. ed. 1836.
   "not one Bishop, but all Bishops together through the whole Church, do
   succeed St. Peter, or any other Apostle."

   [587] Matt. xii. 36.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chapter III.--Letters of the Council of Sardica to the Churches of
   Egypt and of Alexandria, and to all Churches.

   But when, notwithstanding, Eusebius and his fellows proceeded without
   shame, disturbing the Churches, and plotting the ruin of many, the most
   religious Emperors Constantius and Constans being informed of this,
   commanded the Bishops from both the West and East to meet together in
   the city of Sardica. In the meantime Eusebius [588] died: but a great
   number assembled from all parts, and we challenged the associates of
   Eusebius and his fellows to submit to a trial. But they, having before
   their eyes the things that they had done, and perceiving that their
   accusers had come up to the Council, were afraid to do this; but, while
   all besides met with honest intentions, they again brought with them
   the Counts [589] Musonianus [590] and Hesychius the Castrensian [591] ,
   that, as their custom was, they might effect their own aims by their
   authority. But when the Council met without Counts, and no soldiers
   were permitted to be present, they were confounded, and
   conscience-stricken, because they could no longer obtain the judgment
   they wished, but such only as reason and truth required. We, however,
   frequently repeated our challenge, and the Council of Bishops called
   upon them to come forward, saying, "You have come for the purpose of
   undergoing a trial; why then do you now withdraw yourselves? Either you
   ought not to have come, or having come, not to conceal yourselves. Such
   conduct will prove your greatest condemnation. Behold, Athanasius and
   his fellows are here, whom you accused while absent; if therefore you
   think that you have any thing against them, you may convict them face
   to face. But if you pretend to be unwilling to do so, while in truth
   you are unable, you plainly shew yourselves to be calumniators, and
   this is the decision the Council will give you." When they heard this
   they were self-condemned (for they were conscious of their machinations
   and fabrications against us), and were ashamed to appear, thereby
   proving themselves to have been guilty of many base calumnies.

   The holy Council therefore denounced their indecent and suspicious
   flight [592] , and admitted us to make our defence; and when we had
   related their conduct towards us, and proved the truth of our
   statements by witnesses and other evidence, they were filled with
   astonishment, and all acknowledged that our opponents had good reason
   to be afraid to meet the Council, lest their guilt should be proved
   before their faces. They said also, that probably they had come from
   the East, supposing that Athanasius and his fellows would not appear,
   but that, when they saw them confident in their cause, and challenging
   a trial, they fled. They accordingly received us as injured persons who
   had been falsely accused, and confirmed yet more towards us their
   fellowship and love. But they deposed Eusebius's associates in
   wickedness, who had become even more shameless than himself, viz.,
   Theodorus [593] of Heraclea, Narcissus of Neronias, Acacius [594] of
   Cæsarea, Stephanus [595] of Antioch, Ursacius and Valens of Pannonia,
   Menophantus of Ephesus, and George [596] of Laodicaea; and they wrote
   to the Bishops in all parts of the world, and to the diocese of each of
   the injured persons, in the following terms.

   Letter of the Council of Sardica to the Church of Alexandria.

   The Holy Council, by the grace of God assembled at Sardica, from [597]
   Rome, Spain, Gaul, Italy, Campania, Calabria, Apulia, Africa, Sardinia,
   Pannonia, Moesia, Dacia, Noricum, Siscia, Dardania, the other Dacia,
   Macedonia, Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Thrace, Rhodope, Palestine,
   Arabia, Crete, and Egypt, to their beloved brothers, the Presbyters and
   Deacons, and to all the Holy Church of God abiding at Alexandria, sends
   health in the Lord.

   37. We were not ignorant, but the fact was well known to us, even
   before we received the letters of your piety, that the supporters of
   the abominated heresy of the Arians were practising many dangerous
   machinations, rather to the destruction of their own souls, than to the
   injury of the Church. For this has ever been the object of their
   unprincipled craft; this is the deadly design in which they have been
   continually engaged; viz. how they may best expel from their places and
   persecute all who are to be found anywhere of orthodox sentiments, and
   maintaining the doctrine of the Catholic Church, which was delivered to
   them from the Fathers. Against some they have laid false accusations;
   others they have driven into banishment; others they have destroyed by
   the punishments inflicted on them. At any rate they endeavoured by
   violence and tyranny to surprise the innocence of our brother and
   fellow-Bishop Athanasius, and therefore conducted their enquiry into
   his case without any care, without any faith, without any sort of
   justice. Accordingly having no confidence in the part they had played
   on that occasion, nor yet in the reports they had circulated against
   him, but perceiving that they were unable to produce any certain
   evidence respecting the case, when they came to the city of Sardica,
   they were unwilling to meet the Council of all the holy Bishops. From
   this it became evident that the decision of our brother and
   fellow-Bishop Julius was a just one [598] ; for after cautious
   deliberation and care he had determined, that we ought not to hesitate
   at all about communion with our brother Athanasius. For he had the
   credible testimony of eighty Bishops, and was also able to advance this
   fair argument in his support that by the mere means of our dearly
   beloved brethren his own Presbyters, and by correspondence, he had
   defeated the design of Eusebius and his fellows, who relied more upon
   violence than upon a judicial enquiry.

   Wherefore all the Bishops from all parts determined upon holding
   communion with Athanasius on the ground that he was innocent. And let
   your charity also observe, that when he came to the holy Council
   assembled at Sardica, the Bishops of the East were informed of the
   circumstance, as we said before, both by letter, and by injunctions
   conveyed by word of mouth, and were invited by us to be present. But,
   being condemned by their own conscience, they had recourse to
   unbecoming excuses, and set themselves to avoid the enquiry. They
   demanded that an innocent man should be rejected from our communion, as
   a culprit, not considering how unbecoming, or rather how impossible,
   such a proceeding was. And as for the Reports which were framed in the
   Mareotis by certain most wicked and most abandoned youths [599] , to
   whose hands one would not commit the very lowest office of the
   ministry, it is certain that they were ex parte statements. For neither
   was our brother the Bishop Athanasius present on the occasion, nor the
   Presbyter Macarius who was accused by them. And besides, their enquiry,
   or rather their falsification of facts, was attended by the most
   disgraceful circumstances. Sometimes heathens, sometimes Catechumens,
   were examined, not that they might declare what they knew, but that
   they might assert those falsehoods which they had been taught by
   others. And when you Presbyters, who were in charge in the absence of
   your Bishop, desired to be present at the enquiry, in order that you
   might shew the truth, and disprove the falsehoods, no regard was paid
   to you; they would not permit you to be present, but drove you away
   with insult.

   Now although their calumnies have been most plainly exposed before all
   men by these circumstances; yet we found also, on reading the Reports,
   that the most iniquitous Ischyras, who has obtained from them the empty
   title of Bishop as his reward for the false accusation, had convicted
   himself of calumny. He declares in the Reports that at the very time
   when, according to his positive assertions, Macarius entered his cell,
   he lay there sick; whereas Eusebius and his fellows had the boldness to
   write that Ischyras was standing up and offering when Macarius came in.

   38. The base and slanderous charge which they next alleged against him,
   has become well-known to all men. They raised a great outcry, affirming
   that Athanasius had committed murder, and had made away with one
   Arsenius a Meletian Bishop, whose loss they pretended to deplore with
   feigned lamentations and fictitious tears, and demanded that the body
   of a living man, as if a dead one, should be given up to them. But
   their fraud was not undetected; one and all knew that the person was
   alive, and was numbered among the living. And when these men, who are
   ready upon any opportunity, perceived their falsehoods detected (for
   Arsenius shewed himself alive, and so proved that he had not been made
   away with, and was not dead), yet they would not rest, but proceeded to
   add other to their former calumnies [600] , and to slander the man by a
   fresh expedient. Well; our brother Athanasius, dearly beloved, was not
   confounded, but again in the present case also with great boldness
   challenged them to the proof, and we too prayed and exhorted them to
   come to the trial, and if they were able, to establish their charge
   against him. O great arrogance! O dreadful pride! or rather, if one
   must say the truth, O evil and accusing conscience! for this is the
   view which all men take of it.

   Wherefore, beloved brethren, we admonish and exhort you, above all
   things to maintain the right faith of the Catholic Church. You have
   undergone many severe and grievous trials; many are the insults and
   injuries which the Catholic Church has suffered, but he that endureth
   to the end, the same shall be saved [601] .' Wherefore even though they
   still recklessly assail you, let your tribulation be unto you for joy.
   For such afflictions are a sort of martyrdom, and such confessions and
   tortures as yours will not be without their reward, but ye shall
   receive the prize from God. Therefore strive above all things in
   support of the sound faith, and of the innocence of your Bishop and our
   fellow-minister Athanasius. We also have not held our peace, nor been
   negligent of what concerns your comfort, but have deliberated and done
   whatsoever the claims of charity demand. We sympathize with our
   suffering brethren, and their affliction we consider as our own.

   39. Accordingly we have written to beseech our most religious and godly
   Emperors, that their kindness would give orders for the release of
   those who are still suffering from affliction and oppression, and would
   command that none of the magistrates, whose duty it is to attend only
   to civil causes, give judgment upon Clergy [602] , nor henceforward in
   any way, on pretence of providing for the Churches, attempt anything
   against the brethren; but that every one may live, as he prays and
   desires to do, free from persecution, from violence and fraud, and in
   quietness and peace may follow the Catholic and Apostolic Faith. As for
   Gregory, who has the reputation of being illegally appointed by the
   heretics, and has been sent by them to your city, we wish your
   unanimity to understand, that he has been deposed by a judgment of the
   whole sacred Council, although indeed he has never at any time been
   considered to be a Bishop at all. Wherefore receive gladly your Bishop
   Athanasius, for to this end we have dismissed him in peace. And we
   exhort all those who either through fear, or through the intrigues of
   certain persons, have held communion with Gregory, that now being
   admonished, exhorted, and persuaded by us, they withdraw from that his
   detestable communion, and straightway unite themselves to the Catholic
   Church.

   40. But forasmuch as we have learnt that Aphthonius, Athanasius the son
   of Capito, Paul, and Plutio, our fellow Presbyters [603] , have also
   suffered from the machinations of Eusebius and his fellows, so that
   some of them have had trial of exile, and others have fled on peril of
   their lives, we have in consequence thought it necessary to make this
   known unto you, that you may understand that we have received and
   acquitted them also, being aware that whatever has been done by
   Eusebius and his fellows against the orthodox has tended to the glory
   and commendation of those who have been attacked by them. It were
   fitting that your Bishop and our brother Athanasius should make this
   known to you respecting them, to his own respecting his own; but as for
   more abundant testimony he wished the holy Council also to write to
   you, we deferred not to do so, but hastened to signify this unto you,
   that you may receive them as we have done, for they also are deserving
   of praise, because through their piety towards Christ they have been
   thought worthy to endure violence at the hands of the heretics.

   What decrees have been passed by the holy Council against those who are
   at the head of the Arian heresy, and have offended against you, and the
   rest of the Churches, you will learn from the subjoined documents [604]
   . We have sent them to you, that you may understand from them that the
   Catholic Church will not overlook those who offend against her.

   Letter of the Council of Sardica to the Bishops of Egypt and Libya.

   The holy Council, by the grace of God assembled at Sardica, to the
   Bishops of Egypt and Libya, their fellow-ministers and dearly beloved
   brethren, sends health in the Lord.

   41. We were not ignorant [605] , but the fact was well known to us,
   even before we received the letters of your piety, that the supporters
   of the abominated heresy of the Arians were practising many dangerous
   machinations, rather to the destruction of their own souls, than to the
   injury of the Church. For this has ever been the object of their craft
   and villainy: this is the deadly design in which they have been
   continually engaged, viz. how they may best expel from their places and
   persecute all who are to be found anywhere of orthodox sentiments, and
   maintaining the doctrine of the Catholic Church, which was delivered to
   them from the Fathers. Against some they have laid false accusations;
   others they have driven into banishment; others they have destroyed by
   the punishments inflicted on them. At any rate they endeavoured by
   violence and tyranny to surprise the innocence of our brother and
   fellow-Bishop Athanasius, and therefore conducted their enquiry into
   his case without any faith, without any sort of justice. Accordingly
   having no confidence in the part they had played on that occasion, nor
   yet in the reports they had circulated against him, but perceiving that
   they were unable to produce any certain evidence respecting the case,
   when they came to the city of Sardica, they were unwilling to meet the
   Council of all the holy Bishops. From this it became evident that the
   decision of our brother and fellow-Bishop Julius was a just one; for
   after cautious deliberation and care he had decided, that we ought not
   to hesitate at all about communion with our brother Athanasius. For he
   had the credible testimony of eighty Bishops, and was also able to
   advance this fair argument in his support, that by the mere means of
   our dearly beloved brethren his own Presbyters, and by correspondence,
   he had defeated the designs of Eusebius and his fellows, who relied
   more upon violence than upon a judicial inquiry.

   Wherefore all the Bishops from all parts determined upon holding
   communion with Athanasius on the ground that he was innocent. And let
   your charity also observe, that when he came to the holy Council
   assembled at Sardica, the Bishops of the East were informed of the
   circumstance, as we said before, both by letter, and by injunctions
   conveyed by word of mouth, and were invited by us to be present. But,
   being condemned by their own conscience, they had recourse to
   unbecoming excuses, and began to avoid the enquiry. They demanded that
   an innocent man should be rejected from our communion, as a culprit,
   not considering how unbecoming, or rather how impossible, such a
   proceeding was. And as for the reports which were framed in the
   Mareotis by certain most wicked and abandoned youths, to whose hands
   one would not commit the very lowest office of the ministry, it is
   certain that they were ex parte statements. For neither was our brother
   the Bishop Athanasius present on the occasion, nor the Presbyter
   Macarius, who was accused by them. And besides, their enquiry, or
   rather their falsification of facts, was attended by the most
   disgraceful circumstances. Sometimes Heathens, sometimes Catechumens,
   were examined, not that they might declare what they knew, but that
   they might assert those falsehoods which they had been taught by
   others. And when you Presbyters, who were in charge in the absence of
   your Bishop, desired to be present at the enquiry, in order that you
   might shew the truth, and disprove falsehood, no regard was paid to
   you; they would not permit you to be present, but drove you away with
   insult.

   Now although their calumnies have been most plainly exposed before all
   men by these circumstances; yet we found also, on reading the Reports,
   that the most iniquitous Ischyras, who has obtained from them the empty
   title of Bishop as his reward for the false accusation, had convicted
   himself of calumny. He declares in the Reports, that at the very time
   when, according to his positive assertions, Macarius entered his cell,
   he lay there sick; whereas Eusebius and his fellows had the boldness to
   write that Ischyras was standing offering when Macarius came in.

   42. The base and slanderous charge which they next alleged against him
   has become well known unto all men. They raised a great outcry,
   affirming that Athanasius had committed murder, and made away with one
   Arsenius a Meletian Bishop, whose loss they pretended to deplore with
   feigned lamentations, and fictitious tears, and demanded that the body
   of a living man, as if a dead one, should be given up to them. But
   their fraud was not undetected; one and all knew that the person was
   alive, and was numbered among the living. And when these men, who are
   ready upon any opportunity, perceived their falsehood detected (for
   Arsenius shewed himself alive, and so proved that he had not been made
   away with, and was not dead), yet they would not rest, but proceeded to
   add other to their former calumnies, and to slander the man by a fresh
   expedient. Well: our brother Athanasius, dearly beloved, was not
   confounded, but again in the present case also with great boldness
   challenged them to the proof, and we too prayed and exhorted them to
   come to the trial, and if they were able, to establish their charge
   against him. O great arrogance! O dreadful pride! or rather, if one
   must say the truth, O evil and accusing conscience! for this is the
   view which all men take of it.

   Wherefore, beloved brethren, we admonish and exhort you, above all
   things, to maintain the right faith of the Catholic Church. You have
   undergone many severe and grievous trials; many are the insults and
   injuries which the Catholic Church has suffered, but he that endureth
   to the end, the same shall be saved [606] .' Wherefore, even though
   they shall still recklessly assail you, let your tribulation be unto
   you for joy. For such afflictions are a sort of martyrdom, and such
   confessions and tortures as yours will not be without their reward, but
   ye shall receive the prize from God. Therefore strive above all things
   in support of the sound Faith, and of the innocence of your Bishop and
   our brother Athanasius. We also have not held our peace, nor been
   negligent of what concerns your comfort, but have deliberated and done
   whatsoever the claims of charity demand. We sympathize with our
   suffering brethren, and their afflictions we consider as our own, and
   have mingled our tears with yours. And you, brethren, are not the only
   persons who have suffered: many others also of our brethren in ministry
   have come hither, bitterly lamenting these things.

   43. Accordingly, we have written to beseech our most religious and
   godly Emperors, that their kindness would give orders for the release
   of those who are still suffering from affliction and oppression, and
   would command that none of the magistrates, whose duty it is to attend
   only to civil causes, give judgment upon Clergy, nor henceforward in
   any way, on pretence of providing for the Churches, attempt anything
   against the brethren, but that every one may live, as he prays and
   desires to do, free from persecution, from violence and fraud, and in
   quietness and peace may follow the Catholic and Apostolic Faith. As for
   Gregory, who has the reputation of being illegally appointed by the
   heretics, and who has been sent by them to your city, we wish your
   unanimity to understand, that he has been deposed by the judgment of
   the whole sacred Council, although indeed he has never at any time been
   considered to be a Bishop at all. Wherefore receive gladly your Bishop
   Athanasius; for to this end we have dismissed him in peace. And we
   exhort all those, who either through fear, or through intrigues of
   certain persons, have held communion with Gregory, that being now
   admonished, exhorted, and persuaded by us, they withdraw from his
   detestable communion, and straightway unite themselves to the Catholic
   Church.

   What decrees have been passed by the holy Council against Theodorus,
   Narcissus, Stephanus, Acacius, Menophantus, Ursacius, Valens, and
   George [607] , who are the heads of the Arian heresy, and have offended
   against you and the rest of the Churches, you will learn from the
   subjoined documents. We have sent them to you, that your piety may
   assent to our decisions, and that you may understand from them, that
   the Catholic Church will not overlook those who offend against her.

   Encyclical Letter of the Council of Sardica.

   The holy Council [608] , by the grace of God, assembled at Sardica, to
   their dearly beloved brethren, the Bishops and fellow-Ministers of the
   Catholic Church every where, sends health in the Lord.

   44. The Arian madmen have dared repeatedly to attack the servants of
   God, who maintain the right faith; they attempted to substitute a
   spurious doctrine, and to drive out the orthodox; and at last they made
   so violent an assault against the Faith, that it became known even to
   the piety of our most religious Emperors. Accordingly, the grace of God
   assisting them, our most religious Emperors have themselves assembled
   us together out of different provinces and cities, and have permitted
   this holy Council to be held in the city of Sardica; to the end that
   all dissension may be done away, and all false doctrine being driven
   from us, Christian godliness may alone be maintained by all men. The
   Bishops of the East also attended, being exhorted to do so by the most
   religious Emperors, chiefly on account of the reports they have so
   often circulated concerning our dearly beloved brethren and
   fellow-ministers Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, and Marcellus,
   Bishop of Ancyro-Galatia. Their calumnies have probably already reached
   you, and perhaps they have attempted to disturb your ears, that you may
   be induced to believe their charges against the innocent, and that they
   may obliterate from your minds any suspicions respecting their own
   wicked heresy. But they have not been permitted to effect this to any
   great extent; for the Lord is the Defender of His Churches, Who endured
   death for their sakes and for us all, and provided access to heaven for
   us all through Himself. When therefore Eusebius and his fellows wrote
   long ago to Julius our brother and Bishop of the Church of the Romans,
   against our forementioned brethren, that is to say, Athanasius,
   Marcellus, and Asclepas [609] , the Bishops from the other parts wrote
   also, testifying to the innocence of our fellow-minister Athanasius,
   and declaring that the representations of Eusebius and his fellows were
   nothing else but mere falsehood and calumny.

   And indeed their calumnies were clearly proved by the fact that, when
   they were invited to a Council by our dearly beloved fellow-minister
   Julius, they would not come, and also by what was written to them by
   Julius himself. For had they had confidence in the measures and the
   acts in which they were engaged against our brethren, they would have
   come. And besides, they gave a still more evident proof of their
   conspiracy by their conduct in this great and holy Council. For when
   they arrived at the city of Sardica, and saw our brethren Athanasius,
   Marcellus, Asclepas, and the rest, they were afraid to come to a trial
   and though they were repeatedly invited to attend, they would not obey
   the summons. Although all we Bishops met together, and above all that
   man of most happy old age, Hosius, one who on account of his age, his
   confession, and the many labours he has undergone, is worthy of all
   reverence; and although we waited and urged them to come to the trial,
   that in the presence of our fellow-ministers they might establish the
   truth of those charges which they had circulated and written against
   them in their absence; yet they would not come, when they were thus
   invited, as we said before, thus giving proof of their calumnies, and
   almost proclaiming to the world by this their refusal, the plot and
   conspiracy in which they have been engaged. They who are confident of
   the truth of their assertions are able to make them good against their
   opponents face to face. But as they would not meet us, we think that no
   one can now doubt, however they may again have recourse to their bad
   practices, that they possess no proof against our fellow-ministers, but
   calumniate them in their absence, while they avoid their presence.

   45. They fled, beloved brethren, not only on account of the calumnies
   they had uttered, but because they saw that those had come who had
   various charges to advance against them. For chains and irons were
   brought forward which they had used; persons appeared who had returned
   from banishment; there came also our brethren, kinsmen of those who
   were still detained in exile, and friends of such as had perished
   through their means. And what was the most weighty ground of
   accusation, Bishops were present, one [610] of whom brought forward the
   irons and chains which they had caused him to wear, and others appealed
   to the death which had been brought about by their calumnies. For they
   had proceeded to such a pitch of madness, as even to attempt to destroy
   Bishops; and would have destroyed them, had they not escaped their
   hands. Our fellow-ministers, Theodulus of blessed memory [611] , died
   during his flight from their false accusations, orders having been
   given in consequence of these to put him to death. Others also
   exhibited sword-wounds; and others complained that they had been
   exposed to the pains of hunger through their means. Nor were they
   ordinary persons who testified to these things, but whole Churches, in
   whose behalf legates appeared [612] , and told us of soldiers sword in
   hand, of multitudes armed with clubs, of the threats of judges, of the
   forgery of false letters. For there were read certain false letters of
   Theognius and his fellows against our fellow-ministers Athanasius,
   Marcellus, and Asclepas, written with the design of exasperating the
   Emperors against them; and those who had then been Deacons of Theognius
   proved the fact. From these men, we heard of virgins stripped naked,
   churches burnt, ministers in custody, and all for no other end, but
   only for the sake of the accursed heresy of the Arian madmen, whose
   communion whoso refused was forced to suffer these things.

   When they perceived then how matters lay, they were in a strait what
   course to choose. They were ashamed to confess what they had done, but
   were unable to conceal it any longer. They therefore came to the city
   of Sardica, that by their arrival they might seem to remove suspicion
   from themselves of such offences. But when they saw those whom they had
   calumniated, and those who had suffered at their hands; when they had
   before their eyes their accusers and the proofs of their guilt, they
   were unwilling to come forward, though invited by our fellow-ministers
   Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas, who with great freedom complained
   of their conduct, and urged and challenged them to the trial, promising
   not only to refute their calumnies, but also to bring proof of the
   offences which they had committed against their Churches. But they were
   seized with such terrors of conscience, that they fled; and in doing so
   they exposed their own calumnies and confessed by running away the
   offences of which they had been guilty.

   46. But although their malice and their calumnies have been plainly
   manifested on this as well as on former occasions, yet that they may
   not devise means of practising a further mischief in consequence of
   their flight, we have considered it advisable to examine the part they
   have played according to the principles of truth; this has been our
   purpose, and we have found them calumniators by their acts, and authors
   of nothing else than a plot against our brethren in ministry. For
   Arsenius, who they said had been murdered by Athanasius, is still
   alive, and is numbered among the living; from which we may infer that
   the reports they have spread abroad on other subjects are fabrications
   also. And whereas they spread abroad a rumour concerning a cup, which
   they said had been broken by Macarius the Presbyter of Athanasius,
   those who came from Alexandria, the Mareotis, and the other parts,
   testified that nothing of the kind had taken place. And the Egyptian
   Bishops [613] who wrote to Julius our fellow-minister, positively
   affirmed that there had not arisen among them even any suspicion
   whatever of such a thing.

   Moreover, the Reports, which they say they have to produce against him,
   are, as is notorious, ex parte statements; and even in the formation of
   these very Reports, Heathens and Catechumens were examined; one of
   whom, a Catechumen, said [614] in his examination that he was present
   in the room when Macarius broke in upon them; and another declared,
   that Ischyras of whom they speak so much, lay sick in his cell at the
   time; from which it appears that the Mysteries were never celebrated at
   all, because Catechumens were present, and also that Ischyras was not
   present, but was lying sick on his bed. Besides, this most worthless
   Ischyras, who has falsely asserted, as he was convicted of doing, that
   Athanasius had burnt some of the sacred books, has himself confessed
   that he was sick, and was lying in his bed when Macarius came; from
   which it is plain that he is a slanderer. Nevertheless, as a reward for
   these his calumnies, they have given to this very Ischyras the title of
   Bishop, although he is not even a Presbyter. For two Presbyters, who
   were once associated with Meletius, but were afterwards received by the
   blessed Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, and are now with Athanasius,
   appeared before the Council, and testified that he was not even a
   Presbyter of Meletius, and that Meletius never had either Church or
   Minister in the Mareotis. And yet this man, who has never been even a
   Presbyter, they have now brought forward as a Bishop, that by this name
   they may have the means of overpowering those who are within hearing of
   his calumnies.

   47. The book of our fellow-minister Marcellus was also read, by which
   the fraud of Eusebius and his fellows was plainly discovered. For what
   Marcellus had advanced by way of enquiry [615] , they falsely
   represented as his professed opinion; but when the subsequent parts of
   the book were read, and the parts preceding the queries themselves, his
   faith was found to be correct. He had never pretended, as they
   positively affirmed [616] , that the Word of God had His beginning from
   holy Mary, nor that His kingdom had an end; on the contrary he had
   written that His kingdom was both without beginning and without end.
   Our fellow-minister Asclepas also produced Reports which had been drawn
   up at Antioch in the presence of his accusers and Eusebius of Cæsarea,
   and proved that he was innocent by the declarations of the Bishops who
   judged his cause [617] . They had good reason therefore, dearly beloved
   brethren, for not hearkening to our frequent summons, and for deserting
   the Council. They were driven to this by their own consciences; but
   their flight only confirmed the proof of their own calumnies, and
   caused those things to be believed against them, which their accusers,
   who were present, were asserting and arguing. But besides all these
   things, they had not only received those who were formerly degraded and
   ejected on account of the heresy of Arius, but had even promoted them
   to a higher station, advancing Deacons to the Presbytery, and of
   Presbyters making Bishops, for no other end, but that they might
   disseminate and spread abroad impiety, and corrupt the orthodox faith.

   48. Their leaders are now, after Eusebius and his fellows, Theodorus of
   Heraclea, Narcissus of Neronias in Cilicia, Stephanus of Antioch,
   George of Laodicea, Acacius of Cæsarea in Palestine, Menophantus of
   Ephesus in Asia, Ursacius of Singidunum in Moesia, and Valens of Mursa
   in Pannonia [618] . These men would not permit those who came with them
   from the East to meet the holy Council, nor even to approach the Church
   of God; but as they were coming to Sardica, they held Councils in
   various places by themselves, and made an engagement under threats,
   that when they came to Sardica, they would not so much as appear at the
   trial, nor attend the assembling of the holy Council, but simply coming
   and making known their arrival as a matter of form, would speedily take
   to flight. This we have been able to ascertain from our
   fellow-ministers, Macarius of Palestine and Asterius of Arabia [619] ,
   who after coming in their company, separated themselves from their
   unbelief. These came to the holy Council, and complained of the
   violence they had suffered, and said that no right act was being done
   by them; adding that there were many among them who adhered to
   orthodoxy, but were prevented by those men from coming hither, by means
   of the threats and promises which they held out to those who wished to
   separate from them. On this account it was that they were so anxious
   that all should abide in one dwelling, and would not suffer them to be
   by themselves even for the shortest space of time.

   49. Since then it became us not to hold our peace, nor to pass over
   unnoticed their calumnies, imprisonments, murders, wounds, conspiracies
   by means of false letters, outrages, stripping of the virgins,
   banishments, destruction of the Churches, burnings, translations from
   small cities to larger dioceses, and above all, the rising of the
   ill-named Arian heresy by their means against the orthodox faith; we
   have therefore pronounced our dearly beloved brethren and
   fellow-ministers Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas, and those who
   minister to the Lord with them, to be innocent and clear of offence,
   and have written to the diocese of each, that the people of each Church
   may know the innocence of their own Bishop, and may esteem him as their
   Bishop and expect his coming.

   And as for those who like wolves [620] have invaded their Churches,
   Gregory at Alexandria, Basil at Ancyra, and Quintianus at Gaza, let
   them neither give them the title of Bishop, nor hold any communion at
   all with them, nor receive letters [621] from them, nor write to them.
   And for Theodorus, Narcissus, Acacius, Stephanus, Ursacius, Valens,
   Menophantus, and George, although the last from fear did not come from
   the East, yet because he was deposed by the blessed Alexander, and
   because both he and the others were connected with the Arian madness,
   as well as on account of the charges which lie against them, the holy
   Council has unanimously deposed them from the Episcopate, and we have
   decided that they not only are not Bishops, but that they are unworthy
   of holding communion with the faithful.

   For they who separate the Son and alienate the Word from the Father,
   ought themselves to be separated from the Catholic Church and to be
   alien from the Christian name. Let them therefore be anathema to you,
   because they have corrupted the word of truth [622] .' It is an
   Apostolic injunction [623] , If any man preach any other Gospel unto
   you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.' Charge your
   people that no one hold communion with them, for there is no communion
   of light with darkness; put away from you all these, for there is no
   concord of Christ in Belial [624] . And take heed, dearly beloved, that
   ye neither write to them, nor receive letters from them; but desire
   rather, brethren and fellow-ministers, as being present in spirit [625]
   with our Council, to assent to our judgments by your subscriptions
   [626] , to the end that concord may be preserved by all our
   fellow-ministers everywhere. May Divine Providence protect and keep
   you, dearly beloved brethren, in sanctification and joy.

   I, Hosius, Bishop, have subscribed this, and all the rest likewise.

   This is the letter which the Council of Sardica sent to those who were
   unable to attend, and they on the other hand gave their judgment in
   accordance; and the following are the names both of those Bishops who
   subscribed in the Council, and of the others also.

   50. Hosius of Spain [627] , Julius of Rome by his Presbyters Archidamus
   and Philoxenus, Protogenes of Sardica, Gaudentius, Macedonius, Severus,
   Prætextatus, Ursicius, Lucillus, Eugenius, Vitalius, Calepodius,
   Florentius, Bassus, Vincentius, Stercorius, Palladius, Domitianus,
   Chalbis, Gerontius, Protasius, Eulogus, Porphyrius, Dioscorus, Zosimus,
   Januarius, Zosimus, Alexander, Eutychius, Socrates, Diodorus,
   Martyrius, Eutherius, Eucarpus, Athenodorus, Irenæus, Julianus,
   Alypius, Jonas, Aetius, Restitutus, Marcellinus, Aprianus, Vitalius,
   Valens, Hermogenes, Castus, Domitianus, Fortunatius, Marcus, Annianus,
   Heliodorus, Musæus, Asterius, Paregorius, Plutarchus, Hymenæus,
   Athanasius, Lucius, Amantius, Arius, Asclepius, Dionysius, Maximus,
   Tryphon, Alexander, Antigonus, Ælianus, Petrus, Symphorus, Musonius,
   Eutychus, Philologius, Spudasius, Zosimus, Patricius, Adolius,
   Sapricius [628] .

   From Gaul the following; Maximianus [629] , Verissimus [630] ,
   Victurus, Valentinus [631] , Desiderius, Eulogius, Sarbatius, Dyscolius
   [632] , Superior, Mercurius, Declopetus, Eusebius, Severinus [633] ,
   Satyrus, Martinus, Paulus, Optatianus, Nicasius, Victor [634] ,
   Sempronius, Valerinus, Pacatus, Jesses, Ariston, Simplicius, Metianus,
   Amantus [635] , Amillianus, Justinianus, Victorinus [636] , Satornilus,
   Abundantius, Donatianus, Maximus.

   From Africa; Nessus, Gratus [637] , Megasius, Coldæus, Rogatianus,
   Consortius, Rufinus, Manninus, Cessilianus, Herennianus, Marianus,
   Valerius, Dynamius, Mizonius, Justus, Celestinus, Cyprianus, Victor,
   Honoratus, Marinus, Pantagathus, Felix, Baudius, Liber, Capito,
   Minervalis, Cosmus, Victor, Hesperio, Felix, Severianus, Optantius,
   Hesperus, Fidentius, Salustius, Paschasius.

   From Egypt; Liburnius, Amantius, Felix, Ischyrammon, Romulus,
   Tiberinus, Consortius, Heraclides, Fortunatius, Dioscorus,
   Fortunatianus, Bastamon, Datyllus, Andreas, Serenus, Arius, Theodorus,
   Evagoras, Helias, Timotheus, Orion, Andronicus, Paphnutius, Hermias,
   Arabion, Psenosiris, Apollonius, Muis, Sarapampon [638] , Philo,
   Philippus, Apollonius, Paphnutius, Paulus, Dioscorus, Nilammon,
   Serenus, Aquila, Aotas, Harpocration, Isac, Theodorus, Apollos,
   Ammonianus, Nilus, Heraclius, Arion, Athas, Arsenius, Agathammon,
   Theon, Apollonius, Helias, Paninuthius, Andragathius, Nemesion,
   Sarapion, Ammonius, Ammonius, Xenon, Gerontius, Quintus, Leonides,
   Sempronianus, Philo, Heraclides, Hieracys, Rufus, Pasophius,
   Macedonius, Apollodorus, Flavianus, Psaes, Syrus, Apphus, Sarapion,
   Esaias, Paphnutius, Timotheus, Elurion, Gaius, Musæus, Pistus,
   Heraclammon, Heron, Helias, Anagamphus, Apollonius, Gaius, Philotas,
   Paulus, Tithoes, Eudæmon, Julius.

   Those on the road [639] of Italy are Probatius, Viator, Facundinus,
   Joseph, Numedius, Sperantius, Severus, Heraclianus, Faustinus,
   Antoninus, Heraclius, Vitalius, Felix, Crispinus, Paulianus.

   From Cyprus; Auxibius, Photius, Gerasius, Aphrodisius, Irenicus,
   Nunechius, Athanasius, Macedonius, Triphyllius, Spyridon, Norbanus,
   Sosicrates.

   From Palestine; Maximus, Aetius, Arius, Theodosius, Germanus, Silvanus,
   Paulus, Claudius, Patricius, Elpidius, Germanus, Eusebius, Zenobius,
   Paulus, Petrus.

   These are the names of those who subscribed to the acts of the Council;
   but there are very many beside, out of Asia, Phrygia, and Isauria [640]
   , who wrote in my behalf before this Council was held, and whose names,
   nearly sixty-three in number, may be found in their own letters. They
   amount altogether to three hundred and forty-four [641] .
     __________________________________________________________________

   [588] Of Nicodemia.

   [589] Hist. Ar. 15.

   [590] Musonian was originally of Antioch, and his name Strategius; he
   had been promoted and honoured with a new name by Constantine, for whom
   he had collected information about the Manichees. Amm. Marc. xv. 13,
   §1. In 354, he was Prætorian Prefect of the East. (vid. de Syn. 1, note
   1.) Libanius praises him.

   [591] The Castrensians were the officers of the palace; castra, as
   stratopedon, infr. §86. being at this time used for the Imperial Court.
   vid. Gothofred in Cod. Theod. vi. 30. p. 218. Du Cange in voc.

   [592] To Philippopolis.

   [593] p. 111, note 2.

   [594] [Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (2) b.]

   [595] Hist. Arian. §20.

   [596] [Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) c. 1. and §8 (2) c.]

   [597] Vid. supr. p. 100, where Isauria, Thessaly, Sicily, Britain, &c.,
   added. Also Theod. H. E. ii. 6. vid. p. 120 note 9 a.

   [598] Vid. infr. §51, note.

   [599] Supr. p. 107, note 9.

   [600] Vid. supr. §36. infr. §87.

   [601] Matt. x. 22.

   [602] Vid. Bingham. Antiqu. V. ii. 5. &c. Gieseler Eccl. Hist. vol. I.
   p. 242. Bassi. Biblioth. Jur. t. l. p. 276. Bellarm. de C eric. 28.

   [603] Supr. p. 109.

   [604] Vid. Encycl. Letter, infr. §46.

   [605] It will be observed that this Letter is nearly a transcript of
   the foregoing. It was first printed in the Benedictine Edition.

   [606] Matt. x. 22.

   [607] §36.

   [608] Vid. Theod. Hist. ii. 6. Hil. Fragm. ii.

   [609] Asclepas, or Asclepius of Gaza, Epiph. Hær. 69. 4. was one of the
   Nicene Fathers, and according to Theod. Hist. i. 27. was at the Council
   of Tyre, which Athan. also attended, but only by compulsion. According
   to the Eusebians at Philippopolis, they had deposed him [17 years
   previously, but the number must be corrupt, or the statement
   incorrect]. They state, however, at the same time, that he had been
   condemned by Athanasius and Marcellus, vid. Hilar. Fragm. iii. 13.
   Sozomen, Hist. iii. 8. says that they deposed him on the charge of
   having overturned an altar; and, after Athan. infr. §47, that he was
   acquitted at Sardica on the ground that Eusebius of Cæsarea and others
   had reinstated him in his see (before 339). There is mention of a
   Church built by him in Gaza ap. Bolland. Febr. 26. Vit. L. Porphyr. n.
   20. p. 648.

   [610] Perhaps Lucius of Hadrianople, says Montfaucon, referring to
   Apol. de Fug. §3. vid. also Hist. Arian. 19.

   [611] Theodulus, Bishop of Trajanopolis in Thrace, who is here spoken
   of as deceased, seems to have suffered this persecution from the
   Eusebians upon their retreat from Sardica, vid. Athan. Hist. Arian.
   §19. We must suppose then with Montfaucon, that the Council, from whom
   this letter proceeds, sat some considerable time after that retreat,
   and that the proceedings spoken of took place in the interval.
   Socrates, however, makes Theodulus survive Constans, who died 350. H.
   E. ii. 26.

   [612] The usual proceeding of the Arians was to retort upon the
   Catholics the charges which they brought against them, supr. §33, note
   4. Accordingly, in their Encyclical from Philippopolis, they say that
   "a vast multitude had congregated at Sardica, of wicked and abandoned
   persons, from Constantinople and Alexandria; who lay under charges of
   murder, blood, slaughter, robbery, plunder, spoiling, and all nameless
   sacrileges and crimes; who had broken altars, burnt Churches, ransacked
   private houses," &c. &c. Hil. Fragm. iii. 19.

   [613] p. 101.

   [614] Cf. §28.

   [615] Cf. de Decr. §25, note

   [616] De Syn. §25, note.

   [617] §44, note 9.

   [618] Vid. supr. §§13, note, and 36. About Stephanus, vid. infr. Hist.
   Arian. §20.

   [619] [For Macarius, read Arius.] These two Bishops were soon after the
   Council banished by Eusebian influence into upper Libya, where they
   suffered extreme ill usage. vid. Hist. Arian. §18.

   [620] Vid. Acts xx. 29

   [621] p. 95, note 4.

   [622] 2 Cor. ii. 17.

   [623] Gal. i. 9.

   [624] 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.

   [625] 1 Cor. v. 3.

   [626] In like manner the Council of Chalcedon was confirmed by as many
   as 470 subscriptions, according to Ephrem (Phot. Bibl. p. 801) by 1600
   according to Eulogius (ibid. p. 877), i.e. of Bishops, Archimandrites.
   &c.

   [627] Hosius is called by Athan, the father and the president of the
   Council. Hist. Arian. 15, 16. Roman controversialists here explain why
   Hosius does not sign himself as the Pope's legate, De Marc. Concord. v.
   4. Alber. Dissert. ix. and Protestants why his legates rank before all
   the other Bishops, even before Protogenes, Bishop of the place.
   Basnage, Ann. 347. 5. Febronius considers that Hosius signed here and
   at Nicæa, as a sort of representative of the civil, and the Legates of
   ecclesiastical supremacy. de Stat. Eccl. vi. 4. And so Thomassin,
   "Imperator velut exterior Episcopus: præfuit autem summus Pontifex, ut
   Episcopus interior." Dissert. in Conc. x. 14. The popes never attended
   in person the Eastern Councils. St. Leo excuses himself on the plea of
   its being against usage. Epp. 37. and 93. [Silvester's absence from
   Nicæa was due solely to extreme old age. But Sardica was a Western
   council.]

   [628] [The above names, with a few exceptions, comprise those present
   at the Council. See additional Note at the end of this Apology, where a
   list is given in alphabetical order of all bishops present, with their
   Sees.]

   [629] Of Treveri.

   [630] Of Lyons.

   [631] Of Arles.

   [632] Of Rheims.

   [633] Of Sens.

   [634] Of Worms.

   [635] Of Strassburg.

   [636] Of Paris.

   [637] Of Carthage.

   [638] §§33, note 3a, and 78.

   [639] hoi en to kanali& 251; tes 'Italias. "Canalis est, non via regia
   aut militaris, verum via tranversa, quæ in regiam seu basilicam
   influit, quasi aquæ canalis in alveum." Gothofred. in Cod. Theod. vi.
   de Curiosis, p. 196. who illustrates the word at length. Du Cange on
   the contrary, in voc. explains it of "the high road." Tillemont
   professes himself unable to give a satisfactory sense to it. vol. viii.
   p. 685. [The word occurs in the XIth. Sardican canon, where the Greek
   version (Can. XX. in Bruns) glosses it kanali& 251; etoi parodo.]

   [640] Cf. §36.

   [641] Athan. says, supr. §1. that the Letter of the Council was signed
   in all by more than 300. It will be observed, that Athan.'s numbers in
   the text do not accurately agree with each other. The subscriptions
   enumerated are 284, to which 63 being added, made a total of 347, not
   344. [The enumeration of Ath. includes many who signed long afterwards.
   Those from Palestine' are simply the signatories of the synodal letter
   of 346, below §57. The number, 170 mentioned by Ath. Hist. Ar. 15 gives
   an orthodox majority of 20. See additional Note at end of this Apology,
   and Gwatkin, Studies, p. 121, note.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chapter IV.--Imperial and Ecclesiastical Acts in Consequence of the
   Decision of the Council of Sardica.

   51. When the most religious Emperor Constantius heard of these things,
   he sent for me, having written privately to his brother Constans of
   blessed memory, and to me three several times in the following terms.

   Constantius Victor Augustus to Athanasius [642] . Our benignant
   clemency will not suffer you to be any longer tempest-tossed by the
   wild waves of the sea; for our unwearied piety has not lost sight of
   you, while you have been bereft of your native home, deprived of your
   goods, and have been wandering in savage wildernesses. And although I
   have for a long time deferred expressing by letter the purpose of my
   mind concerning you, principally because I expected that you would
   appear before us of your own accord, and would seek a relief of your
   sufferings; yet forasmuch as fear, it may be, has prevented you from
   fulfilling your intentions, we have therefore addressed to your
   fortitude letters full of our bounty, to the end that you may use all
   speed and without fear present yourself in our presence, thereby to
   obtain the enjoyment of your wishes, and that, having experience of our
   kindness, you may be restored again to your own. For this purpose I
   have besought my lord and brother Constans Victor Augustus, in your
   behalf, that he would give you permission to come, in order that you
   may be restored to your country with the consent of us both, receiving
   this as a pledge of our favour.

   The Second Letter.

   Although we made it very plain to you in a former letter that you may
   without hesitation come to our Court, because we greatly wished to send
   you home, yet, we have further sent this present letter to your
   fortitude to exhort you without any distrust or apprehension, to place
   yourself in the public conveyances [643] , and to hasten to us, that
   you may enjoy the fulfilment of your wishes.

   The Third Letter.

   Our pleasure was, while we abode at Edessa, and your Presbyters were
   there, that, on one of them being sent to you, you should make haste to
   come to our Court, in order that you might see our face, and
   straightway proceed to Alexandria. But as a very long period has
   elapsed since you received letters from us, and you have not yet come,
   we therefore hasten to remind you again, that you may endeavour even
   now to present yourself before us with speed, and so may be restored to
   your country, and obtain the accomplishment of your prayers. And for
   your fuller information we have sent Achitas the Deacon, from whom you
   will be able to learn the purpose of our soul, that you may now secure
   the objects of your prayers.

   Such was the tenor of the Emperor's letters; on receiving which I went
   up to Rome to bid farewell to the Church and the Bishop: for I was at
   Aquileia [644] when the above was written. The Church was filled with
   all joy, and the Bishop Julius rejoiced with me in my return and wrote
   to the Church [645] ; and as we passed along, the Bishops of every
   place sent us on our way in peace. The letter of Julius was as follows.

   52. Julius to the Presbyters, Deacons, and people residing at
   Alexandria [646] .

   I congratulate you, beloved brethren, that you now behold the fruit of
   your faith before your eyes; for any one may see that such indeed is
   the case with respect to my brother and fellow-Bishop Athanasius, whom
   for the innocency of his life, and by reason of your prayers, God is
   restoring to you again. Wherefore it is easy to perceive, that you have
   continually offered up to God pure prayers and full of love. Being
   mindful of the heavenly promises, and of the conversation that leads to
   them, which you have learnt from the teaching of my brother aforesaid,
   you knew certainly and understood by the right faith that is in you,
   that he, whom you always had as present in your most pious minds, would
   not be separated from you for ever. Wherefore there is no need that I
   should use many words in writing to you; for your faith has already
   anticipated whatever I could say to you, and has by the grace of God
   procured the accomplishment of the common prayers of you all.
   Therefore, I repeat again, I congratulate you, because you have
   preserved your souls unconquered in the faith; and I also congratulate
   no less my brother Athanasius, in that, though he is enduring many
   afflictions, he has at no time been forgetful of your love and earnest
   desires towards him. For although for a season he seemed to be
   withdrawn from you in body, yet he has continued to live as always
   present with you in spirit [647] .

   53. Wherefore he returns to you now more illustrious than when he went
   away from you. Fire tries and purifies the precious materials, gold and
   silver: but how can one describe the worth of such a man, who, having
   passed victorious through the perils of so many tribulations, is now
   restored to you, being pronounced innocent not by our voice only, but
   by the voice of the whole Council [648] ? Receive therefore, beloved
   brethren, with all godly honour and rejoicing, your Bishop Athanasius,
   together with those who have been partners with him in so many labours.
   And rejoice that you now obtain the fulfilment of your prayers, after
   that in your salutary letter you have given meat and drink to your
   Pastor, who, so to speak, longed and thirsted after your godliness. For
   while he sojourned in a foreign land, you were his consolation; and you
   refreshed him during his persecutions by your most faithful minds and
   spirits. And it delights me now to conceive and figure to my mind the
   joy of every one of you at his return, and the pious greetings of the
   concourse, and the glorious festivity of those that run to meet him.
   What a day will that be to you, when my brother comes back again, and
   your former sufferings terminate, and his much-prized and desired
   return inspires you all with an exhilaration of perfect joy! The like
   joy it is ours to feel in a very great degree, since it has been
   granted us by God, to be able to make the acquaintance of so eminent a
   man. It is fitting therefore that I should conclude my letter with a
   prayer. May Almighty God, and His Son our Lord and Saviour Jesus
   Christ, afford you continual grace, giving you a reward for the
   admirable faith which you displayed in your noble confession in behalf
   of your Bishop, that He may impart unto you and unto them that are with
   you, both here and hereafter, those better things, which the eye hath
   not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man,
   the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him [649] ,'
   through our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom to Almighty God be glory
   for ever and ever. Amen. I pray, dearly beloved brethren, for your
   health and strength in the Lord.

   54. The Emperor, when I came to him [650] with these letters, received
   me kindly, and sent me forth to my country and Church addressing the
   following to the Bishops, Presbyters, and People.

   Constantius, Victor, Maximus, Augustus, to the Bishops and Presbyters
   of the Catholic Church.

   The most reverend Athanasius has not been deserted by the grace of God,
   but although for a brief season he was subjected to trial to which
   human nature is liable, he has obtained from the all-surveying
   Providence such an answer to his prayers as was meet, and is restored
   by the will of the Most High, and by our sentence, at once to his
   country and to the Church, over which by divine permission he presided.
   Wherefore, in accordance with this, it is fitting that it should be
   provided by our clemency, that all the decrees which have heretofore
   been passed against those who held communion with him, be now consigned
   to oblivion, and that all suspicions respecting them be henceforward
   set at rest, and that immunity, such as the Clergy who are associated
   with him formerly enjoyed, be duly confirmed to them. Moreover to our
   other acts of favour towards him we have thought good to add the
   following, that all persons of the sacred catalogue [651] should
   understand, that an assurance of safety is given to all who adhere to
   him, whether Bishops, or other Clergy. And union with him will be a
   sufficient guarantee, in the case of any person, of an upright
   intention. For whoever, acting according to a better judgment and part,
   shall choose to hold communion with him, we order, in imitation of that
   Providence which has already gone before, that all such should have the
   advantage of the grace which by the will of the Most High is now
   offered to them from us. May God preserve you.

   The Second Letter.

   Constantius, Victor, Maximus, Augustus, to the people of the Catholic
   Church at Alexandria.

   55. Having in view your welfare in all respects, and knowing that you
   have for a long time been deprived of episcopal superintendence, we
   have thought good to send back to you your Bishop Athanasius, a man
   known to all men for the uprightness that is in him, and for the good
   disposition of his personal character. Receive him, as you are wont to
   receive every one, in a suitable manner, and, using his advocacy as
   your succour in your prayers to God, endeavour to preserve continually
   that unanimity and peace according to the order of the Church which is
   at the same time becoming in you, and most advantageous for us. For it
   is not becoming that any dissension or faction should be raised among
   you, contrary to the prosperity of our times. We desire that this
   offence may be altogether removed from you, and we exhort you to
   continue stedfastly in your accustomed prayers, and to make him, as we
   said before, your advocate and helper towards God. So that, when this
   your determination, beloved, has influenced the prayers of all men,
   even those heathen who are still addicted to the false worship of idols
   may eagerly desire to come to the knowledge of our sacred religion.
   Again therefore we exhort you to continue in these things, and gladly
   to receive your Bishop, who is sent back to you by the decree of the
   Most High, and by our decision, and determine to greet him cordially
   with all your soul and with all your mind. For this is what is both
   becoming in you, and agreeable to our clemency. In order that all
   occasions of disturbance and sedition may be taken away from those who
   are maliciously disposed, we have by letter commanded the magistrates
   who are among you to subject to the vengeance of the law all whom they
   find to be factious. Wherefore taking into consideration both these
   things, our decision in accordance with the will of the Most High, and
   our regard for you and for concord among you, and the punishment that
   awaits the disorderly, observe such things as are proper and suitable
   to the order of our sacred religion, and receiving the afore-mentioned
   Bishop with all reverence and honour, take care to offer up with him
   your prayers to God, the Father of all, in behalf of yourselves, and
   for the well-being of your whole lives.

   56. Having written these letters, he also commanded that the decrees,
   which he had formerly sent out against me in consequence of the
   calumnies of Eusebius and his fellows, should be cancelled and struck
   out from the Orders of the Duke and the Prefect of Egypt; and Eusebius
   the Decurion [652] was sent to withdraw them from the Order-books. His
   letter on this occasion was as follows.

   Constantius, Victor, Augustus, to Nestorius [653] . (And in the same
   terms, to the Governors of Augustamnica, the Thebais, and Libya.)

   Whatever Orders are found to have been passed heretofore, tending to
   the injury and dishonour of those who hold communion with the Bishop
   Athanasius, we wish them to be now erased. For we desire that whatever
   immunities his Clergy possessed before, they should again possess the
   same. And we wish this our Order to be observed, that when the Bishop
   Athanasius is restored to his Church, those who hold communion with him
   may enjoy the immunities which they have always enjoyed, and which the
   rest of the Clergy enjoy; so that they may have the satisfaction of
   being on an equal footing with others.

   57. Being thus set forward on my journey, as I passed through Syria, I
   met with the Bishops of Palestine, who when they had called a Council
   [654] at Jerusalem, received me cordially, and themselves also sent me
   on my way in peace, and addressed the following letter to the Church
   and the Bishops.

   The Holy Council, assembled at Jerusalem, to the fellow-ministers in
   Egypt and Libya, and to the Presbyters, Deacons, and People at
   Alexandria, brethren beloved and greatly longed for, sends health in
   the Lord.

   We cannot give worthy thanks to the God of all, dearly beloved, for the
   wonderful things which He has done at all times, and especially at this
   time for your Church, in restoring to you your pastor and lord, and our
   fellow-minister Athanasius. For who ever hoped that his eyes would see
   what you are now actually obtaining? Of a truth, your prayers have been
   heard by the God of all, Who cares for His Church, and has looked upon
   your tears and groans, and has therefore heard your petitions. For ye
   were as sheep scattered and fainting, not having a shepherd [655] .
   Wherefore the true Shepherd, Who careth for His own sheep, has visited
   you from heaven, and has restored to you him whom you desire. Behold,
   we also, being ready to do all things for the peace of the Church, and
   being prompted by the same affection as yourselves, have saluted him
   before you; and communicating with you through him, we send you these
   greetings, and our offering of thanksgiving, that you may know that we
   also are united in the bond of love that joins you to him. You are
   bound to pray also for the piety of our most God-beloved Emperors, who,
   when they knew your earnest longings after him, and his innocency,
   determined to restore him to you with all honour. Wherefore receive him
   with uplifted hands, and take good heed that you offer up due
   thanksgiving on his behalf to God Who has bestowed these blessings upon
   you; so that you may continually rejoice with God and glorify our Lord,
   in Christ Jesus our Lord, through Whom to the Father be glory for ever.
   Amen.

   I have set down here the names of those who subscribed this letter,
   although I have mentioned them before [656] . They are these; Maximus,
   Aetius, Arius, Theodorus [657] , Germanus, Silvanus, Paulus, Patricius,
   Elpidius, Germanus, Eusebius, Zenobius, Paulus, Macrinus [658] ,
   Petrus, Claudius.

   58. When Ursacius and Valens saw all this, they forthwith condemned
   themselves for what they had done, and going up to Rome, confessed
   their crime, declared themselves penitent, and sought forgiveness [659]
   , addressing the following letters to Julius, Bishop of ancient Rome,
   and to ourselves. Copies of them were sent to me from Paulinus, Bishop
   of Treveri [660] .

   A Translation from the Latin of a Letter [661] to Julius, concerning
   the recantation of Ursacius and Valens [662] .

   Ursacius and Valens to the most blessed lord, pope Julius.

   Whereas it is well known that we have heretofore in letters laid many
   grievous charges against the Bishop Athanasius, and whereas when we
   were corrected by the letters of your Goodness, we were unable to
   render an account of the statement we had made; we do now confess
   before your Goodness, and in the presence of all the Presbyters our
   brethren, that all the reports which have heretofore come to your
   hearing respecting the case of the aforesaid Athanasius, are falsehoods
   and fabrications, and are utterly inconsistent with his character.
   Wherefore we earnestly desire communion with the aforesaid Athanasius,
   especially since your Piety, with your characteristic generosity, has
   vouchsafed to pardon our error. But we also declare, that if at any
   time the Eastern Bishops, or even Athanasius himself, ungenerously
   should wish to bring us to judgment for this matter, we will not depart
   contrary to your judgment. And as for the heretic Arius and his
   supporters, who say that once the Son was not, and that the Son was
   made of that which was not, and who deny that Christ is God and the Son
   of God before the worlds, we anathematize them both now and for
   evermore, as also we have set forth in our former declaration at Milan
   [663] . We have written this with our own hands, and we profess again,
   that we have renounced for ever, as we said before, the Arian heresy
   and its authors.

   I Ursacius subscribed this my confession in person; and likewise I
   Valens.

   Ursacius and Valens, Bishops, to their lord and brother, the Bishop
   Athanasius.

   Having an opportunity of sending by our brother and fellow Presbyter
   Musæus, who is coming to your Charity, we salute you affectionately,
   beloved brother, through him, from Aquileia, and pray you, being as we
   trust in health, to read our letter. You will also give us confidence,
   if you will return to us an answer in writing. For know that we are at
   peace with you, and in communion with the Church, of which the
   salutation prefixed to this letter is a proof. May Divine Providence
   preserve you, my Lord, our beloved brother!

   Such were their letters, and such the sentence and the judgment of the
   Bishops in my behalf. But in order to prove that they did not act thus
   to ingratiate themselves, or under compulsion in any quarter, I desire,
   with your permission, to recount the whole matter from the beginning,
   so that you may perceive that the bishops wrote as they did with
   upright and just intentions, and that Ursacius and Valens, though they
   were slow to do so, at last confessed the truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [642] Written a.d. 345.

   [643] Gothof. in Cod. Theod. viii. 5. p. 507.

   [644] Apol. Const. 3, 15.

   [645] "They acquainted Julius the Bishop of Rome with their case; and
   he, according to the prerogative (pronomia) of the Church in Rome,
   fortified them with letters in which he spoke his mind, and sent them
   back to the East, restoring each to his own place, and remarking on
   those who had violently deposed them. They then set out from Rome, and
   on the strength (thar& 191;ountes) of the letters of Bishop Julius,
   take possession of their Churches." Socr. ii. 15. It must be observed,
   that in the foregoing sentences Socrates has spoken of "(imperial)
   Rome." Sozomen says, "Whereas the care of all (kedemonias) pertained to
   him on account of the dignity of his see, he restored each to his own
   Church." iii. 8. "I answer," says Barrow, "the Pope did not restore
   them judicially but declaratively, that is, declaring his approbation
   of their right and innocence, did admit them to communion....Besides,
   the Pope's proceeding was taxed, and protested against, as
   irregular;....and, lastly, the restitution of Athanasius and the other
   Bishops had no complete effect, till it was confirmed by the synod of
   Sardica, backed by the imperial authority." Suprem. p. 360. ed. 1836.

   [646] Written early in 346 a.d.

   [647] Athan. here omits a paragraph in his own praise. vid. Socr. ii.
   23.

   [648] §35, note 3.

   [649] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [650] [At Antioch September (?) 346. See Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (3).]

   [651] Vid. Bingh. Antiqu. I. v. 10.

   [652] Member of the Curia or Council.

   [653] Prefect of Egypt, vid. Vita Ant. 86, Fest. Ind. xvii.-xxiv.

   [654] Hist. Arian. 25.

   [655] Matt. ix. 36.

   [656] §50.

   [657] Theodosius, supr.

   [658] Not supr.

   [659] Cf. §20, note 4.

   [660] Triberon, Paul infr. Hist. Ar. 26.

   [661] Hist. Arian. 25. 26.

   [662] [Gibbon, ch. xxi. note 108, doubts the fact of this recantation
   on the ground of the dissimilar tone of the two letters that follow.
   Newman explains that they treat Julius as a superior,' Athanasius as an
   equal;' but surely he was something more than an equal. Fear of
   Constans, and the desire to secure themselves from attack, would make
   it important for them at any price to obtain the favour of the first
   bishop of the West. In order to do this they had to make their peace
   with Athanasius; but in doing so, they went no further than they could
   help.]

   [663] a.d. 347.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Part II.

   Chapter V.--Documents connected with the charges of the Meletians
   against S. Athanasius.

   59. Peter was Bishop among us before the persecution, and during the
   course of it he suffered martyrdom. When Meletius, who held the title
   of bishop in Egypt, was convicted of many crimes, and among the rest of
   offering sacrifice to idols, Peter deposed him in a general council of
   the bishops. Whereupon Meletius did not appeal to another council, or
   attempt to justify himself before those who should come after, but made
   a schism, so that they who espoused his cause are even yet called
   Meletians instead of Christians [664] . He began immediately to revile
   the bishops, and made false accusations, first against Peter himself,
   and against his successor Achillas, and after Achillas, against
   Alexander [665] . And he thus practised craftily, following the example
   of Absalom, to the end that, as he was disgraced by his deposition, he
   might by his calumnies mislead the simple. While Meletius was thus
   employed, the Arian heresy also had arisen. But in the Council of
   Nicæa, while the heresy was anathematized, and the Arians were cast
   out, the Meletians on whatever grounds [666] (for it is not necessary
   now to mention the reason) were received. Five months however had not
   yet passed [667] when, the blessed Alexander having died, the
   Meletians, who ought to have remained quiet, and to have been grateful
   that they were received on any terms, like dogs unable to forget their
   vomit, were again troubling the Churches.

   Upon learning this, Eusebius, who had the lead in the Arian heresy,
   sends and buys the Meletians with large promises, becomes their secret
   friend, and arranges with them for their assistance on any occasion
   when he might wish for it. At first he sent to me, urging me to admit
   Arius and his fellows to communion [668] , and threatened me in his
   verbal communications, while in his letters he [merely] made a request.
   And when I refused, declaring that it was not right that those who had
   invented heresy contrary to the truth, and had been anathematized by
   the Ecumenical [669] Council, should be admitted to communion, he
   caused the Emperor also, Constantine, of blessed memory, to write to
   me, threatening me, in case I should not receive Arius and his fellows,
   with those afflictions, which I have before undergone, and which I am
   still suffering. The following is a part of his letter. Syncletius and
   Gaudentius, officers of the palace [670] , were the bearers of it.

   Part of a Letter from the Emperor Constantine.

   Having therefore knowledge of my will, grant free admission to all who
   wish to enter into the Church. For if I learn that you have hindered or
   excluded any who claim to be admitted into communion with the Church, I
   will immediately send some one who shall depose you by my command, and
   shall remove you from your place.

   60. When upon this I wrote and endeavoured to convince the Emperor,
   that that anti-Christian heresy had no communion with the Catholic
   Church, Eusebius forthwith, availing himself of the occasion which he
   had agreed upon with the Meletians, writes and persuades them to invent
   some pretext, so that, as they had practised against Peter and Achillas
   and Alexander, they might devise and spread reports against us also.
   Accordingly, after seeking for a long time, and finding nothing, they
   at last agree together, with the advice of Eusebius and his fellows,
   and fabricate their first accusation by means of Ision, Eudæmon, and
   Callinicus [671] , respecting the linen vestments [672] , to the effect
   that I had imposed a law upon the Egyptians, and had required its
   observance of them first. But when certain Presbyters of mine were
   found to be present, and the Emperor took cognizance of the matter,
   they were condemned (the Presbyters were Apis and Macarius), and the
   Emperor wrote, condemning Ision, and ordering me to appear before him.
   His letters were as follows [673] .

   Eusebius, having intelligence of this, persuades them to wait; and when
   I arrive, they next accuse Macarius of breaking the cup, and bring
   against me the most heinous accusation possible, viz. that, being an
   enemy of the Emperor, I had sent a purse of gold to one Philumenus. The
   Emperor therefore heard us on this charge also in Psammathia [674] ,
   when they, as usual, were condemned, and driven from the presence; and,
   as I returned, he wrote the following letter to the people.

   Constantine, Maximus, Augustus, to the people of the Catholic Church at
   Alexandria.

   61. Beloved brethren, I greet you well, calling upon God, Who is the
   chief witness of my intention, and on the Only-begotten, the Author of
   our Law, Who is Sovereign over the lives of all men, and Who hates
   dissensions. But what shall I say to you? That I am in good health?
   Nay, but I should be able to enjoy better health and strength, if you
   were possessed with mutual love one towards another, and had rid
   yourselves of your enmities, through which, in consequence of the
   storms excited by contentious men, we have left the haven of brotherly
   love. Alas! what perverseness is this! What evil consequences are
   produced every day by the tumult of envy which has been stirred up
   among you! Hence it is that evil reports have settled upon the people
   of God. Whither has the faith of righteousness departed? For we are so
   involved in the mists of darkness, not only through manifold errors,
   but through the faults of ungrateful men, that we bear with those who
   favour folly, and though we are aware of them, take no heed of those
   who set aside goodness and truth. What strange inconsistency is this!
   We do not convict our enemies, but we follow the example of robbery
   which they set us, whereby the most pernicious errors, finding no one
   to oppose them, easily, if I may so speak, make a way for themselves.
   Is there no understanding among us, for the credit of our common
   nature, since we are thus neglectful of the injunctions of the law?

   But some one will say, that love is a thing brought out by nature. But,
   I ask, how is it that we who have got the law of God for our guide in
   addition to our natural advantages, thus tolerate the disturbances and
   disorders raised by our enemies, who seem inflamed, as it were, with
   firebrands? How is it, that having eyes, we see not, neither
   understand, though we are surrounded by the intelligence of the law?
   What a stupor has seized upon our life, that we are thus neglectful of
   ourselves, and that although God admonishes us! Is it not an
   intolerable evil? and ought we not to esteem such men as our enemies,
   and not the household and people of God? For they are infuriated
   against us, abandoned as they are: they lay grievous crimes to our
   charge, and make attacks upon us as enemies.

   62. And I would have you yourselves to consider with what exceeding
   madness they do this. The foolish men carry their maliciousness at
   their tongues' end. They carry about with them a sort of leaden anger,
   so that they reciprocally smite one another, and involve us by way of
   increasing their own punishment. The good teacher is accounted an
   enemy, while he who clothes himself with the vice of envy, contrary to
   all justice makes his gain of the gentle temper of the people; he
   ravages, and consumes, he decks himself out, and recommends himself
   with false praises; he subverts the truth, and corrupts the faith,
   until he finds out a hole and hiding-place for his conscience. Thus
   their very perverseness makes them wretched, while they impudently
   prefer themselves to places of honour, however unworthy they may be.
   Ah! what a mischief is this! they say "Such an one is too old; such an
   one is a mere boy; the office belongs to me; it is due to me, since it
   is taken away from him. I will gain over all men to my side, and then I
   will endeavour with my power to ruin him." Plain indeed is this
   proclamation of their madness to all the world; the sight of companies,
   and gatherings, and rowers under command [675] in their offensive
   cabals. Alas! what preposterous conduct is ours, if I may say it! Do
   they make an exhibition of their folly in the Church of God? And are
   they not yet ashamed of themselves? Do they not yet blame themselves?
   Are they not smitten in their consciences, so that they now at length
   shew that they entertain a proper sense of their deceit and
   contentiousness? Theirs is the mere force of envy, supported by those
   baneful influences which naturally belong to it. But those wretches
   have no power against your Bishop. Believe me, brethren, their
   endeavours will have no other effect than this, after they have worn
   down our days, to leave to themselves no place of repentance in this
   life. Wherefore I beseech you, lend help to yourselves; receive kindly
   our love, and with all your strength drive away those who desire to
   obliterate from among us the grace of unanimity; and looking unto God,
   love one another. I received gladly your Bishop Athanasius, and
   addressed him in such a manner, as being persuaded that he was a man of
   God. It is for you to understand these things, not for me to judge of
   them. I thought it becoming that the most reverend Athanasius himself
   should convey my salutation to you, knowing his kind care of you,
   which, in a manner worthy of that peaceable faith which I myself
   profess, is continually engaged in the good work of declaring saving
   knowledge, and will be able to exhort you as is suitable, May God
   preserve you, beloved brethren.

   Such was the letter of Constantine.

   63. After these occurrences the Meletians remained quiet for a little
   time, but afterwards shewed their hostility again, and contrived the
   following plot, with the aim of pleasing those who had hired their
   services. The Mareotis is a country district of Alexandria, in which
   Meletius was not able to make a schism. Now while the Churches still
   existed within their appointed limits, and all the Presbyters had
   congregations in them, and while the people were living in peace, a
   certain person named Ischyras [676] , who was not a clergyman, but of a
   worthless disposition, endeavoured to lead astray the people of his own
   village, declaring himself to be a clergyman. Upon learning this, the
   Presbyter of the place informed me of it when I was going through my
   visitation of the Churches, and I sent Macarius the Presbyter with him
   to summon Ischyras. They found him sick and lying in a cell, and
   charged his father to admonish his son not to continue any such
   practices as had been reported against him. But when he recovered from
   his sickness, being prevented by his friends and his father from
   pursuing the same course, he fled over to the Meletians; and they
   communicate with Eusebius and his fellows, and at last that calumny is
   invented by them, that Macarius had broken a cup, and that a certain
   Bishop named Arsenius had been murdered by me. Arsenius they placed in
   concealment, in order that he might seem made away with, when he did
   not make his appearance; and they carried about a hand, pretending that
   he had been cut to pieces. As for Ischyras, whom they did not even
   know, they began to spread a report that he was a Presbyter, in order
   that what he said about the cup might mislead the people. Ischyras,
   however, being censured by his friends, came to me weeping, and said
   that no such thing as they had reported had been done by Macarius, and
   that himself had been suborned by the Meletians to invent this calumny.
   And he wrote the following letter.

   To the Blessed pope [677] Athanasius, Ischyras sends health in the
   Lord.

   64. As when I came to you, my Lord Bishop, desiring to be received into
   the Church, you reproved me for what I formerly said, as though I had
   proceeded to such lengths of my own free choice, I therefore submit to
   you this my apology in writing, in order that you may understand, that
   violence was used towards me, and blows inflicted on me by Isaac and
   Heraclides, and Isaac of Letopolis, and those of their party. And I
   declare, and take God as my witness in this matter, that of none of the
   things which they have stated, do I know you to be guilty. For no
   breaking of a cup or overturning of the Holy Table ever took place, but
   they compelled me by violent usage to assert all this. And this defence
   I make and submit to you in writing, desiring and claiming for myself
   to be admitted among the members of your congregation. I pray that you
   may have health in the Lord.

   I submit this my handwriting to you the Bishop Athanasius in the
   presence of the Presbyters, Ammonas of Dicella, Heraclius of Phascos,
   Boccon of Chenebri, Achillas of Myrsine, Didymus of Taphosiris, and
   Justus from Bomotheus [678] ; and of the Deacons, Paul, Peter, and
   Olympius, of Alexandria, and Ammonius, Pistus, Demetrius, and Gaius, of
   the Mareotis.

   65. Notwithstanding this statement of Ischyras, they again spread
   abroad the same charges against me everywhere, and also reported them
   to the Emperor Constantine. He too had heard before of the affair of
   the cup in Psammathia [679] , when I was there, and had detected the
   falsehood of my enemies. But now he wrote to Antioch to Dalmatius [680]
   the Censor requiring him to institute a judicial enquiry respecting the
   murder. Accordingly the Censor sent me notice to prepare for my defence
   against the charge. Upon receiving his letters, although at first I
   paid no regard to the thing because I knew that nothing of what they
   said was true, yet seeing that the Emperor was moved, I wrote to my
   fellow-ministers into Egypt, and sent a deacon, desiring to learn
   something of Arsenius, for I had not seen the man for five or six
   years. Well, not to relate the matter at length, Arsenius was found in
   concealment, in the first instance in Egypt, and afterwards my friends
   discovered him again in concealment in Tyre also. And what was most
   remarkable, even when he was discovered he would not confess that he
   was Arsenius, until he was convicted in court before Paul, who was then
   Bishop of Tyre, and at last out of very shame could not deny it.

   This he did in order to fulfil his contract with Eusebius and his
   fellows, lest, if he were discovered, the game they were playing should
   at length be broken up; which in fact came to pass. For when I wrote
   the Emperor word, that Arsenius was discovered, and reminded him of
   what he had heard in Psammathia concerning Macarius the Presbyter, he
   stopped the proceedings of the Censor's court, and wrote condemning the
   proceedings against me as calumnious, and commanded Eusebius and his
   fellows, who were coming into the East to appear against me, to return.
   Now in order to shew that they accused me of having murdered Arsenius
   (not to bring forward the letters of many persons on the subject), it
   shall be sufficient only to produce one from Alexander the Bishop of
   Thessalonica, from which the tenor of the rest may be inferred. He then
   being acquainted with the reports which Archaph, who is also called
   John, circulated against me on the subject of the murder, and having
   heard that Arsenius was alive, wrote as follows.

   Letter of Alexander.

   To his dearly beloved son and fellow-minister like-minded, the lord
   Athanasius, Alexander the Bishop sends health in the Lord.

   66. I congratulate the most excellent Sarapion, that he is striving so
   earnestly to adorn himself with holy habits, and is thus advancing to
   higher praise the memory of his father. For, as the Holy Scripture
   somewhere says, though his father die, yet he is as though he were not
   dead [681] :' for he has left behind him a memorial of his life. What
   my feelings were towards the ever memorable Sozon, you yourself, my
   lord [682] , are not ignorant, for you know the sacredness of his
   memory, as well as the goodness of the young man. I have received only
   one letter from your reverence, which I had by the hands of this youth.
   I mention this to you, my lord, in order that you may know. Our dearly
   beloved brother and deacon Macarius, afforded me great pleasure by
   writing to me from Constantinople, that the false accuser Archaph had
   met with disgrace, for having given out before all men that a live man
   had been murdered. That he will receive from the righteous Judge,
   together with all the tribe of his associates, that punishment, which
   his crimes deserve, the unerring Scriptures assure us. May the Lord of
   all preserve you for very many years, my lord, in every way most kind.

   67. And they who lived with Arsenius bear witness, that he was kept in
   concealment for this purpose, that they might pretend his death; for in
   searching after him we found the person [who had done so], and he in
   consequence wrote the following letter to John, who played the chief
   part in this false accusation.

   To his dearly beloved brother John, Pinnes, Presbyter of the Monastery
   [683] of Ptemencyrcis, in the home of Anteopolis, sends greeting.

   I wish you to know, that Athanasius sent his deacon into the Thebais,
   to search everywhere for Arsenius; and Pecysius the Presbyter, and
   Silvanus the brother of Helias, and Tapenacerameus, and Paul monk of
   Hypsele, whom he first fell in with, confessed that Arsenius was with
   us. Upon learning this we caused him to be put on board a vessel, and
   to sail to the lower countries with Helias the monk. Afterwards the
   deacon returned again suddenly with certain others, and entered our
   monastery, in search of the same Arsenius, and him they found not,
   because, as I said before, we had sent him away to the lower countries;
   but they conveyed me together with Helias the monk, who took him out of
   the way, to Alexandria, and brought us before the Duke [684] ; when I
   was unable to deny, but confessed that he was alive, and had not been
   murdered: the monk also who took him out of the way confessed the same.
   Wherefore I acquaint you with these things, Father, lest you should
   determine to accuse Athanasius; for I said that he was alive, and had
   been concealed with us, and all this is become known in Egypt, and it
   cannot any longer be kept secret.

   I, Paphnutius, monk of the same monastery, who wrote this letter,
   heartily salute you. I pray for your health.

   The following also is the letter which the Emperor wrote when he learnt
   that Arsenius was found to be alive.

   Constantine, Victor, Maximus, Augustus, to the pope Athanasius.

   68. Having read the letters of your wisdom, I felt the inclination to
   write in return to your fortitude, and to exhort you that you would
   endeavour to restore the people of God to tranquillity, and to merciful
   feelings. For in my own mind I hold these things to be of the greatest
   importance, that we should cultivate truth, and ever keep righteousness
   in our thoughts, and have pleasure especially in those who walk in the
   right way of life. But as concerning those who are deserving of all
   execration, I mean the most perverse and ungodly Meletians, who have at
   last stultified themselves by their folly, and are now raising
   unreasonable commotions by envy, uproar, and tumult, thus making
   manifest their own ungodly dispositions, I will say thus much. You see
   that those who they pretended had been slain with the sword, are still
   amongst us, and in the enjoyment of life. Now what could be a stronger
   presumption against them, and one so manifestly and clearly tending to
   their condemnation, as that those whom they declared to have been
   murdered, are yet in the enjoyment of life, and accordingly will be
   able to speak for themselves?

   But this further accusation was advanced by these same Meletians. They
   positively affirmed that you, rushing in with lawless violence, had
   seized upon and broken a cup, which was deposited in the most Holy
   Place; than which there certainly could not be a more serious charge,
   nor a more grievous offence, had such a crime actually been
   perpetrated. But what manner of accusation is this? What is the meaning
   of this change and variation and difference in the circumstances of it,
   insomuch that they now transfer this same accusation to another person
   [685] , a fact which makes it clearer, so to speak, than the light
   itself, that they designed to lay a plot for your wisdom? After this,
   who can be willing to follow them, men that have fabricated such
   charges to the injury of another, seeing too that they are hurrying
   themselves on to ruin, and are conscious that they are accusing you of
   false and feigned crimes? Who then, as I said, will follow after them,
   and thus go headlong in the way of destruction; in that way in which it
   seems they alone suppose that they have hope of safety and of help? But
   if they were willing to walk according to a pure conscience, and to be
   directed by the best wisdom, and to go in the way of a sound mind, they
   would easily perceive that no help can come to them from Divine
   Providence, while they are given up to such doings, and tempt their own
   destruction. I should not call this a harsh judgment of them, but the
   simple truth.

   And finally, I will add, that I wish this letter to be read frequently
   by your wisdom in public, that it may thereby come to the knowledge of
   all men, and especially reach the ears of those who thus act, and thus
   raise disturbances; for the judgment which is expressed by me according
   to the dictates of equity is confirmed also by real facts. Wherefore,
   seeing that in such conduct there is so great an offence, let them
   understand that I have thus judged; and that I have come to this
   determination, that if they excite any further commotion of this kind,
   I will myself in person take cognizance of the matter, and that not
   according to the ecclesiastical, but according to the civil laws, and
   so I will in future find them out, because they clearly are robbers, so
   to speak, not only against human kind, but against the divine doctrine
   itself. May God ever preserve you, beloved brother!

   69. But that the wickedness of the calumniators might be more fully
   displayed, behold Arsenius also wrote to me after he was discovered in
   his place of concealment; and as the letter which Ischyras had written
   confessed the falsehood of their accusation, so that of Arsenius proved
   their maliciousness still more completely.

   To the blessed Pope Athanasius, Arsenius, Bishop of those who were
   heretofore under Meletius in the city of the Hypselites, together with
   the Presbyters and Deacons, wishes much health in the Lord.

   Being earnestly desirous of peace and union with the Catholic Church,
   over which by the grace of God you preside, and wishing to submit
   ourselves to the Canon of the Church, according to the ancient rule
   [686] , we write unto you, dearly beloved Pope, and declare in the name
   of the Lord, that we will not for the future hold communion with those
   who continue in schism, and are not yet at peace with the Catholic
   Church, whether Bishops, Presbyters, or Deacons. Neither will we take
   part with them if they wish to establish anything in a Council; neither
   will we send letters of peace [687] unto them nor receive such from
   them; neither yet without the consent of you, the bishop of the
   metropolis, will we publish any determination concerning Bishops, or on
   any other general ecclesiastical question; but we will yield obedience
   to all the canons that have heretofore been ordained, after the example
   of the Bishops [688] Ammonian, Tyrannus, Plusian, and the rest.
   Wherefore we beseech your goodness to write to us speedily in answer,
   and likewise to our fellow-ministers concerning us, informing them that
   we will henceforth abide by the fore-mentioned resolution and will be
   at peace with the Catholic Church, and at unity with our
   fellow-ministers in the [various] districts. And we are persuaded that
   your prayers, being acceptable unto God, will so prevail with Him, that
   this peace shall be firm and indissoluble unto the end, according to
   the will of God the Lord of all, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

   The sacred Ministry that is under you, we and those that are with us
   salute. Very shortly, if God permit, we will come to visit your
   goodness. I, Arsenius, pray for your health in the Lord for many years,
   most blessed Pope.

   70. But a stronger and clearer proof of the calumny against us is the
   recantation of John, of which the most God-beloved Emperor Constantine
   of blessed memory is a witness, for knowing how John had accused
   himself, and having received letters from him expressing his
   repentance, he wrote to him as follows.

   Constantine, Maximus, Augustus to John.

   The letters which I have received from your prudence were extremely
   pleasing to me, because I learned from them what I very much longed to
   hear, that you had laid aside every petty feeling, had joined the
   Communion of the Church as became you, and were now in perfect concord
   with the most reverend Bishop Athanasius. Be assured therefore that so
   far I entirely approve of your conduct; because, giving up all
   skirmishing, you have done that which is pleasing to God, and have
   embraced the unity of His Church. In order therefore that you may
   obtain the accomplishment of your wishes, I have thought it right to
   grant you permission to enter the public conveyance [689] , and to come
   to the court [690] of my clemency. Let it then be your care to make no
   delay; but as this letter gives you authority to use the public
   conveyance, come to me immediately, that you may have your desires
   fulfilled, and by appearing in my presence may enjoy that pleasure
   which it is fit for you to receive. May God preserve you continually,
   dearly beloved brother.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [664] Cf. Orat. i. 2 and notes.

   [665] Ad. Ep. Æg. §22. supr. §11.

   [666] [Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) ad fin.] Athan. speaks more openly
   against this arrangement. infr. §71.

   [667] [According to the tenses in the original the five months mark the
   date not of Alexander's death (April 17, 328), but of the renewed
   Meletian troubles. The settlement did not keep them quiet for five
   months. The terminus a quo of the five months is somewhat doubtful; but
   it certainly is not the Council of Nicæa, see §71, &c. Montf. Monit. in
   Vit. S. Athanasii, also Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) and ch. v. §3 a.]

   [668] Ad. Ep Æg. 23.

   [669] Supr. §7, and de Decr. 27.

   [670] palatinoi, vid. Apol. ad Const. §19.

   [671] Infr. §71 fin. Sozom. ii. 25.

   [672] sticharia, ecclesiastical. [See D.C.A. p. 1933.]

   [673] They are lost.

   [674] Suburb of Nicomedia, infr. §65.

   [675] archieresian

   [676] Cf. §§46, 72, 77.

   [677] Cf. de Syn. 16, [and Fest Ind. passim].

   [678] [Cf. the list of Mareotic clergy supr., p. 72. The three deacons
   of Alexandria are in the list, p. 71].

   [679] Vid. §60.

   [680] Dalmatius was the name of father and son, the brother and nephew
   of Constantine. Socrates, Hist. i. 27. gives the title of Censor to the
   son; but the Chron. Pasch. p. 531 (Dind.) gives it to the father.
   Valesius, and apparently Tillemont (Empereurs, vol. 4. p. 657) think
   Socrates mistaken. The younger Dalmatius was created Cæsar by
   Constantine a few years before his death; and as well as his brother
   Hannibalian, and a number of other relatives, was put to death by the
   soldiery, on the death of Constantine. vid. Hist. Ar. 69. [Gwatkin, p.
   108 note].

   [681] Ecclus. 30. 4.

   [682] despota. Theod. H. E. i. 5. init.

   [683] [The mone here is not a monastery in the later sense, but a
   village or cluster of cells. This intercepted letter demonstrates the
   existence of Meletian monks, of which there is other evidence also:
   (see below, Introd. to Vit. Ant. The objection of Weingarten to the
   genuineness of this letter is purely arbitrary)].

   [684] According to the system of government introduced by Diocletian
   and Constantine, there were thirty-five military commanders of the
   troops, under the Magistri militum, and all of these bore the name of
   duces or dukes; the comites, or counts, were ten out of the number, who
   were distinguished as companions of the Emperor. vid. Gibbon, ch. 17.
   Three of these dukes were stationed in Egypt [i.e. in the whole
   prefecture; one only in the province of Egypt in the narrower sense].

   [685] Cf. §28.

   [686] Vid. supr. p. 92, note 3; the (so-called) Apostolical Canon
   apparently referred to here, is Can. 27. according to Beveridge.

   [687] Cf. p. 95, note 4.

   [688] i.e. Meletian Bishops who had conformed; or, since they are not
   in the list, §71. Catholic Bishops with whom the conforming party were
   familiar; or Meletians after the return of Meletius. vid. Tillemont,
   Mem. vol. 8. p. 658.

   [689] On the "cursus publicus," vid. Gothofred. in Cod. Theod. viii.
   tit. 5. It was provided for the journeys of the Emperor, for persons
   whom he summoned, for magistrates, ambassadors, and for such private
   persons as the Emperor indulged in the use of it, which was gratis. The
   use was granted by Constantine to the Bishops who were summoned to
   Nicæa, as far as it went, in addition (though aliter Valesius in loc.)
   to other means of travelling. Euseb. v. Const. iii. 6. The cursus
   publicus brought the Bishops to the Council of Tyre. ibid. iv. 43. In
   the conference between Liberius and Constantius, Theod. Hist. ii. 13.
   it is objected that the cursus publicus is not sufficient to convey
   Bishops to the Council which Liberius proposes; he answers that the
   Churches are rich enough to convey their Bishops as far as the sea.
   Thus S. Hilary was compelled (data evectionis copia, Sulp. Sev. Hist.
   ii. 57.) to attend at Seleucia, as Athan. at Tyre. Julian complains of
   the abuse of the cursus publicus, perhaps with an allusion to these
   Councils of Constantius. vid. Cod. Theod. viii. tit. 5. l. 12. where
   Gothofred quotes Liban. Epitaph. in Julian. vol. i. p. 569. ed.
   Reiske.) Vid. the well-known passage of Ammianus, who speaks of the
   Councils being the ruin of the res vehicularia Hist. xxi. 16. The
   Eusebians at Philippopolis say the same thing. Hilar. Frag. iii. 25.
   The Emperor provided board and perhaps lodging for the Bishops at
   Ariminum; which the Bishops of Aquitaine, Gaul, and Britain, declined,
   except three British from poverty. Sulp. Hist. ii. 56. Hunneric in
   Africa, after assembling 466 Bishops at Carthage, dismissed them
   without modes of conveyance, provision, or baggage. Victor Utic. Hist.
   iii. init. In the Emperor's letter previous to the assembling of the
   sixth Ecumenical Council, a.d. 678, (Harduin, Conc. t. 3. p. 1048 fin.)
   he says he has given orders for the conveyance and maintenance of its
   members. Pope John VIII. reminds Ursus, Duke of Venice (a.d. 876.), of
   the same duty of providing for the members of a Council, "secundum pios
   principes, qui in talibus munifice semper erant intenti." Colet.
   Concil. (Ven. 1730,) t. xi. p. 14.

   [690] stratopedon; vid. Chrys. on the Statues, p. 382, note 6. Gothofr.
   in Cod. Theod. vi. 32, 1. 1. Castra sunt ubi Princeps est. ibid. 35, l.
   15. also Kiesling. de Discipl. Cler. i. 5. p. 16. Beveridge in Can.
   Apost. 83. interprets strateia of any civil engagement as opposed to
   clerical.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chapter VI.--Documents connected with the Council of Tyre.

   71. Thus ended the conspiracy. The Meletians were repulsed and covered
   with shame; but notwithstanding this Eusebius and his fellows still did
   not remain quiet, for it was not for the Meletians but for Arius and
   his fellows, that they cared, and they were afraid lest, if the
   proceedings of the former should be stopped, they should no longer find
   persons to play the parts [691] , by whose assistance they might bring
   in that heresy. They therefore again stirred up the Meletians, and
   persuaded the Emperor to give orders that a Council should be held
   afresh at Tyre, and Count Dionysius was despatched thither, and a
   military guard was given to Eusebius and his fellows. Macarius also was
   sent as a prisoner to Tyre under a guard of soldiers; and the Emperor
   wrote to me, and laid a peremptory command upon me, so that, however
   unwilling, I set out. The whole conspiracy may be understood from the
   letters which the Bishops of Egypt wrote; but it will be necessary to
   relate how it was contrived by them in the outset, that so may be
   perceived the malice and wickedness that was exercised against me.
   There are in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, nearly one hundred Bishops;
   none of whom laid anything to my charge; none of the Presbyters found
   any fault with me; none of the people spoke aught against me; but it
   was the Meletians who were ejected by Peter, and the Arians, that
   divided the plot between them, while the one party claimed to
   themselves the right of accusing me, the other of sitting in judgment
   on the case. I objected to Eusebius and his fellows as being my enemies
   on account of the heresy; next, I shewed in the following manner that
   the person who was called my accuser was not a Presbyter at all. When
   Meletius was admitted into communion (would that he had never been so
   admitted [692] !) the blessed Alexander who knew his craftiness
   required of him a schedule of the Bishops whom he said he had in Egypt,
   and of the presbyters and deacons that were in Alexandria itself, and
   if he had any in the country district. This the Pope Alexander has
   done, lest Meletius, having received the freedom of the Church, should
   tender [693] many, and thus continually, by a fraudulent procedure,
   foist upon us whomsoever he pleased. Accordingly he has made out the
   following schedule of those in Egypt.

   A schedule presented by Meletius to the Bishop Alexander.

   I, Meletius of Lycopolis, Lucius of Antinopolis, Phasileus of
   Hermopolis, Achilles of Cusæ, Ammonius of Diospolis.

   In Ptolemais, Pachymes of Tentyræ.

   In Maximianopolis, Theodorus of Coptus.

   In Thebais, Cales of Hermethes, Colluthus of Upper Cynopolis, Pelagius
   of Oxyrynchus, Peter of Heracleopolis, Theon of Nilopolis, Isaac [694]
   of Letopolis, Heraclides of Niciopolis [695] , Isaac of Cleopatris,
   Melas of Arsenoitis.

   In Heliopolis, Amos of Leontopolis, Ision of Athribis.

   In Pharbethus, Harpocration of Bubastus, Moses of Phacusæ, Callinicus
   [696] of Pelusium, Eudæmon of Tanis [697] , Ephraim of Thmuis.

   In Sais, Hermæon of Cynopolis and Busiris, Soterichus of Sebennytus,
   Pininuthes of Phthenegys, Cronius of Metelis, Agathammon of the
   district of Alexandria.

   In Memphis, John who was ordered by the Emperor to be with the
   Archbishop [698] . These are those of Egypt.

   And the Clergy that he had in Alexandria were Apollonius Presbyter,
   Irenæus Presbyter, Dioscorus Presbyter, Tyrannus Presbyter. And
   Deacons; Timotheus Deacon, Antinous Deacon, Hephæstion Deacon. And
   Macarius Presbyter of Parembole [699] .

   72. These Meletius presented actually in person [700] to the Bishop
   Alexander, but he made no mention of the person called Ischyras, nor
   ever professed at all that he had any Clergy in the Mareotis.
   Notwithstanding our enemies did not desist from their attempts, but
   still he that was no Presbyter was feigned to be one, for there was the
   Count ready to use compulsion towards us, and soldiers were hurrying us
   about. But even then the grace of God prevailed: for they could not
   convict Macarius in the matter of the cup; and Arsenius, whom they
   reported to have been murdered by me, stood before them alive and
   shewed the falseness of their accusation. When therefore they were
   unable to convict Macarius, Eusebius and his fellows, who became
   enraged that they had lost the prey of which they had been in pursuit,
   persuaded the Count Dionysius, who is one of them, to send to the
   Mareotis, in order to see whether they could not find out something
   there against the Presbyter, or rather that they might at a distance
   patch up their plot as they pleased in our absence: for this was their
   aim. However,--when we represented that the journey to the Mareotis was
   a superfluous undertaking (for that they ought not to pretend that
   statements were defective which they had been employed upon so long,
   and ought not now to defer the matter; for they had said whatever they
   thought they could say, and now being at a loss what to do, they were
   making pretences); or if they must needs go to the Mareotis, that at
   least the suspected parties should not be sent,--the Count was
   convinced by my reasoning, with respect to the suspected persons; but
   they did anything rather than what I proposed, for the very persons
   whom I objected against on account of the Arian heresy, these were they
   who promptly went off, viz. Diognius, Maris, Theodorus, Macedonius,
   Ursacius, and Valens. Again, letters were written to the Prefect of
   Egypt and a military guard was provided; and, what was remarkable and
   altogether most suspicious, they caused Macarius the accused party to
   remain behind under a guard of soldiers, while they took with them the
   accuser [701] . Now who after this does not see through this
   conspiracy? Who does not clearly perceive the wickedness of Eusebius
   and his fellows? For if a judicial enquiry must needs take place in the
   Mareotis, the accused also ought to have been sent thither. But if they
   did not go for the purpose of such an enquiry, why did they take the
   accuser? It was enough that he had not been able to prove the fact. But
   this they did in order that they might carry on their designs against
   the absent Presbyter, whom they could not convict when present, and
   might concoct a plan as they pleased. For when the Presbyters of
   Alexandria and of the whole district found fault with them because they
   were there by themselves, and required that they too might be present
   at their proceedings (for they said that they knew both the
   circumstances of the case, and the history of the person named
   Ischyras), they would not allow them; and although they had with them
   Philagrius the Prefect of Egypt [702] , who was an apostate, and
   heathen soldiers, during an enquiry which it was not becoming even for
   Catechumens to witness, they would not admit the Clergy, lest there as
   well as at Tyre there might be those who would expose them.

   73. But in spite of these precautions they were not able to escape
   detection: for the Presbyters of the City and of the Mareotis,
   perceiving their evil designs, addressed to them the following protest.

   To Theognius, Maris, Macedonius, Theodorus, Ursacius, and Valens, the
   Bishops who have come from Tyre, these from the Presbyters and Deacons
   of the Catholic Church of Alexandria under the most reverend Bishop
   Athanasius.

   It was incumbent upon you when you came hither and brought with you the
   accuser, to bring also the Presbyter Macarius; for trials are appointed
   by Holy Scripture to be so constituted, that the accuser and accused
   may stand up together. But since neither you brought Macarius, nor our
   most reverend Bishop Athanasius came hither with you, we claimed for
   ourselves the right of being present at the investigation, that we
   might see that the enquiry was conducted impartially, and might
   ourselves be convinced of the truth. But when you refused to allow
   this, and wished, in company only with the Prefect of Egypt and the
   accuser, to do whatever you pleased, we confess that we saw a suspicion
   of evil in the affair, and perceived that your coming was only the act
   of a cabal and a conspiracy. Wherefore we address to you this letter,
   to be a testimony before a genuine Council, that it may be known to all
   men, that you have carried on an ex parte proceeding and for your own
   ends, and have desired nothing else but to form a conspiracy against
   us. A copy of this, lest it should be kept secret by you, we have
   handed in to Palladius also the Controller [703] of Augustus. For what
   you have already done causes us to suspect you, and to reckon on the
   like conduct from you hereafter.

   I Dionysius Presbyter have handed in this letter. Alexander Presbyter,
   Nilaras Presbyter, Longus Presbyter, Aphthonius Presbyter, Athanasius
   Presbyter, Amyntius Presbyter, Pistus Presbyter, Plution Presbyter,
   Dioscorus Presbyter, Apollonius Presbyter, Sarapion Presbyter, Ammonius
   Presbyter, Gaius Presbyter, Rhinus Presbyter, Æthales Presbyter.

   Deacons; Marcellinus Deacon, Appianus Deacon, Theon Deacon, Timotheus
   Deacon, a second Timotheus Deacon.

   74. This is the letter, and these the names of the Clergy of the city;
   and the following was written by the Clergy of the Mareotis, who know
   the character of the accuser, and who were with me in my visitation.

   To the holy Council of blessed Bishops of the Catholic Church, all the
   Presbyters and Deacons of the Mareotis send health in the Lord.

   Knowing that which is written, Speak that thine eyes have seen,' and, A
   false witness shall not be unpunished [704] ', we testify what we have
   seen, especially since the conspiracy which has been formed against our
   Bishop Athanasius has made our testimony necessary. We wonder how
   Ischyras ever came to be reckoned among the number of the Ministers of
   the Church, which is the first point we think it necessary to mention.
   Ischyras never was a Minister of the Church; but when formerly he
   represented himself to be a Presbyter of Colluthus, he found no one to
   believe him, except only his own relations [705] . For he never had a
   Church, nor was ever considered a Clergyman by those who lived but a
   short distance from his village, except only, as we said before, by his
   own relations. But, notwithstanding he assumed this designation, he was
   deposed in the presence of our Father Hosius at the Council which
   assembled at Alexandria [706] , and was admitted to communion as a
   layman, and so he continued subsequently, having fallen from his
   falsely reputed rank of presbyter. Of his character we think it
   unnecessary to speak, as all men have it in their power to become
   acquainted therewith. But since he has falsely accused our Bishop
   Athanasius of breaking a cup and overturning a table, we are
   necessarily obliged to address you on this point. We have said already
   that he never had a Church in the Mareotis; and we declare before God
   as our witness, that no cup was broken, nor table overturned by our
   Bishop, nor by any one of those who accompanied him; but all that is
   alleged respecting this affair is mere calumny. And this we say, not as
   having been absent from the Bishop, for we are all with him when he
   makes his visitation of the Mareotis, and he never goes about alone,
   but is accompanied by all of us Presbyters and Deacons, and by a
   considerable number of the people. Wherefore we make these assertions
   as having been present with him in every visitation which he has made
   amongst us, and testify that neither was a cup ever broken, nor table
   overturned, but the whole story is false, as the accuser himself also
   witnesses under his own hand [707] . For when, after he had gone off
   with Meletians, and had reported these things against our Bishop
   Athanasius, he wished to be admitted to communion, he was not received,
   although he wrote and confessed under his own hand that none of these
   things were true, but that he had been suborned by certain persons to
   say so.

   75. Wherefore also Theognius, Theodorus, Maris, Macedonius, Ursacius,
   Valens, and their fellows came into the Mareotis, and when they found
   that none of these things were true, but it was likely to be discovered
   that they had framed a false accusation against our Bishop Athanasius,
   Theognius and his fellows being themselves his enemies, caused the
   relations of Ischyras and certain Arian madmen to say whatever they
   wished. For none of the people spoke against the Bishop; but these
   persons, through fear of Philagrius the Prefect of Egypt, and by
   threats and with the support of the Arian madmen, accomplished whatever
   they desired. For when we came to disprove the calumny, they would not
   permit us, but cast us out, while they admitted whom they pleased to a
   participation in their schemes, and concerted matters with them,
   influencing them by fear of the Prefect Philagrius. Through his means
   they prevented us from being present, that we might discover whether
   those who were suborned by them were members of the Church or Arian
   madmen. And you also, dearly beloved Fathers, know, as you teach us,
   that the testimony of enemies avails nothing. That what we say is the
   truth the handwriting [708] of Ischyras testifies, as do also the facts
   themselves, because when we were conscious that no such thing as was
   pretended had taken place, they took with them Philagrius, that through
   fear of the sword and by threats they might frame whatever plots they
   wished. These things we testify as in the presence of God; we make
   these assertions as knowing that there will be a judgment held by God;
   desiring indeed all of us to come to you, but being content with
   certain of our number, so that the letters may be instead of the
   presence of those who have not come.

   I, Ingenius Presbyter, pray you health in the Lord, beloved fathers.
   Theon Presbyter, Ammonas P., Heraclius P., Boccon P., Tryphon P., Peter
   P., Hierax P., Sarapion P., Marcus P., Ptollarion P., Gaius P.,
   Dioscorus P., Demetrius P., Thyrsus P.

   Deacons; Pistus Deacon, Apollos D., Serras D., Pistus D., Polynicus D.,
   Ammonius D., Maurus D., Hephæstus D., Apollos D., Metopas D., Apollos
   D., Serapas D., Meliphthongus D., Lucius D., Gregoras D.

   76. The same to the Controller, and to Philagrius, at that time Prefect
   of Egypt.

   To Flavius Philagrius, and to Flavius Palladius, Ducenary [709] ,
   Officer of the Palace, and Controller, and to Flavius Antoninus,
   Commissary of Provisions, and Centenary of my lords the most
   illustrious Prefects of the sacred Prætorium, these from the Presbyters
   and Deacons of the Mareotis, a nome of the Catholic Church which is
   under the most Reverend Bishop Athanasius, we address this testimony by
   those whose names are underwritten:--

   Whereas Theognius, Maris, Macedonius, Theodorus, Ursacius, and Valens,
   as if sent by all the Bishops who assembled at Tyre, came into our
   Diocese alleging that they had received orders to investigate certain
   ecclesiastical affairs, among which they spoke of the breaking of a cup
   of the Lord, of which information was given them by Ischyras, whom they
   brought with them, and who says that he is a Presbyter, although he is
   not,--for he was ordained by the Presbyter Colluthus who pretended to
   the Episcopate, and was afterwards ordered by a whole Council, by
   Hosius and the Bishops that were with him, to take the place of a
   Presbyter, as he was before; and accordingly all that were ordained by
   Colluthus resumed the same rank which they held before, and so Ischyras
   himself proved to be a layman,--and the church which he says he has,
   never was a church at all, but a quite small private house belonging to
   an orphan boy of the name of Ision;--for this reason we have offered
   this testimony, adjuring you by Almighty God, and by our Lords
   Constantine Augustus, and the most illustrious Cæsars his sons, to
   bring these things to the knowledge of their piety. For neither is he a
   Presbyter of the Catholic Church nor does he possess a church, nor has
   a cup ever been broken, but the whole story is false and an invention.

   Dated in the Consulship of Julius Constantius the most illustrious
   Patrician [710] , brother of the most religious Emperor Constantine
   Augustus, and of Rufinus Albinus, most illustrious men, on the tenth
   day of the month Thoth [711] .

   These were the letters of the Presbyters.

   77. The following also are the letters and protests of the Bishops who
   came with us to Tyre, when they became aware of the conspiracy and
   plot.

   To the Bishops assembled at Tyre, most honoured Lords, those of the
   Catholic Church who have come from Egypt with Athanasius send greeting
   in the Lord.

   We suppose that the conspiracy which has been formed against us by
   Eusebius, Theognius, Maris, Narcissus, Theodorus, Patrophilus, and
   their fellows is no longer uncertain. From the very beginning we all
   demurred, through our fellow-minister Athanasius, to the holding of the
   enquiry in their presence, knowing that the presence of even one enemy
   only, much more of many, is able to disturb and injure the hearing of a
   cause. And you also yourselves know the enmity which they entertain,
   not only towards us, but towards all the orthodox, how that for the
   sake of the madness of Arius, and his impious doctrine, they direct
   their assaults, they form conspiracies against all. And when, being
   confident in the truth, we desired to shew the falsehood, which the
   Meletians had employed against the Church, Eusebius and his fellows
   endeavoured by some means or other to interrupt our representations,
   and strove eagerly to set aside our testimony, threatening those who
   gave an honest judgment, and insulting others, for the sole purpose of
   carrying out the design they had against us. Your godly piety, most
   honoured Lords, was probably ignorant of their conspiracy, but we
   suppose that it has now been made manifest. For indeed they have
   themselves plainly disclosed it; for they desired to send to the
   Mareotis those of their party who are suspected by us, so that, while
   we were absent and remained here, they might disturb the people and
   accomplish what they wished. They knew that the Arian madmen, and
   Colluthians [712] and Meletians, were enemies of the Catholic Church
   and therefore they were anxious to send them, that in the presence of
   our enemies they might devise against us whatever schemes they pleased.
   And those of the Meletians who are here, even four days previously (as
   they knew that this enquiry was about to take place), despatched at
   evening certain of their party, as couriers, for the purpose of
   collecting Meletians out of Egypt into the Mareotis, because there were
   none at all there, and Colluthians and Arian madmen, from other parts,
   and to prepare them to speak against us. For you also know that
   Ischyras himself confessed before you, that he had not more than seven
   persons in his congregation. When therefore we heard that, after they
   had made what preparations they pleased against us, and had sent these
   suspected persons, they were going about to each of you, and requiring
   your subscriptions, in order that it might appear as if this had been
   done with the consent of you all; for this reason we hastened to write
   to you, and to present this our testimony; declaring that we are the
   objects of a conspiracy under which we are suffering by and through
   them, and demanding that having the fear of God in your minds, and
   condemning their conduct in sending whom they pleased without our
   consent, you would refuse your subscriptions, lest they pretend that
   those things are done by you, which they are contriving only among
   themselves. Surely it becomes those who are in Christ, not to regard
   human motives, but to prefer the truth before all things. And be not
   afraid of their threatenings, which they employ against all, nor of
   their plots, but rather fear God. If it was at all necessary that
   persons should be sent to the Mareotis, we also ought to have been
   there with them, in order that we might convict the enemies of the
   Church, and point out those who were aliens, and that the investigation
   of the matter might be impartial. For you know that Eusebius and his
   fellows contrived that a letter should be presented, as coming from the
   Collutians, the Meletians, and Arians, and directed against us: but it
   is evident that these enemies of the Catholic Church speak nothing that
   is true concerning us, but say everything against us. And the law of
   God forbids an enemy to be either a witness or a judge. Wherefore as
   you will have to give an account in the day of judgment, receive this
   testimony, and recognising the conspiracy which has been framed against
   us, beware, if you are requested by them, of doing anything against us,
   and of taking part in the designs of Eusebius and his fellows. For you
   know, as we said before, that they are our enemies, and you are aware
   why Eusebius of Cæsarea became such last year [713] . We pray that you
   may be in health, greatly beloved Lords.

   78. To the most illustrious Count Flavius Dionysius, from the Bishops
   of the Catholic Church in Egypt who have come to Tyre.

   We suppose that the conspiracy which has been formed against us by
   Eusebius, Theognius, Maris, Narcissus, Theodorus, Patrophilus and their
   fellows, is no longer uncertain. From the very beginning we all
   demurred, through our fellow-minister Athanasius, to the holding of the
   enquiry in their presence, knowing that the presence of even one enemy
   only, much more of many, is able to disturb and injure the hearing of a
   cause. For their enmity is manifest which they entertain, not only
   towards us, but also towards all the orthodox, because they direct
   their assaults, they form conspiracies against all. And when, being
   confident in the truth, we desired to shew the falsehood which the
   Meletians had employed against the Church, Eusebius and his fellows
   endeavoured by some means or other to interrupt our representations,
   and strove eagerly to set aside our testimony, threatening those who
   gave an honest judgment and insulting others, for the sole purpose of
   carrying out the design they had against us. Your goodness was probably
   ignorant of the conspiracy which they have formed against us, but we
   suppose that it has now been made manifest. For indeed they have
   themselves plainly disclosed it; for they desired to send to the
   Mareotis those of their party who are suspected by us, so that, while
   we were absent and remained here, they might disturb the people and
   accomplish what they wished. They knew that Arian madmen, Colluthians,
   and Meletians were enemies of the Church, and therefore they were
   anxious to send them, that in the presence of our enemies, they might
   devise against us whatever schemes they pleased. And those of the
   Meletians who are here, even four days previously (as they knew that
   this enquiry was about to take place), despatched at evening two
   individuals of their own party, as couriers, for the purpose of
   collecting Meletians out of Egypt into the Mareotis, because there were
   none at all there, and Colluthians, and Arian madmen, from other parts,
   and to prepare them to speak against us. And your goodness knows that
   he himself confessed before you, that he had not more than seven
   persons in his congregation. When therefore we heard that, after they
   had made what preparations they pleased against us, and had sent these
   suspected persons, they were going about to each of the Bishops and
   requiring their subscriptions, in order that it might appear that this
   was done with the consent of them all; for this reason we hastened to
   refer the matter to your honour, and to present this our testimony,
   declaring that we are the objects of a conspiracy, under which we are
   suffering by and through them, and demanding of you that having in your
   mind the fear of God, and the pious commands of our most religious
   Emperor, you would no longer tolerate these persons, but condemn their
   conduct in sending whom they pleased without our consent.

   I Adamantius Bishop have subscribed this letter, Ischyras, Ammon,
   Peter, Ammonianus, Tyrannus, Taurinus, Sarapammon, Ælurion,
   Harpocration, Moses, Optatus, Anubion, Saprion, Apollonius, Ischyrion,
   Arbæthion, Potamon, Paphnutius, Heraclides, Theodorus, Agathammon,
   Gaius, Pistus, Athas, Nicon, Pelagius, Theon, Paninuthius, Nonnus,
   Ariston, Theodorus, Irenæus, Blastammon, Philippus, Apollos, Dioscorus,
   Timotheus of Diospolis, Macarius, Heraclammon, Cronius, Myis, Jacobus,
   Ariston, Artemidorus, Phinees, Psais, Heraclides.

   Another from the same.

   79. The Bishops of the Catholic Church who have come from Egypt to
   Tyre, to the most illustrious Count Flavius Dionysius.

   Perceiving that many conspiracies and plots are being formed against us
   through the machinations of Eusebius, Narcissus, Flacillus, Theognius,
   Maris, Theodorus, Patrophilus, and their fellows (against whom we
   wished at first to enter an objection, but were not permitted), we are
   constrained to have recourse to the present appeal. We observe also
   that great zeal is exerted in behalf of the Meletians, and that a plot
   is laid against the Catholic Church in Egypt in our persons. Wherefore
   we present this letter to you, beseeching you to bear in mind the
   Almighty Power of God, who defends the kingdom of our most religious
   and godly Emperor Constantine, and to reserve the hearing of the
   affairs which concern us for the most religious Emperor himself. For it
   is but reasonable, since you were commissioned by his Majesty, that you
   should reserve the matter for him upon our appealing to his piety. We
   can no longer endure to be the objects of the treacherous designs of
   the fore-mentioned Eusebius and his fellows, and therefore we demand
   that the case be reserved for the most religious and God-beloved
   Emperor, before whom we shall be able to set forth our own and the
   Church's just claims. And we are convinced that when his piety shall
   have heard our cause, he will not condemn us. Wherefore we again adjure
   you by Almighty God, and by our most religious Emperor, who, together
   with the children of his piety, has thus ever been victorious [714] and
   prosperous these many years, that you proceed no further, nor suffer
   yourselves to move at all in the Council in relation to our affairs,
   but reserve the hearing of them for his piety. We have likewise made
   the same representations to my Lords the orthodox Bishops.

   80. Alexander [715] , Bishop of Thessalonica, on receiving these
   letters, wrote to the Count Dionysius as follows.

   The Bishop Alexander to my master Dionysius.

   I see that a conspiracy has evidently been formed against Athanasius;
   for they have determined, I know not on what grounds, to send all those
   to whom he has objected, without giving any information to us, although
   it was agreed that we should consider together who ought to be sent.
   Take care therefore that nothing be done rashly (for they have come to
   me in great alarm, saying that the wild beasts have already roused
   themselves, and are going to rush upon them; for they had heard it
   reported, that John had sent certain [716] ), lest they be beforehand
   with us, and concoct what schemes they please. For you know that the
   Colluthians who are enemies of the Church, and the Arians, and
   Meletians, are all of them leagued together, and are able to work much
   evil. Consider therefore what is best to be done, lest some mischief
   arise, and we be subject to censure, as not having judged the matter
   fairly. Great suspicions are also entertained of these persons, lest,
   as being devoted to the Meletians, they should go through those
   Churches whose Bishops are here [717] , and raise an alarm amongst
   them, and so disorder the whole of Egypt. For they see that this is
   already taking place to a great extent.

   Accordingly the Count Dionysius wrote to Eusebius and his fellows as
   follows.

   81. This is what I have already mentioned to my lords, Flacillus [718]
   and his fellows, that Athanasius has come forward and complained that
   those very persons have been sent whom he objected to; and crying out
   that he has been wronged and deceived. Alexander the lord of my soul
   [719] has also written to me on the subject; and that you may perceive
   that what his Goodness has said is reasonable, I have subjoined his
   letter to be read by you. Remember also what I wrote to you before: I
   impressed upon your Goodness, my lords, that the persons who were sent
   ought to be commissioned by the general vote and decision of all. Take
   care therefore lest our proceedings fall under censure, and we give
   just grounds of blame to those who are disposed to find fault with us.
   For as the accuser's side ought not to suffer any oppression, so
   neither ought the defendant's. And I think that there is no slight
   ground of blame against us, when my lord Alexander evidently
   disapproves of what we have done.

   82. While matters were proceeding thus we withdrew from them, as from
   an assembly of treacherous men [720] , for whatsoever they pleased they
   did, whereas there is no man in the world but knows that ex parte
   proceedings cannot stand good. This the divine law determines; for when
   the blessed Apostle was suffering under a similar conspiracy and was
   brought to trial, he demanded, saying, The Jews from Asia ought to have
   been here before thee, and object, if they had aught against me [721]
   .' On which occasion Festus also, when the Jews wished to lay such a
   plot against him, as these men have now laid against me, said, It is
   not the manner of Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he
   which is accused have the accuser face to face, and have licence to
   answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him [722] .' But
   Eusebius and his fellows both had the boldness to pervert the law, and
   have proved more unjust even than those wrong-doers. For they did not
   proceed privately at the first, but when in consequence of our being
   present they found themselves weak, then they straightway went out,
   like the Jews, and took counsel together alone, how they might destroy
   us and bring in their heresy, as those others demanded Barabbas. For
   this purpose it was, as they have themselves confessed, that they did
   all these things.

   83. Although these circumstances were amply sufficient for our
   vindication, yet in order that the wickedness of these men and the
   freedom of the truth might be more fully exhibited, I have not felt
   averse to repeat them again, in order to shew that they have acted in a
   manner inconsistently with themselves, and as men scheming in the dark
   have fallen foul of their own friends, and while they desired to
   destroy us have like insane persons wounded themselves. For in their
   investigation of the subject of the Mysteries, they questioned Jews,
   they examined Catechumens [723] ; Where were you,' they said, when
   Macarius came and overturned the Table?' They answered, We were
   within;' whereas there could be no oblation if Catechumens were
   present. Again, although they had written word everywhere, that
   Macarius came and overthrew everything, while the Presbyter was
   standing and celebrating the Mysteries, yet when they questioned
   whomsoever they pleased, and asked them, Where was Ischyras when
   Macarius rushed in?' those persons answered that he was lying sick in a
   cell. Well, then, he that was lying was not standing, nor was he that
   lay sick in his cell offering the oblation. Besides whereas Ischyras
   said that certain books had been burnt by Macarius, they who were
   suborned to give evidence, declared that nothing of the kind had been
   done, but that Ischyras spoke falsely. And what is most remarkable,
   although they had again written word everywhere, that those who were
   able to give evidence had been concealed by us, yet these persons made
   their appearance, and they questioned them, and were not ashamed when
   they saw it proved on all sides that they were slanderers, and were
   acting in this matter clandestinely, and according to their pleasure.
   For they prompted the witnesses by signs, while the Prefect threatened
   them, and the soldiers pricked them with their swords; but the Lord
   revealed the truth, and shewed them to be slanderers. Therefore also
   they concealed the minutes of their proceedings, which they retained
   themselves, and charged those who wrote them to put out of sight, and
   to commit to no one whomsoever. But in this also they were
   disappointed; for the person who wrote them was Rufus, who is now
   public executioner in the Augustalian [724] prefecture, and is able to
   testify to the truth of this; and Eusebius and his fellows sent them to
   Rome by the hands of their own friends, and Julius the Bishop
   transmitted them to me. And now they are mad, because we obtained and
   read what they wished to conceal.

   84. As such was the character of their machinations, so they very soon
   shewed plainly the reasons of their conduct. For when they went away,
   they took the Arians with them to Jerusalem, and there admitted them to
   communion, having sent out a letter concerning them, part [725] of
   which, and the beginning, is as follows.

   The holy Council by the grace of God assembled at Jerusalem, to the
   Church of God which is in Alexandria, and to the Bishops, Presbyters,
   and Deacons, in all Egypt, the Thebais, Libya, Pentapolis, and
   throughout the world, sends health in the Lord.

   Having come together out of different Provinces to a great meeting
   which we have held for the consecration of the Martyry [726] of the
   Saviour, which has been appointed to the service of God the King of all
   and of His Christ, by the zeal of our most God-beloved Emperor
   Constantine, the grace of God hath afforded us more abundant rejoicing
   of heart; which our most God-beloved Emperor himself hath occasioned us
   by his letters, wherein he hath stirred us up to do that which is
   right, putting away all envy from the Church of God, and driving far
   from us all malice, by which the members of God have been heretofore
   torn asunder, and that we should with simple and peaceable minds
   receive Arius and his fellows, whom envy, that enemy of all goodness,
   has caused for a season to be excluded from the Church. Our most
   religious Emperor has also in his letter testified to the correctness
   of their faith, which he has ascertained from themselves, himself
   receiving the profession of it from them by word of mouth, and has now
   made manifest to us by subjoining to his own letters the men's orthodox
   opinion in writing.

   85. Every one that hears of these things must see through their
   treachery. For they made no concealment of what they were doing; unless
   perhaps they confessed the truth without wishing it. For if I was the
   hindrance to the admittance of Arius and his fellows into the Church,
   and if they were received while I was suffering from their plots, what
   other conclusion can be arrived at, than that these things were done on
   their account, and that all their proceedings against me, and the story
   which they fabricated about the breaking of the cup and the murder of
   Arsenius, were for the sole purpose of introducing impiety into the
   Church, and of preventing their being condemned as heretics? For this
   was what the Emperor threatened formerly in his letters to me. And they
   were not ashamed to write in the manner they did, and to affirm that
   those persons whom the whole Ecumenical Council anathematized held
   orthodox sentiments. And as they undertook to say and do anything
   without scruple, so they were not afraid to meet together in a corner,'
   in order to overthrow, as far as was in their power, the authority of
   so great a Council.

   Moreover, the price which they paid for false testimony yet more fully
   manifests their wickedness and impious intentions. The Mareotis, as I
   have already said, is a country district of Alexandria, in which there
   has never been either a Bishop or a Chorepiscopus [727] ; but the
   Churches of the whole district are subject to the Bishop of Alexandria,
   and each Presbyter has under his charge one of the largest villages,
   which are about ten or more in number [728] . Now the village in which
   Ischyras lives is a very small one, and possesses so few inhabitants,
   that there has never been a church built there, but only in the
   adjoining village. Nevertheless, they determined, contrary to ancient
   usage [729] , to nominate a Bishop for this place, and not only so, but
   even to appoint one, who was not so much as a Presbyter. Knowing as
   they did the unusual nature of such a proceeding, yet being constrained
   by the promises they had given in return for his false impeachment of
   me, they submitted even to this, lest that abandoned person, if he were
   ungratefully treated by them, should disclose the truth, and thereby
   shew the wickedness of Eusebius and his fellows. Notwithstanding this
   he has no church, nor a people to obey him, but is scouted by them all,
   like a dog [730] , although they have even caused the Emperor to write
   to the Receiver-General (for everything is in their power), commanding
   that a church should be built for him, that being possessed of that,
   his statement may appear credible about the cup and the table. They
   caused him immediately to be nominated a Bishop also, because if he
   were without a church, and not even a Presbyter, he would appear to be
   a false accuser, and a fabricator of the whole matter. At any rate he
   has no people, and even his own relations are not obedient to him, and
   as the name which he retains is an empty one, so also the following
   letter is ineffectual, which he keeps, making a display of it as an
   exposure of the utter wickedness of himself and of Eusebius and his
   fellows.

   The Letter of the Receiver-General. [731]

   Flavius Hemerius sends health to the Tax-collector of the Mareotis.

   Ischyras the Presbyter having petitioned the piety of our Lords,
   Augusti and Cæsars, that a Church might be built in the district of
   Irene, belonging to Secontarurus [732] , their divinity has commanded
   that this should be done as soon as possible. Take care therefore, as
   soon as you receive the copy of the sacred Edict, which with all due
   veneration is placed above, and the Reports which have been formed
   before my devotion, that you quickly make an abstract of them, and
   transfer them to the Order book, so that the sacred command may be put
   in execution.

   86. While they were thus plotting and scheming, I went up [733] and
   represented to the Emperor the unjust conduct of Eusebius and his
   fellows, for he it was who had commanded the Council to be held, and
   his Count presided at it. When he heard my report, he was greatly
   moved, and wrote to them as follows.

   Constantine, Victor [734] , Maximus, Augustus, to the Bishops assembled
   at Tyre.

   I know not what the decisions are which you have arrived at in your
   Council amidst noise and tumult: but somehow the truth seems to have
   been perverted in consequence of certain confusions and disorders, in
   that you, through your mutual contentiousness, which you are resolved
   should prevail, have failed to perceive what is pleasing to God.
   However, it will rest with Divine Providence to disperse the mischiefs
   which manifestly are found to arise from this contentious spirit, and
   to shew plainly to us, whether you, while assembled in that place, have
   had any regard for the truth, and whether you have made your decisions
   uninfluenced by either favour or enmity. Wherefore I wish you all to
   assemble with all speed before my piety in order that you may render in
   person a true account of your proceedings.

   The reason why I have thought good to write thus to you, and why I
   summon you before me by letter, you will learn from what I am going to
   say. As I was entering on a late occasion our all-happy home of
   Constantinople, which bears our name (I chanced at the time to be on
   horseback), on a sudden the Bishop Athanasius, with certain others whom
   he had with him, approached me in the middle of the road, so
   unexpectedly, as to occasion me much amazement. God, who knoweth all
   things, is my witness, that I should have been unable at first sight
   even to recognise him, had not some of my attendants, on my naturally
   inquiring of them, informed me both who it was, and under what
   injustice he was suffering. I did not however enter into any
   conversation with him at that time, nor grant him an interview; but
   when he requested to be heard I was refusing, and all but gave orders
   for his removal; when with increasing boldness he claimed only this
   favour, that you should be summoned to appear, that he might have an
   opportunity of complaining before me in your presence, of the
   ill-treatment he has met with. As this appeared to me to be a
   reasonable request, and suitable to the times, I willingly ordered this
   letter to be written to you, in order that all of you, who constituted
   the Council which was held at Tyre, might hasten without delay to the
   Court [735] of my clemency, so as to prove by facts that you had passed
   an impartial and uncorrupt judgment. This, I say, you must do before
   me, whom not even you will deny to be a true servant of God.

   For indeed through my devotion to God, peace is preserved everywhere,
   and the Name of God is truly worshipped even by the barbarians, who
   have hitherto been ignorant of the truth. And it is manifest, that he
   who is ignorant of the truth, does not know God either. Nevertheless,
   as I said before, even the barbarians have now come to the knowledge of
   God, by means of me, His true servant [736] , and have learned to fear
   Him Whom they perceive from actual facts to be my shield and protector
   everywhere. And from this chiefly they have come to know God, Whom they
   fear through the dread which they have of me. But we, who are supposed
   to set forth (for I will not say to guard) the holy mysteries of His
   Goodness, we, I say, engage in nothing but what tends to dissension and
   hatred, and, in short, whatever contributes to the destruction of
   mankind. But hasten, as I said before, and all of you with all speed
   come to us, being persuaded that I shall endeavour with all my might to
   amend what is amiss, so that those things specially may be preserved
   and firmly established in the law of God, to which no blame nor
   dishonour may attach; while the enemies of the law, who under pretence
   of His holy Name bring in manifold and divers blasphemies, shall be
   scattered abroad, and entirely crushed, and utterly destroyed.

   87. When Eusebius and his fellows read this letter, being conscious of
   what they had done, they prevented the rest of the Bishops from going
   up, and only themselves went, viz. Eusebius, Theognius, Patrophilus,
   the other Eusebius, Ursacius, and Valens. And they no longer said
   anything about the cup and Arsenius (for they had not the boldness to
   do so), but inventing another accusation which concerned the Emperor
   himself, they declared before him, that Athanasius had threatened that
   he would cause the corn to be withheld which was sent from Alexandria
   to his own home [737] . The Bishops Adamantius, Anubion, Agathammon,
   Arbethion, and Peter, were present and heard this. It was proved also
   by the anger of the Emperor; for although he had written the preceding
   letter, and had condemned their injustice, as soon as he heard such a
   charge as this, he was immediately incensed, and instead of granting me
   a hearing, he sent me away into Gaul. And this again shews their
   wickedness further; for when the younger Constantine, of blessed
   memory, sent me back home, remembering what his father had written
   [738] , he also wrote as follows.

   Constantine Cæsar, to the people of the Catholic Church of the city of
   Alexandria.

   I suppose that it has not escaped the knowledge of your pious minds,
   that Athanasius, the interpreter of the adorable Law, was sent away
   into Gaul for a time, with the intent that, as the savageness of his
   bloodthirsty and inveterate enemies persecuted him to the hazard of his
   sacred life, he might thus escape suffering some irremediable calamity,
   through the perverse dealing of those evil men. In order therefore to
   escape this, he was snatched out of the jaws of his assailants, and was
   ordered to pass some time under my government, and so was supplied
   abundantly with all necessaries in this city, where he lived, although
   indeed his celebrated virtue, relying entirely on divine assistance,
   sets at nought the sufferings of adverse fortune. Now seeing that it
   was the fixed intention of our master Constantine Augustus, my Father,
   to restore the said Bishop to his own place, and to your most beloved
   piety, but he was taken away by that fate which is common to all men,
   and went to his rest before he could accomplish his wish; I have
   thought proper to fulfil that intention of the Emperor of sacred memory
   which I have inherited from him. When he comes to present himself
   before you, you will learn with what reverence he has been treated.
   Indeed it is not wonderful, whatever I have done on his behalf; for the
   thoughts of your longing desire for him, and the appearance of so great
   a man, moved my soul, and urged me thereto. May Divine Providence
   continually preserve you, beloved brethren.

   Dated from Treveri the 15th before the Calends of July [739] .

   88. This being the reason why I was sent away into Gaul, who, I ask
   again, does not plainly perceive the intention of the Emperor, and the
   murderous spirit of Eusebius and his fellows, and that the Emperor had
   done this in order to prevent their forming some more desperate scheme?
   for he listened to them in simplicity [740] . Such were the practices
   of Eusebius and his fellows, and such their machinations against me.
   Who that has witnessed them will deny that nothing has been done in my
   favour out of partiality, but that that great number of Bishops both
   individually and collectively wrote as they did in my behalf and
   condemned the falsehood of my enemies justly, and in accordance with
   the truth? Who that has observed such proceedings as these will deny
   that Valens and Ursacius had good reason to condemn themselves, and to
   write [741] as they did, to accuse themselves when they repented,
   choosing rather to suffer shame for a short time, than to undergo the
   punishment of false accusers for ever and ever [742] ?

   89. Wherefore also my blessed fellow-ministers, acting justly and
   according to the laws of the Church, while certain affirmed that my
   case was doubtful, and endeavoured to compel them to annul the sentence
   which was passed in my favour, have now endured all manner of
   sufferings, and have chosen rather to be banished than to see the
   judgment of so many Bishops reversed. Now if those genuine Bishops had
   withstood by words only those who plotted against me, and wished to
   undo all that had been done in my behalf; or if they had been ordinary
   men, and not the Bishops of illustrious cities, and the heads of great
   Churches, there would have been room to suspect that in this instance
   they too had acted contentiously and in order to gratify me. But when
   they not only endeavoured to convince by argument, but also endured
   banishment, and one of them is Liberius, Bishop of Rome, (for although
   he did not endure [743] to the end the sufferings of banishment, yet he
   remained in his exile for two years, being aware of conspiracy formed
   against us), and since there is also the great Hosius, together with
   the Bishops of Italy, and of Gaul, and others from Spain, and from
   Egypt, and Libya, and all those from Pentapolis (for although for a
   little while, through fear of the threats of Constantius, he seemed not
   to resist them [744] yet the great violence and tyrannical power
   exercised by Constantius, and the many insults and stripes inflicted
   upon him, proved that it was not because he gave up my cause, but
   through the weakness of old age, being unable to bear the stripes, that
   he yielded to them for a season), therefore I say, it is altogether
   right that all, as being fully convinced, should hate and abominate the
   injustice and the violence which they have used towards me; especially
   as it is well known that I have suffered these things on account of
   nothing else but the Arian impiety.

   90. Now if anyone wishes to become acquainted with my case, and the
   falsehood of Eusebius and his fellows, let him read what has been
   written in my behalf, and let him hear the witnesses, not one, or two,
   or three, but that great number of Bishops; and again let him attend to
   the witnesses of these proceedings, Liberius and Hosius, and their
   fellows, who when they saw the attempts made against us, chose rather
   to endure all manner of sufferings than to give up the truth, and the
   judgment which had been pronounced in our favour. And this they did
   with an honourable and righteous intention, for what they suffered
   proves to what straits the other Bishops were reduced. And they are
   memorials and records against the Arian heresy, and the wickedness of
   false accusers, and afford a pattern and model for those who come
   after, to contend for the truth unto death [745] , and to abominate the
   Arian heresy which fights against Christ, and is a forerunner of
   Antichrist, and not to believe those who attempt to speak against me.
   For the defence put forth, and the sentence given, by so many Bishops
   of high character, are a trustworthy and sufficient testimony in our
   behalf.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [691] Cf. §17, note 1.

   [692] Cf. §59.

   [693] [poles: i.e. palm them off on the church. Cf. Lat. venditare.]

   [694] Cf. §64.

   [695] Cf. §64.

   [696] Cf. §60.

   [697] Cf. §60.

   [698] [The archbishop' is Meletius; this is the first occurrence of the
   word; it evidently has not its later fixed sense. The historical
   allusion is obscure.]

   [699] A village on the Mareotic lake. vid. Socr. iv. 23. Athan Opp. ed.
   Pat. t. 3. p. 86-89.

   [700] [Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) sub. fin. and ch. v. §3a.]

   [701] Supr. §13.

   [702] Cf. Encycl. §3.

   [703] Curiosus; the Curiosi (in curis agendis) were properly the
   overseers of the public roads, Du Cange in voc., but they became in
   consequence a sort of imperial spy and were called the Emperor's eyes.
   Gothofr. in Cod. Theod. t. 2. p. 194. ed. 1665. Constantius confined
   them to the school of the Agentes in rebus (infr. Apol. ad Const.
   §10.), under the Master of the Offices. Gothoft. ibid. p. 192.

   [704] Prov. xxv. 7, LXX, xix. 5.

   [705] Cf. §12.

   [706] a.d. 324.

   [707] Supr. §64.

   [708] cheir, infr. Apol. ad Const. §11.

   [709] On the different kinds of Ducenaries, vid. Gothofr. in Cod.
   Theod. XI. vii. 1. Here, as in Euseb. Hist. vii. 30. the word stands
   for a Procurator, whose annual pay amounted to 200 sestertia, vid.
   Salmas. Hist. Aug. t. l. p. 533. In like manner a Centenary is one who
   receives 100.

   [710] The title Patrician was revived by Constantine as a personal
   distinction. It was for life, and gave precedence over all the great
   officers of state except the Consul. It was usually bestowed on
   favourites, or on ministers as a reward of services. Gibbon, Hist. ch.
   17. This Julius Constantius, who was the father of Julian, was the
   first who bore the title, with L. Optatus, who had been consul the
   foregoing year. Illustrissimus was the highest of the three ranks of
   honour. ibid.

   [711] [Sep. 8. 335 a.d. See note on leap-year at the end of the table
   of Egyptian months, below, Introd. to Letters.]

   [712] Colluthus formed a schism on the doctrine that God was not the
   cause of any sort of evil, e.g. did not inflict pain and suffering.
   Though a Priest, he took on himself to ordain, even to the Priesthood
   [§12]. St. Alexander even seems to imply that he did so for money.
   Theod. H. E. i. 3. [Prolegg. ch. ii. §2.]

   [713] [Ath. had refused to attend a synod at Cæsarea, a.d. 334. See
   Thdt. H. E. i. 28, Prolegg. ch. ii. §4. and D.C.B. ii. 315 b.]

   [714] Cf. Euseb. v. Const. ii. 48.

   [715] Cf. §16.

   [716] Cf. §§17, 65, 70.

   [717] At Tyre.

   [718] Perhaps president of the Council, cf. §20. [But see Prolegg. ch.
   ii. §5.]

   [719] i.e. my beloved lord.

   [720] Jer. ix. 2.

   [721] Acts xxiv. 18, 19.

   [722] Acts xxv. 16.

   [723] Vid. §46.

   [724] Vid. Encyc. §3, p. 43, note 2.

   [725] Vid. de Syn. §21.

   [726] [i.e. Church, see D.C.A. s.v. Martyrium.]

   [727] That Chorepiscopi were real Bishops, vid. Bevereg. in Conc.
   Ancyr. Can. 13. Routh in Conc. Neocæs. Can. 13. referring to Rhabanus
   Maurus. Thomassin on the other hand denies that they were Bishops,
   Discipl. Eccl. i. 2. c. 1. [see D.C.A. s.v.]

   [728] Ten under each Presbyter. Vales ad Socr. Hist. i. 27. Ten
   altogether, Montfaucon in loc. with more probability; and so Tillemont,
   vol. 8. p. 20. [Six villages are mentioned supr. §64, fin.]

   [729] It was against the Canon of Sardica, and doubtless against
   ancient usage, to ordain a Bishop for so small a village, vid. Bingham,
   Antiqu. II. xii., who, however, maintains by instances, that at least
   small towns might be sees. Also it was against usage that a layman, as
   Ischyras, should be made a Bishop. ibid. x. 4, &c. St. Hilary, however,
   makes him a Deacon. Fragm. ii. 16.

   [730] Dogs without owners, and almost in a wild state, abound, as is
   well known, in Eastern cities; vid. Psalm lix. 6, 14, 15; 2 Kings ix.
   35, 36. and for the view taken in Scripture of dogs, vid. Bochart,
   Hieroz. ii. 56 [and Dict. Bib. s.v.].

   [731] Catholicus, §14, Apol. Const. §10. [The mention, below, of
   Augusti and Cæsars' makes 337 the earliest likely date for this
   letter.]

   [732] Cf. §17. note 7. [Prolegg. ch. ii. §4.]

   [733] Cf. §9.

   [734] Euseb. v. Const. ii. 48.

   [735] stratopedon, §70. note 6.

   [736] "Once in an entertainment, at which he (Constantine) received
   Bishops, he made the remark that he too was a Bishop; using pretty much
   these words in my hearing, You are Bishops of matters within the
   Church, I am appointed by God to be Bishop of matters external to it."
   Euseb. Vit. Const. iv. 24.

   [737] Constantinople.

   [738] [See Bright, Hist. Writ. p. xii. note 3, and on the date of this
   letter, Prolegg. ch. v. §3 b, and note 6 below.]

   [739] June 17. a.d. 337 [see Gwatk. Stud., 136].

   [740] epekouse gar haplos. Montfaucon in Onomast. (Athan. t. 2. ad
   calc.) points out some passages in his author, where epakouein, like
   hupakouein, means "to answer." vid. Apol. Const. §16 init. Orat. iii.
   27 fin.

   [741] Cf. §58.

   [742] Here ends the second part of the Apology, as is evident by
   turning back to §58. (supr. p. 130) to which this paragraph is an
   allusion. The express object of the second part was to prove, what has
   now been proved by documents, that Valens and Ursacius did but succumb
   to plain facts which they could not resist. It is observable too from
   this passage that the Apology was written before their relapse, i.e.
   before a.d. 351 or 352. The remaining two sections are often after 357,
   as they mention the fall of Liberius and Hosius, and speak of
   Constantius in different language from any which has been found above.
   [Introd. to Apol. Const. and Hist. Ar.]

   [743] See Hist. Ar. §41.

   [744] Cf. Apol. Fug.; §5, and Hist. Ar. §45.

   [745] Ecclus. iv. 28.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Additional Note on Apol. C. Arianos, §50.

   List of Bishops Present at Sardica.

   The materials for an authentic list are (1) the names given by
   Athanasius, Apol. c. Ar. 50, previous to the lists of bishops from
   various provinces who signed the letter of the council when in
   circulation. These names, given with no specification of their sees,
   are 77 in number. (2) The list of signatures to the letter of the
   council to Julius, given by Hilary, Fragm. ii., 59 in number. The
   signatures to the letters discovered by Maffei and printed in Migne,
   Patr. Gr. xxvi. 1331, sqq. Of these, 26 sign (3) the council's letter
   to the Mareotic Churches, and 61, in part the same, sign (4) the letter
   of Athanasius to the same (Letter 46 in this volume). These signatures
   comprise 30 names not given by Hilary, while those in (1) add six which
   are absent from (2) and (3) alike. This raises the total to 95. We add
   (5) Gratus of Carthage, present according to the Greek text of the
   Canons, although he afterward signed the letter in a local council of
   his own, like Maximin of Treveri, Verissimus of Lyons, and Arius of
   Palestine, who are therefore given by Athanasius in his second list
   (the former two being omitted from the first): also Euphrates of
   Cologne, who was sent by Constans to Antioch with the council's
   decisions (Prolegg. ch. ii. §6), and was therefore most likely present
   at the council itself. We thus get 97 in all.

   This total is confirmed if we subtract from the 170 more or less' of
   Hist. Arian. 15 the 76 seceders to Philippopolis (Sabinus in Socr. ii.
   16), 73 of whom sign their letter, given by Hilary. This leaves 94 more
   or less,' so that the list now to be given, in elucidation of that of
   Athanasius, has strong claims to rank as approximately correct. The
   numbers after the names refer to the sources (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) specified
   above. 1. Adolius (1), See unknown; 2. Aetius (1, 3), Thessalonica in
   Macedonia; 3. Alexander (1, 4), Cypara (i.e. Cyparissus?) in Achaia; 4.
   Alexander (2), Montemnae (?) in Achaia; 5. Alexander (1, 2, 3), Larissa
   in Thessaly; 6. Alypius (1, 2, 3), Megara in Achaia; 7. Amantius (1,
   4), Viminacium, by deputy; 8. Ammonius (4), See unknown; 9. Anianus (1,
   2, 4), Casiulo in Spain; 10. Antigonus (1, 4), Pella, or Pallene in
   Macedonia; 11. Appianus (4), See unknown; 12. Aprianus (1, 4), Peiabio
   (Petovio) in Pannonia; 13. Aprianus (4), See unknown; 14. Arius (1, 2,
   3), of Palestine, See unknown (see note on Hist. Ar. 18); 15. Asclepas
   (1, 2, 4), Gasa; 16. Asterius (1, 2, 3), [Petra in] Arabia; 17.
   Athanasius (1, 2, 3, 4), Alexandria; 18. Athenodorus (1, 2, 3, 4),
   Platæa in Achaia; 19. Bassus (1, 2, 3), Diocletianapolis "in Macedonia"
   (really in Thrace); 20. Calepodius (1, 2, 3), of Campania (? Naples);
   21. Calvus (2, 4), Castrum Martis in Dacia Ripensis; 22. Caloes or
   Chalbis' (1, 4), See unknown; 23. Castus (1, 2, 4), Saragossa in Spain;
   24. Cocras (2), Asapofebiae in Achaia (= Asopus), perhaps the Socrates'
   of (1); 25. Cydonius (4), Cydon in Crete; 26. Diodorus (1, 2, 4),
   Tenedos; 27. Dionysius (1, 2, 3), Elida (Elis?) in Achaia; 28.
   Dioscorus (1, 2, 3), Thrace, See unknown; 29. Dometius (or Domitianus)
   (1, 4), Acaria Constantias (possibly Castra Constantia = Coutances);
   30. Domitianus (1, 2, 3), Asturica in Spain; 31. Eliodorus (1, 2, 3),
   Nicopolis; 32. Eucarpus (1, 4), Opus in Achaia; 33. Eucarpus (4), See
   unknown; 34. Eucissus (4), Cissamus in Crete; 35. Eugenius (4 =
   Euagrius in 2?), Heraclea (in Lucania? texts very corrupt); 36.
   Eugenius (1?, 4), See unknown; 37. Eulogius (1, 4), See unknown;
   Euphrates, see below (97); 38. Eutasius (2), Pannonia, See unknown; 39.
   Euterius (1, 2), Procia de Cayndo' (corrupt); 40. Eutychius (1, 4),
   Methone in Achaia; 41. Eutychius (1, 2), Achia, See unknown; 42.
   Florentius (1, 2, 4), Emerita in Spain; 43. Fortunatianus (1, 2),
   Aquileia; Galba (see above (22); 44. Gaudentius (1, 2, 4), Naissus; 45.
   Gerontius (1, 2, 3, 4), a Macedonia in Brevi(?) in Hil.; Gratus, see
   below (96); 46. Helianus (1, 4), Tyrtana (?); Heliodorus, see above
   (31); 47. Hermogenes (1, 4), Sicyai (?); 48. Hymenaeus (1, 2, 4),
   Hypata in Thessaly; 49. Januarius (1, 2, 4), Beneventum in Campania;
   50. John (3), See unknown; 51. Jonas (1, 2, 3), Particopolis in
   Macedonia; 52. Irenæus (1, 2, 4), Scyros in Achaia; 53. Julianus (1, 2,
   4), of Thebes in Achaia (or Thera? see note to Letter 46); 54. Julianus
   (1, 4), See unknown; Julius, see below (95); Lerenius (2), see above
   (52); 55. Lucius (1, 2, 3, 4), Hadrianople in Thrace; 56. Lucius
   (Lucillus' Ath. twice) (1, 2, 4), Verona; 57. Macedonius (1, 2, 4),
   Ulpiana in Dardania; 58. Marcellus (2, 4, Marcellinus in 1), Ancyra;
   59. Marcus (1, 2, 4), Siscia on the Save; 60. Martyrius (2, 4),
   Naupactus in Achaia; 61. Martyrius (1, 4), See unknown; 62. Maximus (1,
   2), Luca in Tuscany; 63. Maximus (i.e. Maximinus) (4), Treviri; 64.
   Musonius (1, 4), Heraclea in Crete; 65. Moyses (or Musaeus, 1, 2),
   Thebes in Thessaly; 66. Olympius (4), Aeni in Thrace; 67. Osius
   (Hosius), (1, 2, 3), Cordova; 68. Palladius (1, 2, 4), Dium in
   Macedonia; 69. Paregorius (1, 2, 3, 4), Scupi in Dardania; 70.
   Patricius (1), See unknown; 71. Peter (1), See unknown; 72. Philologius
   (1), See unknown; 73. Plutarchus (1, 2, 3), Patrae in Achaia; 74.
   Porphyrius (1, 2, 3, 4), Philippi in Macedonia; 75. Prætextatus (1, 2,
   4), Barcelona; 76. Protasius (1, 2, 4), Milan; 77. Protogenes (1, 2,
   4), Sardica; 78. Restitutus (1, 3), See unknown; 79. Sapricius (1), See
   unknown; 80. Severus (4), Chalcis in Thessaly (Euboea); 81. Severus (1,
   2, 3), Ravenna; Socrates (1), see above, no. 24; 82. Spudasius (1), See
   unknown; 83. Stercorius (1, 2, 4), Canusium in Apulia; 84. Symphorus
   (1, 4), Hierapythna in Crete; Titius (2), see above (40); 85. Trypho
   (1, 2, 4), Achaia (See uncertain from corruption of text); 86. Valens
   (1, 2, 3), Scio' in Dacia Ripensis; 87. Verissimus (2, 4, text of
   latter gives Broseus' corruptly), Lyons; 88. Vincentius (1, 2, 3),
   Capua; 89. Vitalis (1, 2), Aquae in Dacia Ripensis; 90. Vitalis 1, 3,
   4), Vertara in Africa; 91. Ursacius (1, 2, 4), Brixia in Italy; 92.
   Zosimus (1, 2, 4), Lychnidus or Lignidus in Dacia; 93. Zosimus (1, 4),
   Horrea Margi in Moesia; 94. Zosimus (1, 4), See unknown; 95. Julius (1,
   4), Rome (by deputies); 96. Gratus (5), Carthage; 97. Euphrates (5),
   Cologne.

   The names, both of bishops and of sees, have suffered much in
   transcription, and the above list is the result of comparing the
   divergent errors of the various lists. The details of the latter will
   be found in the originals, and in the discussion of the Ballerini, on
   whose work (in Leonis M. Opp. vol. iii. pp. xlii. sqq.) our list is
   founded. In some cases the names of the see are clearly corrupt beyond
   all recognition. The signatures appended to the canons in the
   collections of councils, are taken (with certain uncritical
   adaptations) from the Hilarian list, with the addition, in some copies,
   of Alexander (3 supra), whose name, therefore, has probably dropped out
   of the Hilarian text in course of transmission.]
