# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume IV.   Athanasius - Select Writings and Letters
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume IV.
# father: athanasius
# work: Letter of Eusebius on the Council of Nicaea
# latin_match_candidate: Epistula Eusebii Caesariensis
# clavis: CPG-3502
# extracted: 2026-09-24
# note: Public-domain Schaff/Robertson English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
   Epistola Eusebii.

   ------------------------

   Introduction.

   The letter which follows, addressed by Eusebius of Cæsarea to his
   flock, upon the conclusion of the great Synod, is appended by
   Athanasius to his defense of the Definition of Nicæa (de Decretis),
   written about a.d. 350. It is, however, inserted here in the present
   edition, partly in accordance with the chronological principle of
   arrangement, but principally because it forms the fittest introduction
   to the series of treatises which follow. Along with the account of
   Eustathius in Theodoret H. E. i. 8, and that given by Eusebius, in his
   life of Constantine (vol. I. pp. 521-526 of this series), it forms one
   of our most important authorities for the proceedings at Nicæa, and the
   only account we have dating from the actual year of the Council. It is
   especially important as containing the draft Creed submitted to the
   Council by Eusebius, and the revised form of it eventually adopted. The
   former, which contained (in the first paragraph of §3, from We believe'
   down to One Holy Ghost') the traditional Creed of the Church of
   Cæsarea, which Eusebius had professed at his baptism, was laid by him
   before the Council, and approved: but at the Emperor's suggestion the
   single word homoousion was inserted (not by the majority' as distinct
   from the Emperor, as stated by Swainson, Creeds, p. 65). This
   modification opened the door for others, which eventually resulted in
   the Creed given in §4. It is not altogether easy to reconcile this
   account with that given by Athanasius himself (below de Decr. 19, 20,
   Ad Afr. 5), according to which the Council were led to insist on the
   insertion of the homoousion by the evasions with which the Arian
   bishops met every other test that was propounded, signalling to each
   other by nods winks and gestures, as each Scriptural attribute of the
   Son was enumerated, that this also could be accepted in an Arian sense.
   Probably (see Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) note 5) the discussions thus
   described came first (cp. Sozom. i. 17): then Eusebius of Nicomedia
   presented the document which was indignantly torn up: then came the
   Confession of Eusebius of Cæsarea, which was adopted as the basis of
   the Creed finally issued. In any case the Emperor's suggestion of the
   insertion of homoousion must have been prompted by others, most likely
   by Hosius (Hist. Ar. 42, Cf. Hort, Two Dissertations, p. 58. Gwatkin,
   Studies, pp. 44, 45, puts the scene described by Athanasius during the
   debate upon the final adoption of the Creed).

   The translation which follows, with the notes and Excursus A, is the
   unaltered work of Newman (Library of the Fathers, vol. 8, pp. 59-72),
   except that the word essence' (for ousia), as throughout this volume,
   has been substituted for substance,' and the translation of genetos by
   generate' altered wherever it occurs, as explained in the preface.
   Additions by the editor of this volume are here as elsewhere included
   in square brackets.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Council of Nicæa.

   ------------------------

   Letter of Eusebius of Cæsarea to the people of his Diocese [413] .

   1. What was transacted concerning ecclesiastical faith at the Great
   Council assembled at Nicæa, you have probably learned, Beloved, from
   other sources, rumour being wont to precede the accurate account of
   what is doing. But lest in such reports the circumstances of the case
   have been misrepresented, we have been obliged to transmit to you,
   first, the formula of faith presented by ourselves, and next, the
   second, which [the Fathers] put forth with some additions to our words.
   Our own paper, then, which was read in the presence of our most pious
   [414] Emperor, and declared to be good and unexceptionable, ran thus:--

   2. "As we have received from the Bishops who preceded us, and in our
   first catechisings, and when we received the Holy Laver, and as we have
   learned from the divine Scriptures, and as we believed and taught in
   the presbytery, and in the Episcopate itself, so believing also at the
   time present, we report to you our faith, and it is this [415] :"--

   3. "We believe in One God, the Father Almighty, the Maker of all things
   visible and invisible. And in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God,
   God from God, Light from Light, Life from Life, Son Only-begotten,
   first-born of every creature, before all the ages, begotten from the
   Father, by Whom also all things were made; Who for our salvation was
   made flesh, and lived among men, and suffered, and rose again the third
   day, and ascended to the Father, and will come again in glory to judge
   the quick and dead. And we believe also in One Holy Ghost:"

   "believing each of these to be and to exist, the Father truly Father,
   and the Son truly Son, and the Holy Ghost truly Holy Ghost, as also our
   Lord, sending forth His disciples for the preaching, said, "Go teach
   all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son,
   and of the Holy Ghost [416] ." Concerning Whom we confidently affirm
   that so we hold, and so we think, and so we have held aforetime, and we
   maintain this faith unto the death, anathematizing every godless
   heresy. That this we have ever thought from our heart and soul, from
   the time we recollect ourselves, and now think and say in truth, before
   God Almighty and our Lord Jesus Christ do we witness, being able by
   proofs to shew and to convince you, that, even in times past, such has
   been our belief and preaching."

   4. On this faith being publicly put forth by us, no room for
   contradiction appeared; but our most pious Emperor, before any one
   else, testified that it comprised most orthodox statements. He
   confessed moreover that such were his own sentiments, and he advised
   all present to agree to it, and to subscribe its articles and to assent
   to them, with the insertion of the single word, One-in-essence, which
   moreover he interpreted as not in the sense of the affections of
   bodies, nor as if the Son subsisted from the Father in the way of
   division, or any severance; for that the immaterial, and intellectual,
   and incorporeal nature could not be the subject of any corporeal
   affection, but that it became us to conceive of such things in a divine
   and ineffable manner. And such were the theological remarks of our most
   wise and most religious Emperor; but they, with a view [417] to the
   addition of One in essence, drew up the following formula:--

   The Faith dictated in the Council.

   "We believe in One God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things
   visible and invisible:"--

   "And in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father,
   Only-begotten, that is, from the essence of the Father; God from God,
   Light from Light, Very God from Very God, begotten not made, One in
   essence with the Father, by Whom all things were made, both things in
   heaven and things in earth; Who for us men and for our salvation came
   down and was made flesh, was made man, suffered, and rose again the
   third day, ascended into heaven, and cometh to judge quick and dead."

   "And in the Holy Ghost."

   "And those who say, Once He was not,' and Before His generation He was
   not,' and He came to be from nothing,' or those who pretend that the
   Son of God is Of other subsistence or essence [418] ,' or created' or
   alterable,' or mutable,' the Catholic Church anathematizes."

   5. On their dictating this formula, we did not let it pass without
   inquiry in what sense they introduced "of the essence of the Father,"
   and "one in essence with the Father." Accordingly questions and
   explanations took place, and the meaning of the words underwent the
   scrutiny of reason. And they professed, that the phrase "of the
   essence" was indicative of the Son's being indeed from the Father, yet
   without being as if a part of Him. And with this understanding we
   thought good to assent to the sense of such religious doctrine,
   teaching, as it did, that the Son was from the Father, not however a
   part of His essence [419] . On this account we assented to the sense
   ourselves, without declining even the term "One in essence," peace
   being the object which we set before us, and stedfastness in the
   orthodox view.

   6. In the same way we also admitted "begotten, not made;" since the
   Council alleged that "made" was an appellative common to the other
   creatures which came to be through the Son, to whom the Son had no
   likeness. Wherefore, say they, He was not a work resembling the things
   which through Him came to be [420] , but was of an essence which is too
   high for the level of any work; and which the Divine oracles teach to
   have been generated from the Father [421] , the mode of generation
   being inscrutable and incalculable to every originated nature.

   7. And so too on examination there are grounds for saying that the Son
   is "one in essence" with the Father; not in the way of bodies, nor like
   mortal beings, for He is not such by division of essence, or by
   severance, no, nor by any affection, or alteration, or changing of the
   Father's essence and power [422] (since from all such the unoriginate
   nature of the Father is alien), but because "one in essence with the
   Father" suggests that the Son of God bears no resemblance to the
   originated creatures, but that to His Father alone Who begat Him is He
   in every way assimilated, and that He is not of any other subsistence
   and essence, but from the Father [423] . To which term also, thus
   interpreted, it appeared well to assent; since we were aware that even
   among the ancients, some learned and illustrious Bishops and writers
   [424] have used the term "one in essence," in their theological
   teaching concerning the Father and Son.

   8. So much then be said concerning the faith which was published; to
   which all of us assented, not without inquiry, but according to the
   specified senses, mentioned before the most religious Emperor himself,
   and justified by the forementioned considerations. And as to the
   anathematism published by them at the end of the Faith, it did not pain
   us, because it forbade to use words not in Scripture, from which almost
   all the confusion and disorder of the Church have come. Since then no
   divinely inspired Scripture has used the phrases, "out of nothing," and
   "once He was not," and the rest which follow, there appeared no ground
   for using or teaching them; to which also we assented as a good
   decision, since it had not been our custom hitherto to use these terms.

   9. Moreover to anathematize "Before His generation He was not," did not
   seem preposterous, in that it is confessed by all, that the Son of God
   was before the generation according to the flesh [425] .

   10. Nay, our most religious Emperor did at the time prove, in a speech,
   that He was in being even according to His divine generation which is
   before all ages, since even before He was generated in energy, He was
   in virtue [426] with the Father ingenerately, the Father being always
   Father, as King always, and Saviour always, being all things in virtue,
   and being always in the same respects and in the same way.

   11. This we have been forced to transmit to you, Beloved, as making
   clear to you the deliberation of our inquiry and assent, and how
   reasonably we resisted even to the last minute as long as we were
   offended at statements which differed from our own, but received
   without contention what no longer pained us, as soon as, on a candid
   examination of the sense of the words, they appeared to us to coincide
   with what we ourselves have professed in the faith which we have
   already published.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [413] This Letter is also found in Socr. H. E. i. 8. Theod. H. E. i.
   Gelas. Hist. Nic. ii. 34. p. 442. Niceph. Hist. viii. 22.

   [414] And so infr. "most pious," §4. "most wise and most religious,"
   ibid. "most religious," §8. §10. Eusebius observes in his Vit. Const.
   the same tone concerning Constantine, and assigns to him the same
   office in determining the faith (being as yet unbaptized). E.g. "When
   there were differences between persons of different countries, as if
   some common bishop appointed by God, he convened Councils of God's
   ministers; and not disdaining to be present and to sit amid their
   conferences," &c. i. 44. When he came into the Nicene Council, "it
   was," says Eusebius, "as some heavenly Angel of God," iii. 10. alluding
   to the brilliancy of the imperial purple. He confesses, however, he did
   not sit down until the Bishops bade him. Again at the same Council,
   "with pleasant eyes looking serenity itself into them all, collecting
   himself, and in a quiet and gentle voice" he made an oration to the
   Fathers upon peace. Constantine had been an instrument in conferring
   such vast benefits, humanly speaking, on the Christian Body, that it is
   not wonderful that other writers of the day besides Eusebius should
   praise him. Hilary speaks of him as "of sacred memory," Fragm. v. init.
   Athanasius calls him "most pious," Apol. contr. Arian. 9; "of blessed
   memory," ad Ep. Æg. 18. 19. Epiphanius "most religious and of
   ever-blessed memory," Hær. 70. 9. Posterity, as was natural, was still
   more grateful.

   [415] "The children of the Church have received from their holy
   Fathers, that is, the holy Apostles, to guard the faith; and withal to
   deliver and preach it to their own children....Cease not, faithful and
   orthodox men, thus to speak, and to teach the like from the divine
   Scriptures, and to walk, and to catechise, to the confirmation of
   yourselves and those who hear you; namely, that holy faith of the
   Catholic Church, as the holy and only Virgin of God received its
   custody from the holy Apostles of the Lord; and thus, in the case of
   each of those who are under catechising, who are to approach the Holy
   Laver, ye ought not only to preach faith to your children in the Lord,
   but also to teach them expressly, as your common mother teaches, to
   say: We believe in One God,'" &c. Epiph. Ancor. 119 fin., who thereupon
   proceeds to give at length the [so-called] Constantinopolitan Creed.
   And so Athan. speaks of the orthodox faith, as "issuing from
   Apostolical teaching and the Fathers' traditions, and confirmed by New
   and Old Testament." Letter 60. 6. init. Cyril Hier. too as "declared by
   the Church and established from all Scripture." Cat. v. 12. "Let us
   guard with vigilance what we have received...What then have we received
   from the Scriptures but altogether this? that God made the world by the
   Word," &c., &c. Procl. ad Armen. p. 612. "That God, the Word, after the
   union remained such as He was, &c., so clearly hath divine Scripture,
   and moreover the doctors of the Churches, and the lights of the world
   taught us." Theodor. Dial. 3 init. "That it is the tradition of the
   Fathers is not the whole of our case; for they too followed the meaning
   of Scripture, starting from the testimonies, which just now we laid
   before you from Scripture." Basil de Sp. §16. vid. also a remarkable
   passage in de Synod. §6 fin. infra.

   [416] Matt. xxviii. 19.

   [417] [Or, taking the addition as their pretext.']

   [418] The only clauses of the Creed which admit of any question in
   their explanation, are the "He was not before His generation," and "of
   other subsistence or essence." Of these the former shall be reserved
   for a later part of the volume; the latter is treated of in a note at
   the end of this Treatise [see Excursus A.].

   [419] Eusebius does not commit himself to any positive sense in which
   the formula "of the essence" is to be interpreted, but only says what
   it does not mean. His comment on it is "of the Father, but not as a
   part;" where, what is not negative, instead of being an explanation, is
   but a recurrence to the original words of Scripture, of which ex ousias
   itself is the explanation; a curious inversion. Indeed it is very
   doubtful whether he admitted the ex ousias at all. He says, that the
   Son is not like the radiance of light so far as this, that the radiance
   is an inseparable accident of substance, whereas the Son is by the
   Father's will, kata gnomen kai proairesin, Demonstr. Ev. iv. 3. And
   though he insists on our Lord being alone, ek theou, yet he means in
   the sense which Athan. refutes, supr. §6, viz. that He alone was
   created immediately from God, vid. next note 6. It is true that he
   plainly condemns with the Nicene Creed the ex ouk onton of the Arians,
   "out of nothing," but an evasion was at hand here also; for he not only
   adds, according to Arian custom, "as others" (vid. note following) but
   he has a theory that no being whatever is out of nothing, for
   non-existence cannot be the cause of existence. God, he says, "proposed
   His own will and power as a sort of matter and substance' of the
   production and constitution of the universe, so that it is not
   reasonably said, that any thing is out of nothing. For what is from
   nothing cannot be at all. How indeed can nothing be to any thing a
   cause of being? but all that is, takes its being from One who only is,
   and was, who also said I am that I am.'" Demonstr. Ev. iv. 1. Again,
   speaking of our Lord, "He who was from nothing would not truly be Son
   of God, as neither is any other of things generate.'" Eccl. Theol. i. 9
   fin. [see, however, D.C.B. ii. p. 347].

   [420] Eusebius distinctly asserts, Dem. Ev. iv. 2, that our Lord is a
   creature. "This offspring," he says, "did He first produce Himself from
   Himself as a foundation of those things which should succeed, the
   perfect handy-work, demiourgema, of the Perfect, and the wise
   structure, architektonema, of the Wise," &c. Accordingly his avowal in
   the text is but the ordinary Arian evasion of "an offspring, not as the
   offsprings." E.g. "It is not without peril to say recklessly that the
   Son is originate out of nothing similarly to the other things
   originate.'" Dem. Ev. v. 1. vid. also Eccl. Theol. i. 9. iii. 2. And he
   considers our Lord the only Son by a divine provision similar to that
   by which there is only one sun in the firmament, as a centre of light
   and heat. "Such an Only-begotten Son, the excellent artificer of His
   will and operator, did the supreme God and Father of that operator
   Himself first of all beget, through Him and in Him giving subsistence
   to the operative words (ideas or causes) of things which were to be,
   and casting in Him the seeds of the constitution and governance of the
   universe;...Therefore the Father being One, it behoved the Son to be
   one also; but should any one object that He constituted not more, it is
   fitting for such a one to complain that He constituted not more suns,
   and moons, and worlds, and ten thousand other things." Dem. Ev. iv. 5
   fin. vid. also iv. 6.

   [421] Eusebius does not say that our Lord is "from the essence of" the
   Father, but has "an essence from" the Father. This is the Semi-arian
   doctrine, which, whether confessing the Son from the essence of the
   Father or not, implied that His essence was not the Father's essence,
   but a second essence. The same doctrine is found in the Semi-arians of
   Ancyra, though they seem to have confessed "of the essence." And this
   is one object of the homoousion, to hinder the confession "of the
   essence" from implying a second essence, which was not obviated or was
   even encouraged by the homoiousion. The Council of Ancyra, quoting the
   text "As the Father hath life in Himself so," &c., says, "since the
   life which is in the Father means essence, and the life of the
   Only-begotten which is begotten from the Father means essence, the word
   so' implies a likeness of essence to essence." Hær. 73. 10 fin. Hence
   Eusebius does not scruple to speak of "two essences," and other writers
   of three essences, contr. Marc. i. 4. p. 25. He calls our Lord "a
   second essence." Dem. Ev. vi. Præf. Præp. Ev. vii. 12. p. 320, and the
   Holy Spirit a third essence, ibid. 15. p. 325. This it was that made
   the Latins so suspicions of three hypostases, because the Semi-arians,
   as well as they, understood hupostasis to mean essence [but this is
   dubious]. Eusebius in like manner [after Origen] calls our Lord
   "another God," "a second God." Dem. Ev. v. 4. p. 226. v. fin. "second
   Lord." ibid. 3 init. 6. fin. "second cause." Dem. Ev. v. Præf. vid.
   also heteron echousa to kat' ousian hupokeimenon, Dem. Ev. v. 1. p.
   215. kath' heauton ousiomenos. ibid. iv. 3. And so heteros para ton
   patera. Eccl. Theol. i. 60. p. 90. and zoen idian echon. ibid. and zon
   kai huphestos kai tou patros huparchon ektos. ibid. Hence Athan.
   insists so much, as in de Decr., on our Lord not being external to the
   Father. Once admit that He is in the Father, and we may call the
   Father, the only God, for He is included. And so again as to the
   Ingenerate, the term does not exclude the Son, for He is generate in
   the Ingenerate.

   [422] This was the point on which the Semi-arians made their principal
   stand against the "one in essence," though they also objected to it as
   being of a Sabellian character. E.g. Euseb. Demonstr. iv. 3. p. 148.
   d.p. 149. a, b. v. 1. pp. 213-215. contr. Marcell. i. 4. p. 20. Eccl.
   Theol. i. 12. p. 73. in laud. Const. p. 525. de Fide i. ap. Sirmond.
   tom. i. p. 7. de Fide ii. p. 16, and apparently his de Incorporali. And
   so the Semi-arians at Ancyra Epiph. Hær. 73. 11. p. 858. a, b. And so
   Meletius ibid. p. 878 fin. and Cyril Hier. Catech. vii. 5. xi. 18.
   though of course Catholics would speak as strongly on this point as
   their opponents.

   [423] Here again Eusebius does not say "from the Father's essence," but
   "not from other essence, but from the Father." According to note 5,
   supr. he considered the will of God a certain matter or substance.
   Montfaucon in loc. and Collect. Nov. Præf. p. xxvi. translates without
   warrant "ex Patris hypostasi et substantiâ." As to the Son's perfect
   likeness to the Father which he seems here to grant, it has been
   already shewn, de Decr. 20, note 9, how the admission was evaded. The
   likeness was but a likeness after its own kind, as a picture is of the
   original. "Though our Saviour Himself teaches," he says, "that the
   Father is the only true God,' still let me not be backward to confess
   Him also the true God, as in an image,' and that possessed; so that the
   addition of only' may belong to the Father alone as archetype of the
   image....As, supposing one king held sway, and his image was carried
   about into every quarter, no one in his right mind would say that those
   who held sway were two, but one who was honoured through his image; in
   like manner," &c. de Eccles. Theol. ii. 23, vid. ibid. 7.

   [424] Athanasius in like manner, ad Afros. 6. speaks of "testimony of
   ancient Bishops about 130 years since;" and in de Syn. §43. of "long
   before" the Council of Antioch, a.d. 269. viz. the Dionysii, &c. vid.
   note on de Decr. 20.

   [425] Socrates, who advocates the orthodoxy of Eusebius, leaves out
   this heterodox paragraph [§§9, 10] altogether. Bull, however, Defens.
   F. N. iii. 9. n. 3. thinks it an interpolation. Athanasius alludes to
   the early part of the clause, supr. §4. and de Syn. §13. where he says,
   that Eusebius implied that the Arians denied even our Lord's existence
   before His incarnation. As to Constantine, he seems to have been used
   on these occasions by the court Bishops who were his instructors, and
   who made him the organ of their own heresy. Upon the first rise of the
   Arian controversy he addressed a sort of pastoral letter to Alexander
   and Arius, telling them that they were disputing about a question of
   words, and recommending them to drop it and live together peaceably.
   Euseb. vit. C. ii. 69. 72.

   [426] [Rather potentially' both here and three lines below.] Theognis,
   [one] of the Nicene Arians, says the same, according to Philostorgius;
   viz. "that God even before He begat the Son was a Father, as having the
   power, dunamis, of begetting." Hist. ii. 15. Though Bull pronounces
   such doctrine to be heretical, as of course it is, still he considers
   that it expresses what otherwise stated may be orthodox, viz. the
   doctrine that our Lord was called the Word from eternity, and the Son
   upon His descent to create the worlds. And he acutely and ingeniously
   interprets the Arian formula, "Before His generation He was not," to
   support this view. Another opportunity will occur of giving an opinion
   upon this question; meanwhile, the parallel on which the heretical
   doctrine is supported in the text is answered by many writers, on the
   ground that Father and Son are words of nature, but Creator, King,
   Saviour, are external, or what may be called accidental to Him. Thus
   Athanasius observes, that Father actually implies Son, but Creator only
   the power to create, as expressing a dunamis; "a maker is before his
   works, but he who says Father, forthwith in Father implies the
   existence of the Son." Orat. iii. §6. vid. Cyril too, Dial. ii. p. 459.
   Pseudo-Basil, contr. Eun. iv. 1. fin. On the other hand Origen argues
   the reverse way, that since God is eternally a Father, therefore
   eternally Creator also: "As one cannot be father without a son, nor
   lord without possession, so neither can God be called All-powerful,
   without subjects of His power;" de Princ. i. 2. n. 10. hence he argued
   for the eternity of matter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Excursus [427] A.

   ------------------------

   On the meaning of the phrase ex heteras hupostaseos e ousias in the
   Nicene Anathema.

   Bishop Bull has made it a question, whether these words in the Nicene
   Creed mean the same thing, or are to be considered distinct from each
   other, advocating himself the latter opinion against Petavius. The
   history of the word hupostasis is of too intricate a character to enter
   upon here; but a few words may be in place in illustration of its sense
   as it occurs in the Creed, and with reference to the view taken of it
   by the great divine, who has commented on it.

   Bishop Bull, as I understood him (Defens. F. N. ii. 9. §11.), considers
   that two distinct ideas are intended by the words ousia and hupostasis,
   in the clause ex heteras hupostaseos e ousias; as if the Creed
   condemned those who said that the Son was not from the Father's
   essence, and those also who said that He was not from the Father's
   hypostasis or subsistence; as if a man might hold at least one of the
   two without holding the other. And in matter of fact, he does profess
   to assign two parties of heretics, who denied this or that proposition
   respectively.

   Petavius, on the other hand (de Trin. iv. I.), considers that the word
   hupostasis is but another term for ousia, and that not two but one
   proposition is contained in the clause in question; the word hupostasis
   not being publicly recognised in its present meaning till the Council
   of Alexandria, in the year 362. Coustant. (Epist. Pont. Rom. pp. 274.
   290. 462.) Tillemont (Memoires S. Denys. d'Alex. §15.), Huet
   (Origenian. ii. 2. n. 3.), Thomassin (de Incarn. iii. 1.), and Morinus
   (de Sacr. Ordin. ii. 6.), take substantially the same view; while
   Maranus (Præf. ad S. Basil. §1. tom. 3. ed. Bened.), Natalis Alexander,
   Hist. (Sæc. 1. Diss. 22. circ. fin.), Burton (Testimonies to the
   Trinity, No. 71), and [Routh] (Reliqu. Sacr. vol. iii. p. 189.), differ
   from Petavius, if they do not agree with Bull.

   Bull's principal argument lies in the strong fact, that S. Basil
   expressly asserts, that the Council did mean the two terms to be
   distinct, and this when he is answering the Sabellians, who grounded
   their assertion that there was but one hupostasis, on the alleged fact
   that the Council had used ousia and hupostasis indifferently.

   Bull refers also to Anastasius Hodeg. 21. (22. p. 343.?) who says, that
   the Nicene Fathers defined that there are three hypostases or Persons
   in the Holy Trinity. Petavius considers that he derived this from
   Gelasius of Cyzicus, a writer of no great authority; but, as the
   passage occurs in Anastasius, they are the words of Andrew of Samosata.
   But what is more important, elsewhere Anastasius quotes a passage from
   Amphilochius to something of the same effect. c. 10. p. 164. He states
   it besides himself, c. 9. p. 150. and c. 24. p. 364. In addition, Bull
   quotes passages from S. Dionysius of Alexandria, S. Dionysius of Rome
   (vid. below, de Decr. 25-27 and notes), Eusebius of Cæsarea, and
   afterwards Origen; in all of which three hypostases being spoken of,
   whereas antiquity, early or late, never speaks in the same way of three
   ousiai, it is plain that hupostasis then conveyed an idea which ousia
   did not. To these may be added a passage in Athanasius, in Illud,
   Omnia, §6.

   Bishop Bull adds the following explanation of the two words as they
   occur in the Creed: he conceives that the one is intended to reach the
   Arians, and the other the Semi-arians; that the Semi-arians did
   actually make a distinction between ousia and hupostasis, admitting in
   a certain sense that the Son was from the hupostasis of the Father,
   while they denied that He was from His ousia. They then are
   anathematized in the words ex heteras ousias; and, as he would seem to
   mean, the Arians in the ex heteras hupostaseos.

   Now I hope it will not be considered any disrespect to so great an
   authority, if I differ from this view, and express my reasons for doing
   so.

   1. First then, supposing his account of the Semi-arian doctrine ever so
   free from objection, granting that they denied the ex ousias, and
   admitted the ex hupostaseos, yet who are they who, according to his
   view, denied the ex hupostaseos, or said that the Son was ex heteras
   hupostaseos? he does not assign any parties, though he implies the
   Arians. Yet though, as is notorious, they denied the ex ousias, there
   is nothing to shew that they or any other party of Arians maintained
   specifically that the Son was not [from] the hupostasis, or subsistence
   of the Father. That is, the hypothesis supported by this eminent divine
   does not answer the very question which it raises. It professes that
   those who denied the ex hupostaseos, were not the same as those who
   denied the ex ousias; yet it fails to tell us who did deny the ex
   hupostaseos, in a sense distinct from ex ousias.

   2. Next, his only proof that the Semi-arians did hold the ex
   hupostaseos as distinct from the ex ousias, lies in the circumstance,
   that the three (commonly called) Semi-arian confessions of a.d. 341,
   344, 351, known as Mark's of Arethusa [i.e. the fourth Antiochene'],
   the Macrostich, and the first Sirmian, anathematize those who say that
   the Son is ex heteras hupostaseos, not anathematizing the kai me ek tou
   theou, which he thence infers was their own belief. Another explanation
   of this passage will be offered presently; meanwhile, it is well to
   observe, that Hilary, in speaking of the confession of Philippopolis
   which was taken from Mark's, far from suspecting that the clause
   involved an omission, defends it on the ground of its retaining the
   Anathema (de Synod. 35.), thus implying that ex heteras hupostaseos kai
   me ek tou theou was equivalent to ex heteras hupostaseos e ousias. And
   it may be added, that Athanasius in like manner, in his account of the
   Nicene Council (de Decret. §20. fin.), when repeating its anathema,
   drops the ex hupostaseos altogether, and reads tous de legontas ex ouk
   onton,....e poiema, e ex heteras ousias, toutous anathematizei k. t. l.

   3. Further, Bull gives us no proof whatever that the Semi-arians did
   deny the ex ousias; while it is very clear, if it is right to
   contradict so great a writer, that most of them did not deny it. He
   says that it is "certissimum" that the heretics who wrote the three
   confessions above noticed, that is, the Semi-arians, "nunquam fassos,
   nunquam fassuros fuisse filium ex ousias, e substantia, Patris
   progenitum." His reason for not offering any proof for this naturally
   is, that Petavius, with whom he is in controversy, maintains it also,
   and he makes use of Petavius's admission against himself. Now it may
   seem bold in a writer of this day to differ not only with Bull, but
   with Petavius; but the reason for doing so is simple; it is because
   Athanasius asserts the very thing which Petavius and Bull deny, and
   Petavius admits that he does; that is, he allows it by implication when
   he complains that Athanasius had not got to the bottom of the doctrine
   of the Semi-arians, and thought too favourably of them. "Horum
   Semi-arianorum, quorum antesignanus fuit Basilius Ancyræ episcopus,
   prorsus obscura fuit hæresis.....ut ne ipse quidem Athanasius satis
   illam exploratam habuerit." de Trin. i. x. §7.

   Now S. Athanasius's words are most distinct and express; "As to those
   who receive all else that was defined at Nicæa, but dispute about the
   One in essence' only, we must not feel as towards enemies....for, as
   confessing that the Son is from the essence of the Father and not of
   other subsistence, ek tes ousias tou patros einai, kai me ex heteras
   hupostaseos ton huion,...they are not far from receiving the phrase One
   in essence' also. Such is Basil of Ancyra, in what he has written about
   the faith" de Syn. §41;--a passage, not only express for the matter in
   hand, but remarkable too, as apparently using hupostasis and ousia as
   synonymous, which is the main point which Bull denies. What follows in
   Athanasius is equally to the purpose: he urges the Semi-arians to
   accept the homoousion, in consistency, because they maintain the ex
   ousias and the homoiousion would not sufficiently secure it.

   Moreover Hilary, while defending the Semi-arian decrees of Ancyra or
   Sirmium, says expressly, that according to them, among other truths,
   "non creatura est Filius genitus, sed a natura Patris indiscreta
   substantia est." de Syn. 27.

   Petavius, however, in the passage to which Bull appeals, refers in
   proof of this view of Semi-arianism, to those Ancyrene documents, which
   Epiphanius has preserved, Hær. 73. and which he considers to shew, that
   according to the Semi-arians the Son was not ex ousias tou patros. He
   says, that it is plain from their own explanations that they considered
   our Lord to be, not ek tes ousias, but ek tes homoiotetos (he does not
   say hupostaseos, as Bull wishes) tou patros and that, energei& 139;
   gennetike, which was one of the divine energeiai, as creation, he
   ktistike, was another. Yet surely Epiphanius does not bear out this
   representation better than Athanasius; since the Semi-arians, whose
   words he reports, speak of "hui& 232;n homoion kai kat' ousian ek tou
   patros, p. 825 b, hos he sophia tou sophou hui& 232;s, ousia ousias, p.
   853 c, kat' ousian hui& 232;n tou Theou kai patros, p. 854 c, exousi&
   139; homou kai ousi& 139; patros monogenous huiou. p. 858 d, besides
   the strong word gnesios, ibid. and Athan. de Syn. §41. not to insist on
   other of their statements.

   The same fact is brought before us even in a more striking way in the
   conference at Constantinople, a.d. 360, before Constantius, between the
   Anomoeans and Semi-arians, where the latter, according to Theodoret,
   shew no unwillingness to acknowledge even the homoousion, because they
   acknowledge the ex ousias. When the Anomoeans wished the former
   condemned, Silvanus of Tarsus said, "If God the Word be not out of
   nothing, nor a creature, nor of other essence, ousias, therefore is He
   one in essence, homoousios, with God who begot Him, as God from God,
   and Light from Light, and He has the same nature with His Father." H.
   E. ii. 23. Here again it is observable, as in the passage from
   Athanasius above, that, while apparently reciting the Nicene Anathema,
   he omits ex heteras hupostaseos, as if it were superfluous to mention a
   synonym.

   At the same time there certainly is reason to suspect that the
   Semi-arians approximated towards orthodoxy as time went on; and perhaps
   it is hardly fair to determine what they held at Nicæa by their
   statements at Ancyra, though to the latter Petavius appeals. Several of
   the most eminent among them, as Meletius, Cyril, and Eusebius of
   Samosata conformed soon after; on the other hand in Eusebius, who is
   their representative at Nicæa, it will perhaps be difficult to find a
   clear admission of the ex ousias. But at any rate he does not maintain
   the ex hupostaseos, which Bull's theory requires.

   On various grounds then, because the Semi-arians as a body did not deny
   the ex ousias, nor confess the ex hupostaseos, nor the Arians deny it,
   there is reason for declining Bishop Bull's explanation of these words
   as they occur in the Creed; and now let us turn to the consideration of
   the authorities on which that explanation rests.

   As to Gelasius, Bull himself does not insist upon his testimony, and
   Anastasius [about 700 a.d.] is too late to be of authority. The passage
   indeed which he quotes from Amphilochius is important, but as he was a
   friend of S. Basil, perhaps it does not very much increase the weight
   of S. Basil's more distinct and detailed testimony to the same point,
   and no one can say that that weight is inconsiderable.

   Yet there is evidence the other way which overbalances it. Bull, who
   complains of Petavius's rejection of S. Basil's testimony concerning a
   Council which was held before his birth, cannot maintain his own
   explanation of its Creed without rejecting Athanasius's testimony
   respecting the doctrine of his contemporaries, the Semi-arians; and
   moreover the more direct evidence, as we shall see, of the Council of
   Alexandria, a.d. 362, S. Jerome, Basil of Ancyra, and Socrates.

   First, however, no better comment upon the sense of the Council can be
   required than the incidental language of Athanasius and others, who in
   a foregoing extract exchanges ousia for hupostasis in a way which is
   natural only on the supposition that he used them as synonyms.
   Elsewhere, as we have seen, he omits the word e hupostaseos in the
   Nicene Anathema, while Hilary considers the Anathema sufficient with
   that omission.

   In like manner Hilary expressly translates the clause in the Creed by
   ex altera substantia vel essentia. Fragm. ii. 27. And somewhat in the
   same way Eusebius says in his letter, ex heteras tinos hupostaseos te
   kai ousias.

   But further, Athanasius says expressly, ad Afros,--"Hypostasis is
   essence, ousia, and means nothing else than simply being, which
   Jeremiah calls existence when he says," &c. §4. It is true, he
   elsewhere speaks of three Hypostases, but this only shews that he
   attached no fixed sense to the word. [Rather, he abandons the latter
   usage in his middle and later writings.] This is just what I would
   maintain; its sense must be determined by the context; and, whereas it
   always stands in all Catholic writers for the Una Res (as the 4th
   Lateran speaks), which ousia denotes, when Athanasius says, "three
   hypostases," he takes the word to mean ousia in that particular sense
   in which it is three, and when he makes it synonymous with ousia, he
   uses it to signify Almighty God in that sense in which He is one.

   Leaving Athanasius, we have the following evidence concerning the
   history of the word hupostasis. S. Jerome says, "The whole school of
   secular learning understanding nothing else by hypostasis than usia,
   essence," Ep. xv. 4, where, speaking of the Three Hypostases he uses
   the strong language, "If you desire it, then be a new faith framed
   after the Nicene, and let the orthodox confess in terms like the
   Arian."

   In like manner, Basil of Ancyra, George, and the other Semi-arians, say
   distinctly, "This hypostasis our Fathers called essence," ousia. Epiph.
   Hær. 74. 12. fin.; in accordance with which is the unauthorized
   addition to the Sardican Epistle, "hupostasin, hen autoi hoi hairetikoi
   ousian prosagoreuousi." Theod. H. E. ii. 6.

   If it be said that Jerome from his Roman connection, and Basil and
   George as Semi-arians, would be led by their respective theologies for
   distinct reasons thus to speak, it is true, and may have led them to
   too broad a statement of the fact; but then on the other hand it was in
   accordance also with the theology of S. Basil, so strenuous a defender
   of the formula of the Three Hypostases, to suppose that the Nicene
   Fathers meant to distinguish hupostasis from ousia in their anathema.

   Again, Socrates informs us that, though there was some dispute about
   hypostasis at Alexandria shortly before the Nicene Council, yet the
   Council itself "devoted not a word to the question," H. E. iii. 7.;
   which hardly consists with its having intended to rule that ex heteras
   hupostaseos was distinct from ex heteras ousias.

   And in like manner the Council of Alexandria, a.d. 362, in deciding
   that the sense of Hypostasis was an open question, not only from the
   very nature of the case goes on the supposition that the Nicene Council
   had not closed it, but says so in words again and again in its Synodal
   Letter. If the Nicene Council had already used "hypostasis" in its
   present sense, what remained to Athanasius at Alexandria but to submit
   to it?

   Indeed the history of this Council is perhaps the strongest argument
   against the supposed discrimination of the two terms by the Council of
   Nicæa. Bull can only meet it by considering that an innovation upon the
   "veterem vocabuli usum" began at the date of the Council of Sardica,
   though Socrates mentions the dispute as existing at Alexandria before
   the Nicene Council, H. E. iii. 4. 5. while the supposititious
   confession of Sardica professes to have received the doctrine of the
   one hypostasis by tradition as Catholic.

   Nor is the use of the word in earlier times inconsistent with these
   testimonies; though it occurs so seldom, in spite of its being a word
   of S. Paul [i.e. Heb. i. 3], that testimony is our principal evidence.
   Socrates' remarks deserve to be quoted; "Those among the Greeks who
   have treated of the Greek philosophy, have defined essence, ousia, in
   many ways, but they had made no mention at all of hypostasis. Irenæus
   the Grammarian, in his alphabetical Atticist, even calls the term
   barbarous; because it is not used by any of the ancients, and if
   anywhere found, it does not mean what it is now taken for. Thus in the
   Phoenix of Sophocles it means an ambush;' but in Menander, preserves,'
   as if one were to call the wine-lees in a cask hypostasis.' However it
   must be observed, that, in spite of the old philosophers being silent
   about the term, the more modern continually use it for essence, ousias,
   H. E. iii. 7. The word principally occurs in Origen among Ante-Nicene
   writers, and he, it must be confessed uses it, as far as the context
   decides its sense, to mean subsistence or person. In other words, it
   was the word of a certain school in the Church, which afterwards was
   accepted by the Church; but this proves nothing about the sense in
   which it was used at Nicæa. The three Hypostases are spoken of by
   Origen, his pupil Dionysius, as afterwards by Eusebius of Cæsarea
   (though he may notwithstanding have considered hypostasis synonymous
   with essence), and Athanasius (Origen in Joan. ii. 6. Dionys. ap. Basil
   de Sp. S. n. 72. Euseb. ap. Socr. i. 23. Athan. in Illud Omnia, &c. 6);
   and the Two Hypostases of the Father and the Son, by Origen, Ammonius,
   and Alexander (Origen c. Cels. viii. 2. Ammon. ap. Caten. in Joan. x.
   30. Alex. ap. Theod. i. 3. p. 740). As to the passage in which two
   hypostases are spoken of in Dionysius' letter to Paul of Samosata, that
   letter certainly is not genuine, as might be shewn on a fitting
   occasion, though it is acknowledged by very great authorities.

   I confess that to my mind there is an antecedent probability that the
   view which has here been followed is correct. Judging by the general
   history of doctrine, one should not expect that the formal
   ecclesiastical meaning of the word should have obtained everywhere so
   early. Nothing is more certain than that the doctrines themselves of
   the Holy Trinity and the Incarnation were developed, or, to speak more
   definitely, that the propositions containing them were acknowledged,
   from the earliest times; but the particular terms which now belong to
   them are most uniformly of a later date. Ideas were brought out, but
   technical phrases did not obtain. Not that these phrases did not exist,
   but either not as technical, or in use in a particular School or
   Church, or with a particular writer, or as hapax legomena, as words
   discussed, nay resisted, perhaps used by some local Council, and then
   at length accepted generally from their obvious propriety. Thus the
   words of the Schools pass into the service of the Catholic Church.
   Instead then of the word hupostasis being, as Maran says, received in
   the East "summo consensu," from the date of Noetus or at least
   Sabellius, or of Bull's opinion "apud Catholicos Dionysii ætate ratum
   et fixum illud fuisse, tres esse in divinis hypostases," I would
   consider that the present use of the word was in the first instance
   Alexandrian, and that it was little more than Alexandrian till the
   middle of the fourth century.

   Lastly, it comes to be considered how the two words are to be accounted
   for in the Creed, if they have not distinct senses. Coustant supposes
   that ex ousias was added to explain ex hupostaseos, lest the latter
   should be taken in a Sabellian sense. On which we may perhaps remark
   besides, that the reason why hupostasis was selected as the principal
   term was, that it was agreeable to the Westerns as well as admitted by
   the Orientals. Thus, by way of contrast, we find the Second General
   Council, at which there were no Latins, speaking of Three Hypostases,
   and Pope Damasus and the Roman Council speaking a few years sooner of
   the Holy Ghost as of the same hypostasis and usia with the Father and
   the Son. Theod. H. E. ii. 17. Many things go to make this probable. For
   instance, Coustant acutely points out, though Maran and the President
   of Magdalen [Routh, Rel. Sac. iii. 383] dissent, that this probably was
   a point of dispute between the two Dionysii; the Bishop of Alexandria
   asserting, as we know he did assert, Three Hypostases, the Bishop of
   Rome protesting in reply against "Three partitive Hypostases," as
   involving tritheism, and his namesake rejoining, "If because there are
   Three Hypostases, any say that they are partitive, three there are,
   though they like it not." Again, the influence of the West shews itself
   in the language of Athanasius, who, contrary to the custom of his
   Church, of Origen, Dionysius, and his own immediate patron and master
   Alexander, so varies his own use of the word, as to make his writings
   almost an example of that freedom which he vindicated in the Council of
   Alexandria. Again, when Hosius went to Alexandria before the Nicene
   Council, and a dispute arose with reference to Sabellianism about the
   words hupostasis and ousia, what is this too, but the collision of East
   and West? It should be remembered moreover that Hosius presided at
   Nicæa, a Latin in an Eastern city; and again at Sardica, where, though
   the decree in favour of the One Hypostasis was not passed, it seems
   clear from the history that he was resisting persons with whom in great
   measure he agreed. Further, the same consideration accounts for the
   omission of the ex ousias from the Confession of Mark and the two which
   follow, on which Bull relies in proof that the Semi-arians rejected
   this formula. These three Semi-arian Creeds, and these only, were
   addressed to the Latins, and therefore their compilers naturally select
   that synonym which was most pleasing to them, as the means of securing
   a hearing; just as Athanasius on the other hand in his de Decretis,
   writing to the Greeks, omits hupostaseos and writes ousias.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [427] [This excursus supports the view taken above, Prolegg. ch. ii. §3
   (2) b; the student should supplement Newman's discussion by Zahn
   Marcellus and Harnack Dogmengesch. as quoted at the head of that
   section of the Prolegg. The word Semi-arian' is used in a somewhat
   inexact sense in this excursus, see Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) c, and §8
   (2) c.]
