# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume IV.   Athanasius - Select Writings and Letters
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume IV.
# father: athanasius
# work: On the Opinion of Dionysius (De Sententia Dionysii)
# latin_match_candidate: De sententia Dionysii
# clavis: CPG-2121
# extracted: 2026-09-24
# note: Public-domain Schaff/Robertson English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
   Introduction to the de Sententia Dionysii.

   ------------------------

   The following tract, like the last, is a letter to a person engaged in
   discussion with Arians, who were openly finding fault with the
   Definition of Nicæa, and especially with the word Co-essential (§19).
   Montfaucon suggests that both epistles were addressed to the same
   person, the de Decretis (§25) having as it were challenged the Arians
   to cite passages from Dionysius on behalf of their own doctrine,
   whereupon their opponent came back to Athanasius with a request for
   further help. But the language of the first sentence of our present
   tract seems to imply that Athanasius had not previously heard of the
   discussions in question. However, slender as such grounds are, the
   tract furnishes no more decisive indication of date. (On certain
   expressions which might seem to carry the date back to the lifetime of
   Arius, see Prolegg. ch. ii. §7.)

   Dionysius the Great,' Bishop of Alexandria 233-265, was a pupil of
   Origen (Eus. H. E. vi. 29), and equally distinguished as a ruler of the
   Church and as a theologian. In all the controversies of his age (the
   lapsed, rebaptism, Easter, Paul of Samosata, Sabellianism, the
   authorship of the Apocalypse) his influence made itself felt, and his
   writings were very numerous (Westcott in D. C. B. i. p. 851 sq.; a good
   account of Dionysius in vol. I. of this series, p. 281 note). The most
   celebrated controversy in which he was involved was that which, a
   century later, gave rise to the tract before us.

   About the period when personal attacks on the Nicene leaders began to
   be exchanged for overt objections to the Nicene Definitions, the claim
   was freely made that the fathers' had been condemned by the latter: in
   other words, that they had held with the Arians (see below §1, aei men
   prophaseis...nun de kai diaballein tous pateras tetolmekasi).
   Accordingly we find Athanasius at about the same date, viz. early in
   the sole reign of Constantius, vindicating on the one hand the work of
   the Council, on the other the orthodox reputation of Dionysius. The
   Arians found material for their appeal to the latter in a letter
   addressed by him to certain bishops in Pentapolis, called Ammon and
   Euphranor. Whether or no Sabellius had been a native of that province,
   at any rate his doctrine was at that time so popular there that the Son
   of God was scarcely any longer preached in the Churches.' Exercising
   the right of supervision over those districts which had already become
   vested by prescription in the Alexandrian See, Dionysius wrote to
   Ammon, Bishop of Berenice, (Euseb. H. E. vii. 26, who enumerates three
   several letters to Ammon, Telesphorus, and Euphranor, and a fourth to
   Ammon and Euporus: he also refers to his letters to Dionysius of Rome:
   Montfaucon is therefore scarcely fair in charging Eusebius with
   suppressing the episode ne verbum quidem de hac historia fecerit!')
   insisting on the distinctness of the Son from the Father. In doing so
   he used strong expressions akin to the language of Origen on the
   subordination of the Son. These expressions were at once objected to by
   certain orthodox churchmen (§13, it is not clear whether they belonged
   to Pentapolis or Alexandria), who without consulting Dionysius went to
   Rome (about 260), and spoke against him in the presence of his
   namesake, the Roman Bishop. The latter, true to the traditions of his
   See since the time of Callistus (see Hipp. Philos IX. vii. ditheoi
   este), while steering clear of Sabellianism, was especially jealous of
   error in the opposite direction. Accordingly he assembled a synod (de
   Synod. 44), and drew up a letter to Alexandria, in which he rebuked
   firstly the Sabellians, but secondly and more fully those who separate
   the Godhead or speak of the Son as a work, including under this
   category certain unnamed catechists and teachers of Alexandria (De
   Decr. 26). At the same time he wrote personally to Dionysius, informing
   him that he was accused of maintaining the opinions in question. In
   answer to this letter, Dionysius of Alexandria drew up a treatise in
   four books, entitled Refutation and Defence,' and addressed to his
   namesake of Rome, in which he explained his language, and stated his
   belief in a manner which put an end to the controversy. He had been
   charged with maintaining that the Son was made, that He was not eternal
   (ouk aei en ho theos pater, ouk aei en ho huios,...ouk en prin
   gennethe, all' en pote hote ouk en k.t.l. §14), that he denied the
   co-essentiality (homoousion) of the Son, and separated Him from the
   Father (§16, 18, cf. § 4, xenon kat' ousian k.t.l). In his Refutation
   and Defence, Dionysius admits the use of these expressions, withdraws
   the first (§15, line 1) and admits the propriety of the homoousion,
   although he himself prefers Scriptural language (§ 18. The section
   shews the unfixed use of the word. Dionysius had formerly used ousia in
   the sense of prote ousia, nearly as equivalent to hupostasis: but now
   he clearly takes it as deutera ousia, indicative not of Person but of
   Nature). That the Son was made, he explains as an inadequate formula,
   the word being applicable (in one of its many senses) to the relation
   of son to father (§20. The defence of Athanasius, that Dionysius
   referred to the Human Nature of Christ, is scarcely tenable. It is not
   supported by what Dionysius himself says, rather the contrary: and if
   his language did not refer to the Trinity, where would be its relevancy
   against Sabellianism?). The words en hote ouk en, and ouk en prin
   gennethe, he does not explain, but professes his belief in the eternal
   union of the Word with the Father (§§24, 25). Lastly, he repudiates the
   charge of dividing the Holy Trinity, or of mentioning Father and Son as
   though separate Beings: When I mention the Father, I have already
   mentioned the Son, before I pronounce His Name (§17, the closing words
   of the section are a complete formula of agreement with all that his
   Roman namesake could possibly require of him).

   That Dionysius in his Refutation and Defence' merely restated, and did
   not (kat' oikonomian) alter, his theological position is open to no
   doubt. Athanasius, not the Arians, had the right to claim him as his
   own. He is clearly speaking optima fide when he deprecates the pressing
   of statements in which he had given expression to one side only, and
   that the less essential side, of his convictions. At the same time we
   cannot but see that the Arians had good prima facie ground for their
   appeal. Here were their special formulæ, those anathematised at Nicæa,
   en pote hote ouk en and the rest, adopted, and the homoousion
   implicitly rejected, by the most renowned bishop Alexandria had yet
   had. (Newman, in de Decr. 26, note 7, fails to appreciate the reference
   to the language of Dion. Alex.) Moreover it is only fair to admit that
   not only in language, but in thought also, Athanasius had advanced upon
   his predecessors of the Alexandrian School. The rude shock of Arianism
   had shewn him and the other Nicene leaders the necessity of greater
   consistency than had characterised the theology of Origen and his
   school, a consistency to be gained only by breaking with one side of it
   altogether. While on the one hand Origen held fast to the Godhead of
   the Logos (kat' ousian esti theos), and to His co-eternity with the
   Father (aei gennatai ho soter hupo tou patros, and see de Decr. §27);
   he had yet, using ousia in its first' sense, spoken of Him as heteros
   kat' ousian tou patros (de Orat. 15), and placed him, after the manner
   of Philo, as an intermediary between God and the Universe. He had
   spoken of the unity of the Father and the Son as moral (Cels. viii. 12,
   te homonoi& 139; kai te sumphoni& 139;), insisted upon the huperoche of
   the Father (i.e. subordination' of the Son), and spoken (De Orat) as
   though the highest worship of all were to be reserved for the Father
   (Jerome ascribes still stronger language to him). Yet there is no real
   doubt that, as regards the core of the question, Athanasius and not his
   opponents is the true successor of Origen. The essential difference
   between Athanasius and the Conservatives' of the period following the
   great council consisted in the fact that the former saw clearly what
   the latter failed to realise, namely the insufficiency of the formulæ
   of the third century to meet the problem of the fourth. We may then,
   without disparagement to Dionysius, admit that he was not absolutely
   consistent in his language; that he failed to distinguish the
   ambiguities which beset the words ousia, hupostasis, and even poiein
   and genesthai, and that he used language (ouk en prin gennethe and the
   like) which we, with our minds cleared by the Arian controversy, cannot
   reconcile with the more deliberate and guarded statements of the
   Refutation and Defence [965] .'

   The controversy of the two Dionysii has another interesting side, as
   bearing upon the means then employed for dealing with questions
   affecting the Church as a whole,--and in particular upon the position
   of the Roman Church as the natural referee in such questions. (Cf.
   Prolegg. ch. iv. §4.) This is not the place for a general discussion of
   the question, or for an attempt to trace its history previous to the
   case before us. But it should be noted, firstly, that when the
   Pentapolite (?) opponents of Dionysius desire a lever against him,
   their first resource is not a council of local bishops, but the Roman
   Church: secondly, that the Roman bishop takes up the case, and writes
   to his Alexandrian namesake for an explanation: thirdly, that the
   explanation asked for is promptly given. Unfortunately the fragment of
   the Roman letter preserved to us by Athanasius tells us nothing of the
   form of the intervention, whether it was the request of one co-trustee
   to another for an explanation of the latter's action in a matter
   concerning their common trust, or whether it was coupled with any
   assumption of jurisdiction at all like that involved in the letter of
   the Bishop of Alexandria to those of Libya. At any rate, the latter
   alternative has no positive evidence in our documents; and the
   fragments of the Refutation and Defence shew the most complete and
   resolute independence. There is nothing in the narrative of Athanasius
   which implies that the Alexandrine Bishop recognised or that the Roman
   Bishop claimed any dogmatic authority as belonging to the Imperial
   See.' The letter of Dionysius of Rome is certainly highly
   characteristic of the indifference to theological reasoning and the
   close adherence to the rule of faith as the authoritative solution of
   all questions of doctrine which marks the genius of Rome as contrasted
   with that of Alexandria (see Gore, The Church and the Ministry, ch. i.
   sub fin., and Harnack, Dg. i. 686, who observes upon the striking
   family likeness between this letter and that of Leo to Flavian, and of
   Agatho to the Sixth Ecumenical Council). Lastly, the Roman Church,
   which never troubled about a precedent adverse to her imperial
   instinct, never forgot one which favoured it. The intervention of
   Dionysius was treasured up in her memory, and, when the time came,
   fully exploited (supr. p. 113, note 3, where the note distinguishes
   somewhat too carefully between the Pope' of Rome and the Bishop,'
   papas, of Alexandria).

   The tract of Athanasius, with his extracts in de Decr. and de Syn.,
   tell us all that we know of the history of this important controversy.
   Dionysius had previously (Eus. H. E. vii. 6) had some correspondence
   with Xystus, the previous Bishop of Rome, on the subject of the
   Sabellian teaching current in the Pentapolis. He was in fact during his
   episcopate in constant communication with Rome and with the other
   important churches of the Christian World. His letters are much used in
   the sixth and seventh books of the History of Eusebius, to whom we are
   indebted for most of our knowledge of his writings.

   The general arrangement of the tract is as follows:--

   §1-4 are prefatory, the fourth section broadly indicates the line of
   the defence. §§5-12 deal with the incriminated passages: Athan. gives
   the history of them, and lays stress on their incomplete presentation
   of the belief of Dionysius, as having been written for a special
   purpose,--as may also be said of much of the language of the Apostles.
   But even in themselves the expressions of Dionysius are orthodox,
   referring (as Athanasius claims) to Christ as man. In §§13-23 he turns
   to the Refutation and Defence, from which he makes copious extracts,
   bringing out the diametrical opposition between Dionysius and the
   Arians. In §§24, 25 the anti-Arian doctrine of Dionysius is summed up,
   and §26 recapitulates the main points of §§5-12. He concludes (§27) by
   claiming a verdict upon the evidence, and urging upon the Arians the
   alternative of abandoning their error, or of being left with the devil
   as their only partisan.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [965] It may be added that the letter to Paul of Samosata quoted by
   Bull, Def. III. iv. 3, Petavius, Trin. I. iv. is not genuine.
   Posterity, which enveloped the name of Origen with storms of
   controversy, did not entirely spare his pupil: Basil (Ep. 41) taxes him
   with sowing the first seeds of the Anomoean heresy, Gennadius (Eccl.
   Dogm. iv.) calls him Fons Arii.'
     __________________________________________________________________

   On the Opinion of Dionysius.

   ------------------------

   Letter of Athanasius concerning Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria,
   shewing that he too was against the Arian heresy, like the Synod of
   Nicæa, and that the Arians in vain libel him in claiming him as on
   their side.

   1. The Arian appeal to Dionysius a slander against him.

   You have been tardy in informing me of the present argument between
   yourself and the enemies of Christ; for even before your courtesy wrote
   to me, I had made diligent enquiry, and learnt about the matter, of
   which I heard with pleasure. I approved of the right opinion
   entertained by your piety concerning our blessed fathers, while on the
   present occasion I once more recognise the unreasonableness of the
   Arian madmen. For whereas their heresy has no ground in reason, nor
   express proof from holy writ, they were always resorting to shameless
   subterfuges and plausible fallacies. But they have now also ventured to
   slander the fathers: and this is not inconsistent, but fully of a piece
   with their perversity. For what marvel is it if men who have presumed
   to take counsel against the Lord and against His Christ,' are also
   vilifying the blessed Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, as a partisan
   and accomplice of their own? For if they are pleased to extol a man,
   for the support of their own heresy, even if they call him blessed,
   they cast upon him no slight affront, but a great one indeed; just like
   robbers or men of evil life who, when branded for their own practices,
   claim sober persons as being of their number, and thus defame their
   sober character.

   2. The Arian position inconsistent with Holy Scripture.

   If then they have confidence in their opinions and statements, let them
   broach their heresy nakedly, and shew from it if they think they have
   any religious argument whether from Scripture, or from human reason, in
   their defence. But if they have nothing of the kind, let them hold
   their peace. For they will find nothing from any quarter except the
   greater condemnation of themselves. Firstly from the Scriptures, in
   that John says, In the beginning was the Word;' whereas they say, he
   was not before he was begotten:' while David sings, in the character of
   the Father, my heart uttered a good Word' (Ps. xlv. 1, LXX), whom they
   allege to be in thought only, and originated from nothing. Further,
   whereas John once more says in the Gospel (i. 3), all things were made
   by Him, and without Him was not anything made,' while Paul writes,
   there is one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things' (1 Cor. viii.
   6), and elsewhere, all things were created in Him' (Col. i. 16), how
   will they have the boldness (or rather how will they escape disgrace)
   to oppose the sayings of the saints, by saying that the artificer of
   all things is a creature, and that He is a created thing in whom all
   things created have come into being and subsist? Nor, secondly, is any
   religious argument from human reason left them in their defence. For
   what man, Greek or barbarian, presumes to call one, whom he confesses
   to be God, a created thing, or to say that he was not before he was
   made? or what man, when he has heard Him whom he believes to be God
   alone say, This is My beloved Son' (Mat. iii. 17), and my heart uttered
   a good Word,' will venture even to say that the Word out of the heart
   of God has come to being out of nothing? or that the Son is a created
   thing and not the very offspring of Him that speaks? or again, who that
   hears Him whom he believes to be Lord and Saviour say, I am in the
   Father and the Father in Me,' and I and the Father are one' (John xiv
   10; x. 30), will presume to put asunder what He has made one and
   maintained indivisible?

   3. The Arians appeal to Dionysius as the Jews did to Abraham: but with
   equally little reason.

   Seeing this themselves, accordingly, and having no confidence in their
   own position, they utter falsehoods against religious men. But it would
   be better for them, when isolated, and perceiving that under
   examination they were at a loss and put to silence on all sides, rather
   to have turned back from the way of error and not to claim men whom
   they do not know, lest being confuted by them also they should carry
   off all the more disgrace. But perhaps they do not wish ever to depart
   from this wickedness of theirs; for they emulate this characteristic of
   Caiaphas and his party, just as they have learned from them to deny
   Christ. For they too, when the Lord had done so so many works, by which
   He shewed Himself to be the Christ the Son of the Living God, and being
   convicted by him, from thenceforth in all things thinking and speaking
   against the Scripture, and unable for a moment to face the proofs
   against themselves, betook themselves to the patriarch with the words,
   We have Abraham to our father' (Matt. iii. 9), thus thinking to cloke
   their own unreasonableness. But neither did they gain anything by these
   words, nor will these men, by speaking of Dionysius, be able to escape
   the guilt of the others. For the Lord convicted the latter of their
   wicked deeds by the words, This did not Abraham' (John viii. 40), while
   the same truth again shall convict these men of their impiety and
   falsehood. For the Bishop Dionysius did not hold with Arius, nor was he
   ignorant of the truth. On the contrary, both the Jews of that day, and
   the new Jews of the present day inherited their mad enmity against
   Christ from their father the devil. Well then, a strong proof that here
   once more these men are saying what is not true, but are maligning the
   man, is the fact that neither was he condemned and expelled from the
   church for impiety by other bishops, as these men have been from the
   clergy, nor did he of his own accord leave the church as the partisan
   of a heresy, but died honourably within it, and his memory is retained
   and registered along with the fathers to the present day. For if he had
   held with these men, or not vindicated what he had written, without
   doubt he too would have been treated as these men have been.

   4. The Arian appeal to Dionysius based upon an isolated fragment of his
   teaching to the neglect of the rest.

   And indeed this would suffice for the entire refutation of the new
   Jews, who both deny the Lord and slander the fathers and attempt to
   deceive all Christians. But since they think they have, in certain
   parts of the bishop's letter, pretexts for their slander of him, come
   let us look at these also, so that even from them the futility of the
   reasoning may be exposed, and they may at length cease from their
   blasphemy against the Lord, and at any rate with the soldiers (Mat.
   xxvii. 54), when they see creation witnessing, confess that truly He is
   the Son of God, and not one of created things. They say then that in a
   letter the blessed Dionysius has said, that the Son of God is a
   creature and made, and not His own by nature, but in essence alien from
   the Father, just as the husbandman is from the vine, or the
   ship-builder from the boat, for that being a creature He was not before
   He came to be.' Yes, he wrote it, and we too admit that his letter runs
   thus. But just as he wrote this, he also wrote very many other letters,
   and they ought to consult those also; in order that the faith of the
   man may be made clear from them all, and not from this alone. For the
   art of a ship-builder who has constructed many triremes is judged of
   not from one, but from all. If therefore he simply wrote this letter of
   which they speak as an exposition of his faith, or if this was his only
   letter, let them accuse him to their hearts' content,--for this
   suggestion really amounts to an accusation,--but if he was led to write
   as he did by the occasion and the person [966] concerned, while he also
   wrote other letters, defending himself where he had been suspected, in
   that case they ought not to have neglected the reasons, and hastily
   cast a slur upon the man, lest they should appear to be hunting merely
   stray expressions, while passing over the truth to be found in his
   other letters. For a husbandman also treats trees of the same sort now
   in one way now in another, according to the character of the soil he
   has to do with: nor would any one blame him because he cuts one, grafts
   another, plants another, and another again takes up. On the contrary,
   upon learning the reason, he all the more admires the versatility of
   his skill. Well then, unless they have consulted the writing
   superficially let them state the main subject of the letter; for so the
   malignity and unscrupulous character of their design will come out. But
   since they do not know, or are ashamed to state it, we must state it
   ourselves.

   5. The occasion of Dionysius' writing against the Sabellians.

   At that date certain of the Bishops in Pentapolis, Upper Libya, held
   with Sabellius. And they were so successful with their opinions that
   the Son of God was scarcely any longer preached in the churches.
   Dionysius having heard of this, as he had the charge [967] of those
   churches, sends men to counsel the guilty ones to cease from their
   error, but as they did not cease, but waxed more shameless in their
   impiety, he was compelled to meet their shameless conduct by writing
   the said letter, and to expound from the Gospels the human nature of
   the Saviour, in order that since those men waxed bolder in denying the
   Son, and in ascribing His human actions to the Father, he accordingly
   by demonstrating that it was the Son and not the Father that was made
   man for us, might persuade the ignorant persons that the Father is not
   a Son, and so by degrees lead them up to the true Godhead of the Son
   and the knowledge of the Father. This is the main subject of the
   letter, and this is the reason why he wrote it, by reason of those who
   so shamelessly had chosen to alter the true faith.

   6. Dionysius did not express his full opinion in the passages alleged.

   Well then, what is there in common between the heresy of Arius and the
   opinion of Dionysius: or why is Dionysius to be called like Arius, when
   they differ widely? For the one is a teacher of the Catholic Church,
   while the other has been the inventor of a new heresy. And while Arius
   to expound his own error wrote a Thaleia in an effeminate and
   ridiculous style like Sotades the Egyptian, Dionysius not only wrote
   other letters also, but composed a defence of himself upon the
   suspicious points, and came out clearly as of right opinions. If then
   his writings are inconsistent, let them not draw him to their side, for
   on this assumption he is not worthy of credit. But if, when he had
   written his letter to Ammonius, and fallen under suspicion, he made his
   defence so as to better [968] what he had previously said, but did so
   without changing, it must be evident that he wrote the suspected
   passages in a qualified sense [969] . But what is written or done in
   such a sense men have no business to construe maliciously, or wrest
   each one to a meaning of his own. For even a physician frequently in
   accordance with his knowledge applies to the wounds he has to deal
   with, remedies which to some seem unsuitable with a view to nothing but
   health. In like manner it is the practice of a wise teacher to arrange
   and deliver his lessons with reference to the characters of his pupils,
   until he has brought them over to the way of perfection.

   7. The language of the Apostles needs similar caution in particular
   passages.

   But if they accuse the blessed man (for the arguments of the Arians
   about him are in fact accusations against him) simply for writing thus,
   what will they do when they hear even the great and blessed Apostles in
   the Acts, firstly Peter saying (Acts ii. 22), Ye men of Israel hear
   these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God unto us by mighty
   works and wonders and signs which God did by Him in the midst of you,
   as ye yourselves know: Him, being delivered up by the determinate
   counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye by the hand of lawless men did
   crucify and slay;' and again (ib. iv. 10), In the name of Jesus Christ
   of Nazareth, Whom ye crucified, Whom God raised from the dead, even in
   Him doth this man stand here before you whole;' and Paul, relating (ib.
   xiii. 22) in Antioch of Pisidia how God, when He had removed Saul,
   raised up David to be king; to whom also He bare witness and said, I
   have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do
   My will. Of this man's seed hath God according to promise brought unto
   Israel a Saviour, Jesus;' and again at Athens (ib. xvii. 30), The times
   of ignorance therefore God overlooked; but now He commandeth men that
   they should all everywhere repent: inasmuch as He hath appointed a day
   in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by means of the
   man whom He hath ordained, whereof He hath given assurance unto all
   men, in that He hath raised Him from the dead;' or Stephen, the great
   martyr, when he says, Behold I see the heavens opened and the Son of
   man standing on the right hand of God.' Why, it is high time for them
   to brazen it out (for there is nothing too daring for them) and claim
   that the very apostles held with Arius: for they declare Christ to have
   been a man from Nazareth, and passible.

   8. The Apostles spoke of Christ as man, but also as God.

   Well then, such being the imaginations of these men, did the Apostles,
   since they used the above language, regard Christ as only a man and
   nothing more? God forbid. The very idea is out of the question. But
   here too they have acted as wise master-builders and stewards of the
   mysteries of God. And they have good reason for it. For inasmuch as the
   Jews of that day, in error themselves and misleading the Gentiles,
   thought that the Christ was coming as a mere man of the seed of David,
   after the likeness of the rest of the children of David's descent, and
   would neither believe that He was God nor that the Word was made flesh;
   for this reason it was with much wisdom that the blessed Apostles began
   by proclaiming to the Jews the human characteristics of the Saviour, in
   order that by fully persuading them from visible facts, and from
   miracles which were done, that the Christ was come, they might go on to
   lead them up to faith in His Godhead, by shewing that the works He had
   done were not those of a man but of God. Why, Peter, who calls Christ a
   man capable of suffering, at once went on (Acts iii. 15) to add, He is
   Prince of Life,' while in the Gospel he confesses, Thou art the Christ,
   the Son of the living God.' But in his Epistle he calls Him Bishop of
   souls and Lord both of himself and of angels and Powers. Paul, again,
   who calls Christ a man of the seed of David, wrote thus to the Hebrews
   (i. 3), Who being the brightness of His glory and the very image of His
   subsistence,' and to the Philippians (ii. 6), Who being in the form of
   God counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God.' But what can
   it mean to call him Prince of Life, Son of God, brightness, express
   image, on an equality with God, Lord, and Bishop of souls, if not that
   in the body He was Word of God, by whom all things were made and is as
   indivisible from the Father as is the brightness from the light?

   9. Dionysius must be interpreted like the Apostles.

   And Dionysius accordingly acted as he learned from the Apostles. For as
   the heresy of Sabellius was creeping on, he was compelled, as I said
   before, to write the aforesaid letter, and to hurl at them what is said
   of the Saviour in reference to His manhood and His humiliation, so as
   to bar them by reason of His human attributes from saying that the
   Father was a son, and so render easier for them the teaching concerning
   the Godhead of the Son, when in his other letters he calls Him from the
   Scriptures the word, wisdom, power, breath (Wisd. vii. 25), and
   brightness of the Father. For example, in the letters written in his
   defence, speaking as I have described, he waxes bold in the faith, and
   in piety towards Christ. As then the Apostles are not to be accused by
   reason of their human language about the Lord,--because the Lord has
   been made man,--but are all the more worthy of admiration for their
   wise reserve and seasonable teaching, so Dionysius is no Arian on
   account of his letter to Euphranor and Ammonius against Sabellius. For
   even if he did use humble phrases and examples, yet they too are from
   the Gospels, and his justification for them is the Saviour's coming in
   the flesh, on account of which not only these things, but others like
   them are written. For just as He is Word of God, so afterwards the Word
   was made flesh;' and while in the beginning was the Word; the Virgin at
   the consummation of the ages conceived, and the Lord has become man.
   And He who is indicated by both statements is one Person, for the Word
   was made flesh.' But the expressions used about His Godhead, and His
   becoming man, are to be interpreted with discrimination and suitably to
   the particular context. And he that writes of the human attributes of
   the Word knows also what concerns His Godhead: and he who expounds
   concerning His Godhead is not ignorant of what belongs to His coming in
   the flesh: but discerning each as a skilled and approved money-changer
   [970] ,' he will walk in the straight way of piety; when therefore he
   speaks of His weeping, he knows that the Lord, having become man, while
   he exhibits his human character in weeping, as God raises up Lazarus;
   and He knows that He used to hunger and thirst physically, while
   divinely He fed five thousand persons from five loaves; and knows that
   while a human body lay in the tomb, it was raised as God's body by the
   Word Himself.

   10. The expressions of Dionysius claimed by the Arians refer to Christ
   as Man.

   Dionysius, teaching exactly thus, in his letter to Euphranor and
   Ammonius wrote in view of Sabellius concerning the human predicates of
   the Saviour. For to the latter class belong the sayings, I am the Vine
   and My Father the Husbandman' (Joh. xv. 1), and faithful to Him that
   made Him' (Heb. iii. 2), and He created me' (Prov. viii. 22), and made
   so much better than the angels' (Heb. i. 4). But He was not ignorant of
   the passages, I am in the Father and the Father in Me' (Joh. xiv. 10),
   and He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.' For we know that he
   mentioned them in his other Epistles. For while mentioning them there,
   he made mention also of the human attributes of the Lord. For just as
   being in the form of God He counted it not a prize to be on an equality
   with God, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a slave' (Phil. ii.
   6), and though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor,' so while
   there are high and rich descriptions of His Deity, there are also those
   which relate to His coming in the flesh, humble expressions and poor.
   But that these are used of the Saviour as man is apparent on the
   following grounds. The husbandman is different in essence from the
   vine, while the branches are of one essence and akin to it, and are in
   fact undivided from the vine, it and they having one and the same
   origin. But, as the Lord said, He is the vine, we are the branches. If
   then the Son is of one essence with ourselves, and has the same origin
   as we, let us grant that in this respect the Son is diverse in essence
   from the Father, like as the vine is from the husbandman. But if the
   Son is different from what we are, and He is the Word of the Father
   while we are made of earth, and are descendants of Adam, then the above
   expression ought not to be referred to the deity of the Word, but to
   His human coming. Since thus also has the Saviour said: I am the vine,
   ye are the branches, My Father is the husbandman.' For we are akin to
   the Lord according to the body, and for that reason he said (Heb. ii.
   12, Ps. xxii. 22), I will declare thy name unto my brethren.' And just
   as the branches are of one essence with the vine, and are from it, so
   we also having our bodies homogeneous with the Lord's body, receive of
   His fulness (Joh. i. 16), and have that body as our root [971] for our
   resurrection and our salvation. But the Father is called the
   husbandman, for He it was who by His Word cultivated the Vine, namely
   the manhood of the Saviour, and who by His own Word prepared for us a
   way to a kingdom; and none cometh to the Lord except the Father draw
   him to Him (Joh. vi. 44).

   11. The same is true of the analogous language of the Apostles.

   This then being the sense of the expression, it follows that it is of
   the vine, so understood, that it is written: Who was faithful to Him
   that had created Him' (Heb. iii. 2), and made so much better than the
   angels' (ib. i. 4), and He created me' (Prov. viii. 22). For when He
   had taken that which He had to offer on our behalf, namely His body of
   the Virgin Mary, then it is written of Him that He had been created,
   and formed, and made: for such phrases are applicable to men. Moreover
   not after (His taking) the body has He been made better than the
   angels, lest He should appear to have been previously less than or
   equal to them. But writing to Jews, and comparing the human ministry of
   the Lord to Moses, he said, having been made so much better than the
   angels,' for by means of angels the law was spoken, because the law was
   given by Moses, but grace came by Jesus Christ' (Joh. i. 17), and the
   gift of the Spirit. And whereas in those days the law was preached from
   Dan to Beersheba, now their sound is gone out into all lands' (Rom. x.
   18; Ps. xix. 3), and the Gentiles worship Christ, and through Him know
   the Father. The above things then are written of the Saviour as man,
   and not otherwise.

   12. The passages alleged from Dionysius are, when rightly understood,
   strictly orthodox.

   Well then, did Dionysius, as the adversaries of Christ reiterate, when
   writing of the human characteristics of the Son, and so calling Him a
   creature, mean that he was one man among others? Or when he said that
   the Word was not proper to the essence of the Father, did he hold that
   He was of one essence with us men? Certainly he did not write thus in
   his other epistles. but in them not only manifests a correct opinion,
   but as good as cries out by them against these people, saying as it
   were: I am not of the same opinion as you, you adversaries of God, nor
   did my writings furnish Arius with a pretext for impiety. But writing
   to Ammon and Euphranor on account of the Sabellianisers, I made mention
   of the vine and the husbandman and used other like expressions, in
   order that, by pointing out the human characteristics of the Lord, I
   might persuade those men not to say that it is the Father who was made
   man. For like as the husbandman is not the vine, so He that came in the
   body was not the Father but the Word; and the Word having come to be in
   the Vine was called the Vine, because of His bodily kinship with the
   branches, namely ourselves. In this sense, then, I wrote as I did to
   Euphranor and Ammonius, but your shamelessness I confront with the
   other letters written by me, so that men of sound mind may know the
   defence they contain, and my right mind in the faith of Christ. The
   Arians then ought, if their intelligence were sound, thus to have
   thought and held concerning the Bishop: for all things are manifest to
   them that understand, and right to them that find knowledge' (Prov.
   viii. 9). But since, not having understood the faith of the Catholic
   Church, they have fallen into impiety, and consequently, maimed in
   their intelligence, think that even straight things are crooked and
   call light darkness, while they think that darkness is light, it is
   necessary to quote also from the other letters of Dionysius, and state
   why they were written, to the greater condemnation of the heretic. For
   it was from them that we ourselves have learned to think and write as
   we are doing about the man.

   13. But other writings of Dionysius have to be considered also. Their
   history.

   The following is the occasion of his writing the other letters. The
   Bishop Dionysius having heard of the affairs in Pentapolis and having
   written, in zeal for religion, as I said above, his letter to Euphranor
   and Ammonius against the heresy of Sabellius, some of the brethren
   belonging to the Church, of right opinions, but without asking him, so
   as to learn from himself how he had written, went up to Rome; and they
   spoke against him in the presence of his namesake Dionysius the Bishop
   of Rome. And he, upon hearing it, wrote simultaneously against the
   partisans of Sabellius and against those who held the very opinions for
   uttering which Arius was cast out of the Church; calling it an equal
   and opposite impiety to hold with Sabellius, or with those who say that
   the Word of God is a thing made and formed and originated. And he wrote
   also to Dionysius to inform him of what they had said about him. And
   the latter straightway wrote back, and inscribed his books a Refutation
   and a Defence.' Here mark the detestable gang of the adversaries of
   Christ, and how they themselves have stirred up their disgrace against
   themselves. For Dionysius, Bishop of Rome, having written also against
   those who said that the Son of God was a creature and a created thing,
   it is manifest that not now for the first time but from of old the
   heresy of the Arian adversaries of Christ has been anathematised by
   all. And Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, making his defence concerning
   the letter he had written, appears in his turn as neither thinking as
   they allege, nor having held the Arian error at all.

   14. Object and general method of Dionysius in his Refutation and
   Defence.'

   And the mere fact of Dionysius having made his defence about the
   matters on which these people harp suffices completely to condemn the
   Arians, and to demonstrate their malignity. For he wrote, not in angry
   controversy, but to defend himself on the points where he was under
   suspicion. But in defending himself against charges, what does he do if
   not, while disposing of every charge of which he was suspected, by this
   very fact convict the Arian madmen of malignity? But, to complete their
   confusions by means of what he wrote in his defence, come, let me set
   before you his actual words. For from them you will learn firstly that
   the Arians are malicious, secondly that Dionysius has nothing to do
   with their error. To begin with, then, he wrote his letter as in
   Refutation and in Defence. But this means, surely, that he aims at
   refuting false statements, and defends himself for what he has written;
   shewing that he wrote not as Arius supposed, but that in mentioning
   what is said concerning the Lord in His human aspect, he was not
   ignorant that He was the Word and Wisdom undivided from the Father.
   Then he blames those who spoke against him for not quoting his language
   as a whole, but garbling it, and speaking not in good faith but
   disingenously and arbitrarily. And he compares them to those who used
   to impeach the letters of the blessed Apostle. But this complaint of
   his entirely clears him from sinister suspicion. For if he considers
   the detractors of Paul to be like his own, he shews precisely this,
   that he wrote as he did in Paul's sense. At any rate, in meeting
   severally the charges of his opponents, he explains all the passages
   cited by them: and, whereas in these latter he upsets Sabellius, in his
   subsequent letters he shews how sound and pious is his own faith.
   Accordingly whereas they would have it that Dionysius held that God was
   not always a Father, the Son did not always exist, but God existed
   apart from the Word, while the Son Himself was not before He was
   begotten: on the contrary, there was a time when He was not, for He is
   not eternal but has come later into being,'--see how he replies! Most
   of what he said, whether in the form of investigations, or collective
   inferences, or interrogatory refutations, or charges against his
   accusers, I omit because of the length of his discourses, inserting
   only what is strictly relevant to the charges against him. In answer to
   these, he writes after certain prefatory matter, in the first book
   inscribed Refutation and Defence' in the following terms.

   15. Extracts from the Refutation and Defence.'

   For never was there a time when God was not a father.' And this he
   acknowledges in what follows, that Christ is for ever, being Word and
   Wisdom and Power. For it is not to be supposed that God, having at
   first no such issue, afterwards begat a Son, but that the Son has His
   being not of Himself but of the Father.' And a little way on he adds on
   the same subject, But being the brightness of light eternal, certainly
   He is Himself eternal; for as the light exists always, it is evident
   that the brightness must exist always as well. For it is by the fact of
   its shining that the existence of light is perceived, and there cannot
   be light that does not give light. For let us come back to our
   examples. If there is sun, there is sunlight, there is day. If there is
   none of these things, it is quite impossible for there to be sun. If
   then the sun were eternal, the day also would be unceasing. But in
   fact, as that is not so, the day begins and ceases with the sun. But
   God is light eternal, never beginning nor ceasing. The brightness then
   lies before Him eternally, and is with Him without beginning and
   ever-begotten, shining in His Presence, being that Wisdom which said,
   "I was that wherein he rejoiced, and daily I was glad in his presence
   at all times" (Prov. viii. 30).' And again after a little he resumes
   the same subject with the words, The Father then being eternal, the Son
   is eternal, being Light of Light: for if there is a parent there is
   also a child. But if there were not a child, how and of whom can there
   be a parent? But there are both, and that eternally.' Then again he
   adds, God then being light, Christ is brightness; and being Spirit, for
   "God is a Spirit" (John iv. 24),--in like manner Christ is called the
   breath, for He is the "breath of the power of God" (Wisd. vii. 25).'
   And again, to quote the second book, he says, But only the Son, who
   always is with the Father and is filled of Him that IS, Himself also IS
   from the Father.'

   16. Contrast of the language of Dionysius with that of Arius.

   Now if the sense of the above statements were doubtful, there would be
   need of an interpreter. But since he wrote plainly and repeatedly on
   the same subject, let Arius gnash his teeth when he sees his own heresy
   subverted by Dionysius, and hears him say what he does not wish to
   hear: God was always Father, and the Son is not absolutely eternal, but
   His eternity flows from the eternity of the Father, and He coexists
   with Him as brightness with the light.' But let these, who have so much
   as imagined that Dionysius held with Arius, lay aside such a slander
   against him. For what have they in common, when Arius says, The Son was
   not before He was begotten, but there was once a time when He was not,'
   whereas Dionysius teaches, Now God is Light eternal, neither beginning,
   nor ever to end: accordingly the brightness lies before Him eternally,
   and coexists with Him, shining before Him without beginning and
   ever-begotten.' For in fact to meet the suspicion of others who allege
   that Dionysius in speaking of the Father does not name the Son, and
   again in speaking of the Son does not name the Father, but divides,
   removes, and separates the Son from the Father, he replies and puts
   them to shame in the second book, as follows.

   17. Dionysius did not separate the Persons of the Holy Trinity.

   Each of the names I have mentioned is inseparable and indivisible [972]
   from that next to it. I spoke of the Father, and before referring to
   the Son I designated Him too in the Father. I referred to the Son,--and
   even if I did not also expressly mention the Father, certainly He was
   to be understood beforehand in the Son. I added the Holy Spirit, but at
   the same time I further added both whence and through whom He
   proceeded. But they are ignorant that neither is the Father, qua
   Father, separated from the Son,--for the name carries that relationship
   with it,--nor is the Son expatriated from the Father. For the title
   Father denotes the common bond. But in their hands is the Spirit, who
   cannot be parted either from Him that sent or from Him that conveyed
   Him: How then can I, who use these names, imagine that they are
   sundered and utterly [973] separated from one another?' And after a
   little he goes on, Thus then we extend the Monad [974] indivisibly into
   the Triad, and conversely gather together the Triad without diminution
   into the Monad.'

   18. Dionysius did not hold that the Son was not of one essence with the
   Father.

   Next he confutes them upon their charge that he called the Son one of
   the things originated, and not of one essence with the Father (once
   more in the first book) as follows: Only in saying that certain things
   were perceived to be originated and created, I gave them as examples
   cursorily, as being less adequate, saying that neither was the plant
   [of one essence] with the husbandman, nor the boat with its builder.
   Then I dwelt more upon more apposite and suitable comparisons, and went
   at greater length into those nearer the truth, making out various
   proofs, which I wrote to you [975] in another letter, by means of which
   proofs I shewed also that the charge they allege against me is untrue,
   namely, that I denied Christ to be of one essence with God. For even if
   I argue that I have not found this word (homoousion) nor read it
   anywhere in the Holy Scriptures, yet my subsequent reasonings, which
   they have suppressed, do not discord with its meaning. For I gave the
   example of human birth evidently as being homogeneous, and saying that
   certainly the parents only differed from their children in not being
   themselves the children, else it would follow that there was no such
   thing as parents or children. And the letter, as I said before, I am
   prevented by circumstances from producing, else I would have sent you
   the exact words I then used, or rather a copy of all the letter: which
   I will do if I have an opportunity. But I know, and recollect, that I
   added several similitudes from kindred relations. For I said that a
   plant, sprung from a seed or root, was different from that whence it
   sprung, and at the same time entirely of one nature with it: and that a
   stream flowing from a well receives another form and name,--for the
   well is not called a river, nor the river a well,--and that both
   existed, and that the well was as it were a father, while the river was
   water from the well. But they pretend not to see these and the like
   written statements, but to be as it were blind, while they try to pelt
   me with two unconnected expressions like stones, from a distance, not
   knowing that in matters beyond our knowledge, and which require
   training to apprehend, frequently not only foreign, but even contrary
   examples serve to illustrate the problem in hand.' And in the third
   book he says, Life was begotten of Life, and flowed as a river from a
   well, and from Light unquenchable bright Light was kindled.'

   19. Inconsistency of the Arian appeal to Dionysius.

   Who that hears this will not set down as mad those who suspect
   Dionysius of holding with Arius? For lo! in these words, by arguments
   based on truth, he tramples upon his entire heresy. For by the simile
   of the Brightness he destroys the statements that He was not before He
   was begotten,' and There was a time when He was not,' as also by saying
   that His Father was never without issue. But their allegation that He
   was made of nothing' he destroys by saying that the Word was like a
   river from a well, and a shoot from a stock, and a child from a parent,
   and Light from Light, and Life from Life. And their barring off and
   separating the Word from God, he overthrows by saying that the Triad is
   without division and without diminution gathered together into the
   Monad. While their statement that the Son has no part in the Father's
   essence, he unequivocally tramples down by saying that the Son is of
   one essence with the Father. Wherein one must wonder at the impudence
   of the irreligious persons. How can they, when Dionysius whom they
   claim as their partisan says that the Son is of one essence [976] ,
   themselves go about buzzing like gnats with the complaint that the
   Synod was wrong in writing of one essence?' For if Dionysius is a
   friend of theirs, let them not deny what their partisan holds. But if
   they think that the expression was wrongly used, how can they reiterate
   that Dionysius, who used it, held with them? the more so as he does not
   appear to have written these things merely by the way, but having
   previously written other letters [977] , he convicts of falsehood those
   who had charged him with not saying that the Son was of one Essence
   with the Father, while he refutes those who thought that he said that
   the Word was originated, shewing that he did not hold what they
   supposed, but even if he had used the expressions, he had done so
   merely in order to shew that it was the Son, not the Father, who had
   put on the originated, formed, created body; for which reason the Son
   also is said to have been originated, created, and formed.

   20. Dionysius must be fairly interpreted, and allowed the benefit of
   his own explanatory statements.

   Clearly since he had previously used such expressions, while bidding a
   long farewell to the Arians, he demands a good conscience from his
   hearers,--being entitled to plead the difficulty, or perhaps one may
   say the incomprehensibleness of the problems concerned,--namely that
   they may judge not of the words but of the meaning of the writer, and
   the more so as there is very much to shew his intention. For instance
   he says himself: I used the examples of such relations cursorily, as
   being less adequate, the plant and the husbandman for instance; while I
   dwelt upon the more pertinent examples, and went at greater length into
   those nearer the truth.' But a man who says this shews that it is
   nearer the truth to say that the Son is eternal and of the Father, than
   to say that He is originated. For by the latter the bodily nature of
   the Lord is denoted, but by the former, the eternity of His Godhead. In
   the following words, for instance, he maintains, and not only so, but
   deliberately and with genuine demonstrative force, that they are
   refuted who charged him with not saying that the Son is of one essence
   with the Father: even if I did not find this expression in the
   Scriptures, yet collecting from the actual Scriptures their general
   sense, I knew that, being Son and Word, He could not be outside the
   Essence of the Father.' For that he does not hold the Son to be a thing
   created or formed,--for on this point also they have quoted him
   repeatedly--he says in the second book as follows: But if any one of my
   traducers, because I called God the Creator the maker of all things,
   thinks that I mean that He is Maker of Christ also, let him mark that I
   previously called Him Father, in which term the Son also is implied.
   For after I said that the Father is Maker, I added neither is He Father
   of the things He created, if He that begat is to be called Father in
   the strict sense. For the wider sense of the term Father we will work
   out in what follows. Neither is the Father a maker, if by maker is
   meant simply the artificer. For among the Greeks, philosophers are
   called "makers" of their own discourses. And the Apostle speaks of a
   "doer" (poietes) "of the law" (Rom. ii. 13), for men are called "doers"
   of inward qualities, such as virtue and vice; as God said, "I looked
   for one to do justice, but he did wickedness "' (Isa. v. 7, LXX).

   21. In what sense Dionysius said that the Son was made.'

   Of a truth one that hears this is reminded of the divine oracle which
   says, whithersoever the impious turns, he is destroyed' (Prov. xii. 7,
   LXX). For lo! turning subtly in each direction these impious men are
   destroyed, having even here no excuse as touching Dionysius. For he
   teaches openly that the Son is not a thing made or created, while he
   taxes and corrects those who accuse him of having said that God was the
   creator (of Christ), in that they failed to notice that he had
   previously spoken of God as Father, in which expression the Son also is
   implied. But in saying thus, he shews that the Son is not one of the
   creatures, and that God is not the maker but the Father of His own
   Word. And since certain had ignorantly objected to him that he called
   God the maker of Christ, he defends himself in various ways, shewing
   that not even here is what he said open to blame. For he had said that
   God was the maker of Christ in regard to His flesh, which the Word
   took, and which was in itself created. But if any one were to suspect
   that this referred to the Word, here too they were bound to give him a
   fair hearing. For as I do not hold that the Word is a creature, and
   call God not His maker but His Father, even if I in passing, while
   referring to the Son, call God a creator, yet even here I am able to
   defend myself. For the Greek philosophers call themselves makers
   (poietai) of their own discourses (logoi), although they are their
   fathers; while the Divine Scripture describes us as makers (doers) even
   of the motions of our hearts, speaking of "doers" of the law and of
   judgment and justice.' So that on all sides he demonstrates not only
   that the Son is not a thing made or created, but also that he himself
   has nothing to do with Arian error.

   22. The relation of the Son to the Father is essential, according to
   Dionysius.

   For let not any Arian suppose that he says even anything of the
   following kind: The Son coexists with the Father, so that while the
   names are correlated, the things are widely removed; and whereas the
   Son did not always coexist with the Father, since the Son came into
   being, God received from that fact the additional name of Father, and
   His coexistence with Him dates from that time as happens in the case of
   men. On the contrary, let him observe and bear in mind what we have
   said before, and he will see that the faith of Dionysius is correct.
   For in saying, For there was no time when God was not Father,' and
   again, God at any rate is light eternal without beginning nor ever to
   end, accordingly the brightness is eternally before Him and coexists
   with Him, without beginning and ever-begotten, shining in His
   presence,' he should make it impossible for any one to entertain any
   such suspicion against him. Moreover the examples of the well and the
   river, and the root and the branch, and the breath and the vapour, put
   to shame the adversaries of Christ when they reiterate the contrary
   against him.

   23. Dionysius did not hold that there are two Words.

   But since in addition to all his own iniquities Arius has raked up this
   expression also as if from a dunghill, adding that, The Word is not the
   Father's own, but the Word that is in God is different, while this one,
   the Lord, is outside of and has nothing to do with the Essence of the
   Father, and is only called "Word" conceptually [978] , and is not by
   nature and of a truth Son of God, but is called Son, He too, by
   adoption, as a creature;'--and since saying thus he boasts among the
   ignorant as though here too he has Dionysius as his partisan;--look at
   the faith of Dionysius on these points also, how he contradicts these
   perversities of Arius. For in the first book he writes as follows: Now
   I have said that God is the well of all that is good: while the Son has
   been described as the river which proceeds from Him. For word is an
   efflux of intelligence, and, to borrow language applicable to men, the
   intelligence that issues by the tongue is derived from the heart
   through the mouth, coming out different from the word in the heart. For
   the latter remains, after sending forth the other, as it was. But the
   other is sent forth and flies forth, and is borne in every direction.
   And so each is in the other, and each distinct from the other: and they
   are one and at the same time two. Likewise the Father and the Son were
   said to be one, and the One in the other.' And in the fourth book he
   says: For as our intelligence utters the word from itself, as the
   prophet says, My heart uttered a good word (Ps. xlv. 1), and, while
   either is distinct from the other, occupying a place of its own
   distinct from the other, the one dwelling and stirring in the heart,
   the other upon the tongue,--yet they are not separated, not for a
   moment lost to one another, nor is the intelligence without utterance
   (alogos), nor the word without intelligence, but the intelligence
   creates the Word being manifested in it, and the Word shews forth the
   intelligence having originated in it, and the intelligence is as it
   were an internal word, and the word an issuing intelligence; the
   intelligence passing over into the word, while the word circulates the
   intelligence among the hearers: and so the intelligence through the
   word gains a lodgment in the souls of the hearers, entering in along
   with the word; and the intelligence is as it were the father of the
   word, existing in itself, while the word is as it were the son of the
   intelligence, having its origin, not of course before the latter, nor
   yet concurrently with it from some external source, but by springing
   out of it;--so the mighty Father and universal Intelligence has the Son
   before all things as His Word, Interpreter and Messenger.'

   24. If the Arians agree with Dionysius let them use his language.

   These things Arius either never heard, or heard and in his ignorance
   did not understand. For otherwise, had he understood, he would not have
   so grossly libelled the Bishop, but certainly would revile him also, as
   he did ourselves, because of his hatred of the truth. For being an
   adversary of Christ, he will not hesitate to persecute also those who
   hold the doctrine of Christ, as the Lord Himself has said beforehand:
   If they persecuted Me, they will also persecute you' (Joh. xv. 20). Or,
   if the leaders of impiety think Dionysius was a partisan of theirs, let
   them write and confess what he did. Let them write about the vine and
   the husbandman, the boat and the shipbuilder; and let them at the same
   time confess, as he did in his defence, the Unity of Essence, and that
   the Son is of the Father's Substance, and eternal; and the relation of
   intelligence and word, and the well and the river, and the rest; in
   order that they may see from the very contrast that he used the former
   class of language for a special purpose, but the latter as expressing
   the full meaning of the Christian Faith. And consequently let them, by
   adopting this language, revoke what they have held inconsistently with
   it. For in what way does the faith of Dionysius even approximate to the
   mischief of Arius? Does not Arius restrict the term Word to a
   conceptual sense, while Dionysius calls Him the true Word of God by
   nature? and while the one banishes the Word from the Father, the other
   teaches that He is the Father's own, and inseparable from His Essence,
   as the word is to the intelligence and the river to the well. If then
   any one is able to separate and banish the word from the intelligence,
   or to put asunder the river and the well, and wall them off, or to say
   that the river is of another essence than the well, and to shew that
   the water is from elsewhere, or ventures to divide the brightness from
   the light and to say that the brightness is from another essence, then
   let him join Arius in his madness. For such an one will cease to have
   the semblance even of human intelligence. But if Nature knows that
   these are indivisible, and that the offspring of those objects is their
   very own, then let no one any longer hold with Arius or slander
   Dionysius, but rather on these grounds admire the plainness of his
   language and the correctness of his faith.

   25. The teaching of Dionysius on the Word (continued).

   For with reference to the madness of Arius when he says that the Word
   which is in God is distinct from that one of which John said, In the
   beginning was the Word' (Joh. i. 1), and that God's own wisdom within
   Himself is not the same as that to which the Apostle refers as Christ
   the power of God and the wisdom of God' (1 Cor. i. 24), Dionysius
   resists and denounces any such error, as you may see in the second book
   where he writes on the subject as follows: "In the beginning was the
   Word;" but it was not Word that sent forth the Word, for "the Word was
   with God." The Lord has been made wisdom (cf. 1 Cor. i. 30): He then
   that sent out Wisdom was not Wisdom, for "I was she," saith Wisdom, "in
   whom He delighted." Christ is truth: but "Blessed," saith He, "be the
   God of truth"' (1 Esdr. iv. 40). There He overthrows both Sabellius and
   Arius, and shews both heresies to be equal in impiety. For neither is
   the Father of the Word Himself Word, nor is the offspring of the Father
   a creature, but the Own-begotten of His essence. And again the Word
   that proceeded forth is not Father, nor again is He one word out of
   many; but He alone is the Father's Son, the true and genuine Son by
   nature, Who both now is in Him, and is eternally and indivisibly from
   within Him. Thus the Lord is both Wisdom and Truth, and is not in the
   second place after another wisdom; but He alone it is through whom the
   Father made all things, and in Him He made the manifold essences of
   created things, and through Him He is made known to whom He will, and
   in Him He carries on and effects His universal providence. For Him
   alone does Dionysius recognise as Word of God. This is the faith of
   Dionysius: for I have collected and copied a few statements from his
   letters, enough to induce you to add to their number, but to put the
   Arians to utter shame on account of their libel upon the Bishop. For in
   all, even the details, of what he wrote, he exposed their error and
   branded their heresy.

   26. How Dionysius dealt with the Sabellians.

   Hence too it is manifest that even the letter to Euphranor and Ammonius
   was written by him in a different sense and for a special purpose. For
   this his defence makes plain. And in truth this is an effective form of
   argument for the subversion of the madness of Sabellius, for him that
   wishes for a short way with those heretics, not to start from
   expressions applicable to the deity of the Word, such as that the Son
   is God's Word and Wisdom and Power, and that I and the Father are one'
   (John x. 30), lest they, perverting what is well said should use such
   expressions as a pretext for their unblushing contentiousness, when
   they hear the texts, I and the Father are one,' and he that hath seen
   Me hath seen the Father.' (John x. 30; xiv. 9); but to emphasize what
   is said of the Saviour as Man, as He Himself has done, such as His
   hungering and thirsting, and being weary, and how He is the Vine, and
   how He prayed and has suffered. For in so far as these are lowly
   expressions, it becomes all the clearer that it was not the Father that
   was made man. For it follows, when the Lord is called the Vine, that
   there must also be a husbandman: and when He prayed, that there was one
   to hear, and when He asked, that there was one to give. Now such things
   shew far more readily the madness of the Sabellians, because He that
   prayed was one, He that heard another, one the Vine and another the
   Husbandman. For whatever expressions are cited to distinguish between
   the Son and the Father are used of Him by reason of the flesh which He
   bore for our sake. For created things are distinct in nature from God.
   Accordingly since, the flesh being a created thing, the Word,' as John
   says, was made flesh' (John i. 14), although He is by nature the
   Father's own and inseparable from Him, yet by reason of the flesh the
   Father is widely distinguished from Him. For He Himself permits that
   what is appropriate to the flesh should be said of him, that it may be
   made plain that the body was His own and not that of any other. But
   this being the sense of these sayings, Sabellius will be the more
   quickly confuted, it being proved that it was not the Father that was
   made flesh, but His Word, who also redeemed the flesh and offered it to
   the Father. But thus having confuted and persuaded him, he will next be
   able more readily to teach him concerning the deity of the Word, how
   that He is the Word and Wisdom, Son and Power, Brightness and Express
   Image. For it is here again a necessary inference that as the Word
   exists, there must also exist the Father of the Word, and as Wisdom
   exists, there exists also its Parent, and as Brightness exists so also
   does the Light; and that in this manner the Son and the Father are one.

   27. Conclusion.

   Dionysius knew this when he wrote. And by his first letters he silenced
   Sabellius, and in his others he overcame the heresy of Arius. For just
   as the human attributes of the Saviour overthrew Sabellius, so against
   the Arian madmen one must use proofs drawn not from the human
   attributes but from what betokens the deity of the Word, lest they
   pervert what is said of the Lord by reason of His Body, and think that
   the Word is of like nature with us men, and so abide still in their
   madness. But if they also are taught about His deity they will condemn
   their own error; and when they understand that the Word was made flesh,
   they too will the more easily distinguish in future the human
   characteristics from those which fit His deity. But this being so, and
   the Bishop Dionysius having been shewn by his writings to be pious,
   what will the Arian madmen do next? Convicted on this evidence, whom
   will they again venture to malign? For they needs must, since they have
   fallen from the foundation of the Apostles and have no settled mind of
   their own, seek some support, and if they can find none, then malign
   the fathers. But no one will believe them any more even if they make
   efforts to libel them, for the heresy is condemned on all hands. Unless
   perchance they will henceforth speak of the devil, for he is their only
   partisan, or rather he it is who suggested their heresy to them. Who
   then can any longer call men Christians' whose leader is the devil, and
   not rather Diabolici,' so that they may bear the name not merely of
   adversaries of Christ, but of partisans of the devil? Unless indeed
   they change round, and, rejecting the impiety they have contrived, come
   to know the truth. For this will at once be for their own good, and it
   is thus that it beseems us to pray for all those that are in error.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [966] prosopou: but see also Newman's note 2 on de Decr. §14.

   [967] See Epiphanius, Hær. lxviii. 1. The arrangement is recognised as
   one of old standing in the sixth canon of Nicæa, Let the old customs
   which exist in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis remain in force, namely
   that the Bishop of Alexandria should have authority over all these
   regions; since this is also customary for the Bishop of Rome. Likewise
   also at Antioch and in the other prefectures (it is decreed) that their
   prerogatives should be maintained to those churches.' The canon points
   to the natural explanation of the arrangement: the bishops of the
   capitals began from a very early date to exercise a loosely defined but
   gradually strengthening supervision over those of the rest of the
   province. In particular, they came to exercise a veto (and latterly
   more than a veto) upon the appointments to the provincial sees (ei tis
   choris gnomes, ib.). The bishops of Alexandria as well as Rome had even
   at this date acquired something of the rank of secular potentates
   (dunasteia, Socr. vii. 11, ede palai), but not to the extent to which
   it went later on (ib. 7. and supr. Apol. Ar. §9).

   [968] therapeuein. For the word, cf. Hatch, Hibb. Lect. p. 80 note.

   [969] kat' oikonomian, as below §24. Cf. de Decr. §25, note 5. The word
   oikonomia has two main senses in Athanasius, both derived from the
   classical sense of management or dispensation, the adapting of means
   toward an end. (1) As in the present passage (cf. Origen in Migne XI.
   p. 77 b, oikonomikos): a use which is the lineal ancestor of the
   ill-sounding word economy' as a term in casuistry; (2) as applied to
   the Incarnation of our Lord, regarded as the Dispensation, the Divine
   Method for the salvation of mankind. This use is very frequent in St.
   Athanasius (compare Ep. Æg. 2. and Orat. ii. 11), and in earlier
   Fathers from Ignatius (Eph. 18 ekuophorethe hupo Marias kat'
   oikonomian, where Lightfoot refers to a more detailed history of the
   word in his unpublished note on Eph. i. 10) downwards (references in
   Soph. Lex. s.v.).

   [970] See Westcott, Introduction to the Gospels, Appendix C, 5.

   [971] Cf. Orat. i. 48, note 7, and ii. 56, note 5.

   [972] This passage is somewhat differently rendered by Dr. Pusey in his
   letter on the Filioque (1876), p. 112.

   [973] The pantelos somewhat qualifies the repudiation. Dionysius
   expressly maintained three Hypostases in the Holy Trinity, in contrast
   to the language of Rome (de Decr. 26 note 7a) and the later use of
   Athanasius himself. But see the Tom. ad Antioch. of 362, below, and
   supra p. 90, note 2. Dionysius of Rome repudiates treis memerismenas
   hupostaseis, while Dionysius of Alexandria (in Bas. de Sp. S.)
   maintains that unless three Hypostases be recognised, the divine Triad
   is denied.

   [974] As pointed out by Newman on De Decr. 25, note 9, Trias and Monas
   are concrete, Trinitas and Unitas abstract terms; so that while
   Trinitas (and Monas) lend themselves to a Sabellian, Trias and Unitas
   may be pressed into an Arian sense: but each pair of terms (Greek and
   Latin) holds the balance evenly between the opposite
   misinterpretations.

   [975] To you' is omitted in the extract de Decr. 25.

   [976] It should be noted that Dionysius while assenting to this word,
   does not use it as his own.

   [977] Possibly to other bishops who had questioned his teaching (Routh,
   Rell. iii. p. 380).

   [978] See Orat. ii. 37. note 7.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introduction to Vita S. Antoni.

   ------------------------

   (Written between 356 and 362)

   The Life of St. Antony is included in the present collection partly on
   account of the important influence it has exercised upon the
   development of the ascetic life in the Church, partly and more
   especially on the ground of its strong claim to rank as a work of
   Athanasius. If that claim were undisputed, no apology would be needed
   for its presence in this volume. If on the other hand its spurious and
   unhistorical character had been finally demonstrated, its insertion
   would be open to just objections. As it is, the question being still in
   dispute, although the balance of qualified opinion is on the side of
   the Athanasian authorship, it is well that the reader should have the
   work before him and judge for himself. To assist his judgment, it will
   be attempted in the following paragraphs to state the main reasons on
   either side. In doing so, I can honestly disclaim any bias for or
   against the Vita, or monasticism. Monasticism, with all its good and
   evil, is a great outgrowth of human life and instinct, a great fact in
   the history of the Christian religion; and whether its origin is to be
   put fifty years earlier or later (for that is the net value of the
   question at issue) is a somewhat small point relatively to the great
   problems which it offers to the theologian, the historian, and the
   moralist. But the point is at any rate worthy of careful and
   dispassionate examination. In attempting this, while holding no brief
   for either side, I may as well at once state my opinion on the
   evidence, namely that, genuine as are many of the difficulties which
   surround the question, the external evidence for the Vita is too strong
   to allow us to set it aside as spurious, and that in view of that
   evidence the attempts to give a positive account of the book as a
   spurious composition have failed.

   1. Bibliography. a. Sources. The only reference to Antony in other
   writings of Athanasius is in Hist. Ar. 14. See also Fest. Index x. Vita
   Pachomii in Act. SS. Mai., Tom. iii. Appx. (written late in the fourth
   century, but by a person who had known Pachomius). Coptic fragments and
   documents (for early history of Egyptian monasticism with occasional
   details about Antony) in Zoega, Catalogus codd. Copticorum, (Rome,
   1810), Mingarelli, Codd. copticorum reliquiæ, (Bologna, 1785),
   Revillout, Rapport sur une mission, etc. (in Archives des Missions
   scientifiques et littéraires, 3^me, série, 1879, vol. 4), Amélineau,
   Hist. de S. Pakhôme, &c. (Annales du Musée Guimet, vol. xvii. Paris,
   1889).

   b. Modern discussions. Since the Reformation the general tendency of
   protestant writers has been to discredit, of Roman Catholics to
   maintain the authority of the Vita. To the former class belong the
   Magdeburg Centuriators, Rivet, Basnage, Casimir Oudin; to the latter,
   Bellarmin, Noel Alexandre, and above all Montfaucon in the Benedictine
   edition of Athanasius (especially in the Vita Athanasii, Animadversio
   II. in Vitam et Scripta S.A., and the Monitum in Antonii Vitam, which
   latter may still claim the first rank in critical discussions of the
   problem). We may add, as more or less unbiassed defenders of the Vita,
   Cave (Hist. Lit. i. 193), and Tillemont (Mem. vol. vii.). All the above
   belong to the period before 1750. In more recent times the attack has
   been led by Weingarten (Ursprung des Mönchtums in nachkonst. zeitalter,
   reprinted in 1877 from Zeitschrift für K.G. 1876, and in Herzog, vol.
   x. pp. 758 sqq.), followed by Gass (in Ztsch. K.G. II. 274), and
   Gwatkin (Studies, &c. pp. 98-103). Israel, in Zeitsch. Wiss. Theol.
   1880, p. 130, &c., characterises Weingarten's attack on the Vita as too
   bold.' Keim (Aus dem Urchr. 207 sqq.) and Hilgenfeld (in Zeitsch. f.
   Wiss. Theol. 1878) put the book in the lifetime of Ath. without
   absolutely pronouncing for him as the author, while Hase (J. Prot. Th.
   1880), Harnack (especially in Th. Ltz. xi. 391, see also Das Mönchtum'
   u.s.w., Giessen, 1886), Möller, Lehrb. der K.G. i. 372, and Eichhorn
   (Athanasii de vita ascetica testimonia,' Halle, 1886, the most
   convincing discussion of recent date, and indispensable) decide without
   hesitation in its favour. The discussion of Bornemann (In investigando
   monachatus origine, quibus de causis ratio habenda sit Origenis,
   Leipzig, 1885) may also be mentioned as bearing on the general subject;
   also the articles Monastery,' Coenobium,' and Hermits' in D. C. A. The
   article Antony' in D. C. B. passes over the question without
   discussion, excepting the trite, but untenable, statement that the Vita
   is probably interpolated.' Farrar (Lives of the Fathers, and Contemp.
   Review, Nov. 1887) follows Gwatkin. Picturesque representations of
   Antony (from the Vita) in Kingsley's Hermits and Newman's Historical
   Sketches, vol. 2.

   2. External evidence as to authorship and date. This is given by
   Montfaucon in the Monitum and reproduced by Eichhorn, pp. 36 sqq.

   i. The Version of Evagrius. Evagrius, presbyter (Eustathian) and
   subsequently (388) Bishop at Antioch (in Italy 364-373), translated the
   Vita Antonii into Latin. He prefaced with a short apology (see below,
   Vit. Ant. §1, note 1) for the freedom of his rendering, addressed
   Innocentio carissimo filio.' Now this Innocent, the friend of Jerome
   and Evagrius, died in the summer of 374, almost exactly a year after
   the death of Athanasius (D. C. B. iii. 31, 251). Of this identification
   there is no reason to doubt; still less ground is there for the
   hesitation (Hist. Lit. I. 283, non una est dubitandi ratio') of Cave
   and others as to the identity of the version, printed by Montfaucon and
   transmitted by very numerous mss. (quæ ingenti numero vidi,' Migne xxv.
   p. clviii.) with that actually made by Evagrius. Therefore, even if we
   make the two very improbable assumptions that the Dedication to
   Innocentius falls within a few weeks or days of his death (i.e. during
   the journey from Italy to Syria!), and that the Vita was translated by
   Evagrius almost immediately upon its composition, the composition of
   the Vita falls within a few months of the death of Athanasius. Its
   antiquity then is fully conceded' even by Mr. Gwatkin (Studies, p. 103,
   who yet, p. 98, puts it down to the generation after Athanasius!'). The
   translation of Evagrius also preserves what looks like the original
   heading. It should be added that the Evagrian version (read in the
   light of its preface), entirely excludes the hypothesis that the Greek
   text of the Vita is interpolated. Evagrius avowedly abridges at times,
   while in some cases he embellishes (see §82, note 16).

   ii. Jerome wrote his Vita Pauli in the Syrian desert, between 374 and
   379. He mentions both the Vita and its Latin Version in the prologue:
   if he had seen the latter he can scarcely have been ignorant of its
   heading. The non-mention of Athanasius as the author is an argumentum
   ex silentio of the most precarious kind. Some fifteen years later (de
   Script Eccles. 87, 88, 125) he repeatedly mentions Athanasius as the
   author, and specifies Evagrius as the translator.

   iii. Ephrem the Syrian (Opp. ed. 1732-43, I. p. 249) quotes Saint'
   Athanasius by name as the biographer of Antony. Ephrem died in 373. But
   little stress can be laid upon this testimony, in view of the lack of a
   critical sifting of the works which bear the name of this saint (so
   Tillemont viii. 229, and vii. 138). More important is

   iv. Gregory Naz. Or. 21, Athanasius compiled the biography of the
   divine Antony tou monadikou biou nomothesian en plasmati diegeseos'
   (cf. Vita, Prologue). This oration was delivered in 380, seven years
   after the death of Athanasius. Gregory, it is true, is not a good judge
   on a point of criticism. But he expresses the opinion of his time, and
   confirms and is confirmed by the evidence of Evagrius and Jerome.

   v. Rufinus, Hist. Eccl. I. viii. He would give an account of Antony,
   but ille libellus exclusit qui ab Athanasio scriptus etiam Latino
   Sermone editus est.' This was written 400 a.d.: if in a later work
   (Hist. Mon. 30, and see also 29) he happens to allude to the Vita
   without mentioning its author, we are not entitled to say that to
   Rufinus the work is anonymous' (Gwatkin, p. 103).

   vi. The Life of Pachomius, which (as above mentioned) has details of
   Antony's life independent of the Vita, also mentions the latter (c. 1)
   as the work of Athanasius. Though written perhaps as late as 390, this
   document is of great weight as evidence in the case (see Krüger in
   Theol. Ltzg. 1890, p. 620).

   vii. Paulinus in his prologue to the Life of Ambrose (after 400) refers
   to the Vita as written by Athanasius.

   viii. Fifth-century historians, Palladius, Hist. Laus. 8, Socrates (H.
   E., i. 21) Sozomenus (i. 13) attest the established tradition of their
   day that Athanasius was the author of the Life.

   ix. Augustine (Conf. viii. 14, 15, 19, 29) and Chrysostom (Hom. 8 on S.
   Matthew) mention the Vita without giving the name of the author. But we
   are not entitled to cite them as witnesses to its (alleged) anonymity,
   which they neither affirm nor imply.

   The above witnesses, all of whom excepting No. viii. come within 50
   years of the death of Athanasius, are a formidable array. No other work
   of Athanasius can boast of such external evidence in its favour. And in
   the face of such evidence it is impossible to place the composition
   later than the lifetime of the great Bishop. We have therefore to ask
   whether the contents of the Vita are in irreconcileable conflict with
   the result of the external evidence: whether they point, not indeed to
   a later age, for the external evidence excludes this, but to an author
   who during the lifetime of Athanasius (i.e. not later than the year of
   his death) ventured to publish a hagiographic romance in his name
   (Evagrian' heading, and §§71, 82).

   3. Internal Evidence. It may be remarked in limine that for the
   existence of Antony there is not only the evidence of the Vita itself,
   but also that of many other fourth-century documents (see above 1.a.
   under sources'). Weingarten quite admits this (R. E., X. 774, but he
   implies the contrary in his Zeit-tafeln, ed. 3, p. 228); and Mr.
   Gwatkin is certainly far ahead of his evidence when he pronounces
   (Arian Controversy, p. 48) that Antony never existed.'

   a. Origin and early history of Monasticism. According to the Vita, the
   desert was unknown to monachoi (solitary ascetics) at the time (about
   275? Vit. §3) when Antony first adopted the ascetic life. About the
   year 285 he began his twenty years' sojourn in the ruined fort. To the
   end of this sojourn belongs the first great wave of Monastic settlement
   in the desert. During the later part of the great persecution
   monasteries' and monks begin to abound (§44, 46). The remainder of his
   long life (311-356) is passed mainly in his inner mountain,' where he
   forms the head and centre of Egyptian monasticism. Now it is contended
   by Weingarten and his followers that the Vita is contradicted in this
   important particular by all the real evidence as to the origin of
   monasticism, which cannot be proved to have originated before the death
   of Constantine. But Eichhorn has I think conclusively shewn the
   hastiness of this assumption. Passing over the disputable evidence of
   the De Vita Contemplativa ascribed to Philo, (which Weingarten
   endeavours, against Lucius and others, to put back to a date much
   earlier than the third century and out of relation to Christian
   asceticism [979] ), the writings of Athanasius himself are the
   sufficient refutation of the late date assigned to the rise of
   monachism.

   In the writings of the supposed date (356-362) of the Vita, references
   to monks are very frequent (e.g. Apol. Fug. 4, Apol. Const. 29): but
   previous to this (339) we find them mentioned in Encyl. §3, and yet
   earlier, Apol. Ar. 67 (see below). In the letter to Dracontius (Letter
   49 in this vol.), corporate monasticism is implied to be no novel
   institution. Dracontius himself (about 354) is president of a
   monastery, and many other similar communities are referred to. (Gwatkin
   deals with this letter in an unsatisfactory fashion, p. 102, see the
   letter itself, §§7, 9, and notes.) The letter to Amun, probably earlier
   than that just mentioned, is clearly (sub. fin.) addressed to the head
   of a monastic society. Again, the bishops Muis and Paulus of Letter 49,
   §7, who were monks before their consecration, had been in the monastery
   of Tabennæ before the death of Pachomius, which occurred almost
   certainly in 346 (Eichhorn 12, 13. The whole history of Pachomius, who
   was only a year or two older than Athanasius, although personally but
   little known to him, his monastery being at Tabennæ, an island near
   Philæ, is in conflict with Weingarten's theory). Lastly [980] one of
   the most characteristic and life-like of the documents relating to the
   case of Arsenius and the Council of Tyre, namely the letter of Pinnes
   to John Arcaph (Apol. Ar. 67) carries back the evidence earlier still.
   Pinnes is presbyter of a monastery' (mone): that mone here means a
   society of monks, and not a posting station (Weing. in R. E., X. p.
   775) is clear from the mention of Helias the monk,' and I, Paphnutius,
   monk of the same monastery.' This letter proves that there were not
   only Catholic but Meletian monks, and these not hermits but in
   societies: and thus the origin of the solitary type of monasticism goes
   back as far as the Meletian schism. (The existence of Meletian monks is
   attested independently of this letter, see Eich. p. 347.) Weingarten is
   quite unable to deal with this obstacle to his theory. His argument is
   simply this: either the letter has nothing to do with monks and
   monasteries (he overlooks Paphnutius), or it must be rejected as
   spurious! What reductio ad absurdum could be more complete? In an
   equally desperate way he deals with the clear evidence of Aphraates,
   Hom. vi., as to the existence of (at any rate) solitary monasticism in
   Eastern Syria as early as 336. See Texte und Untersuchungen iii. 3, pp.
   xvi. 89, &c. (Leipzig, 1888.)

   b. Historical misstatements. i. It is better to include under this head
   rather than under the last the title ad peregrinos fratres. Who were
   the foreign monks' (tous en te xene monachous)? The introduction of
   monasticism into the West seems to belong to the time of S. Ambrose
   (Aug. Conf. viii. 6, cf. Sozom. III. 14, the European nations [before
   361] had no experience of monastic societies') or rather Martin of
   Tours (D.C.B. iii. p. 840). The statement (Encycl. Brit. Monachism')
   that Athanasius carried the Vita Atonii to Rome in 340 is based on a
   misunderstanding of Jerome (Ep. 127), who really says no more than that
   the existence of monachism in Egypt first became known at Rome from the
   visits of Athanasius and of his successor Peter. If then the peregrini
   fratres' are to be looked for in the West, we have a serious
   difficulty, and must choose between the Vita and Sozomen. But the
   foreign monks may have belonged to the East. (I cannot see that §93
   assumes,' as Mr. Gwatkin maintains, the existence of numerous monks in
   the West.' What is said is simply that Antony had been heard
   of--ekousthe--in Spain, Gaul, and Africa.) However, the point must be
   left uncertain, and so far allowed to weigh against the Vita.

   ii. Early intercourse of Athanasius with Antony (Prologue, and note 2).
   If the Benedictine text is correct, the reference must be to the period
   before Athanasius became deacon to Bishop Alexander, in fact to a
   period previous to 318 a.d. Tillemont (viii. 652), who maintains the
   other reading, mainly relies upon the impossibility of finding room for
   the intercourse in question in the early life of Athanasius. But his
   only source of knowledge of that period is Rufinus, a very poor
   authority, and Montfaucon replies with some force (Animadv. 11) that we
   have no sufficient information as to how Athanasius passed the years
   previous to his ordination by Alexander. He also suggests that
   Athanasius may have been one of those who followed Antony's example
   (§46, cf. Apol. c. Ar. 6) after his first visit to Alexandria. I may
   add that the notes to the Vita will call attention to several points of
   contact between the teaching of Antony and the earliest treatises of
   Athanasius. Yet the impression left on the mind is here again one of
   uncertainty (cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §1 fin.).

   iii. The narrative about Duke Balacius (§86: see note there) is another
   genuine difficulty, only to be got over if we suppose either that
   Athanasius in one place tells the story inaccurately, and corrects
   himself in the other, or that the Hist. Arian. was partly written for
   Athanasius by a secretary.

   iv. Supposed learning of Antony. His ignorance of letters and of the
   Greek language does not prevent his forcibly employing the most
   effective arguments against Arianism (69), vindicating the Incarnation
   (74) much in the manner of Athanasius, and above all showing a fair
   acquaintance (72-74) with Platonic philosophy (see notes there). But
   everything in the biography points to a man of robust mind, retentive
   memory (3) and frequent intercourse with visitors. If he were so, he
   can scarcely have been ignorant of the theological controversies of his
   day, or of the current philosophical ideas. Nor can I see that the
   philosophy of his argument against the Greeks goes beyond what that
   would imply. His allusion to Plato does not look like a first-hand
   citation. And even an Athanasius would not so entirely rise out of the
   biographical habits of his day as to mingle nothing of his own with the
   speeches of his hero (Equidem quid Antonio quid Athanasio tribuendum
   sit uix diiudicari posse concedo,' Eich. p. 52).

   c. Inconsistencies with Athanasius. It is the most serious objection to
   the Athanasian authorship of the Vita that Athanasius (with the
   exception of the antilegomenon' Hist. Ar. 14) nowhere else mentions
   Antony by name. Especially in the letter to Dracontius, who at first
   refused the Episcopate in the supposed interests of his soul, we might,
   it is argued, have expected a reference to the deep reverence of Antony
   (§67) for even the lowest clergy (the persons enumerated, Letter 49,
   §7, are bishops who had previously been monks, and have nothing to do
   with this question). That is true. We might have expected it. But as a
   matter of fact Athanasius uses another argument instead (see Letter 49,
   §3, note 8^a). It does not follow that he did not know of the Antony of
   the Vita. But although the letter in question has been pressed unduly,
   the general objection, as an argumentum ex silentio on a rather large
   scale, remains [981] . Some more detailed points must now be
   considered.

   a. Demons and Miracles. The writings of Athanasius are singularly free
   from the tendency to indulge in the marvellous. The death of Arius he
   regards as a judgment, and relates it with a certain awe-struck
   sobriety. The pheme of Julian's death in the Narrat. ad Ammon. comes
   less under the head of ecclesiastical miracle than under that of ta
   theia ton pregmaton (Herod. ix. 100, cf. Grote v. 260 sq.); whereas the
   Vita swarms with miraculous and demoniacal stories, some (passed over
   in silence by Newman and other apologists for the Life) indescribably
   silly (e.g. §§53, 63). Hence even Cave allows that the Vita contains
   things tanto viro indigna.' But it must be observed (1) that Antony
   disclaims, and his biographer disclaims for him, inherent miraculous
   power. His miracles are wrought by Christ in answer to prayer, and he
   prefers that those who desire his help should obtain what they want by
   praying for themselves (cf. also §49). (2) That again and again (esp.
   §§16-43) he insists on the absolute subjection of all evil powers to
   God, and their powerlessness to injure believers in Christ. (3) That
   Athanasius recognises semeia (in the sense of miracles, see Letter 49,
   §9, note 9) as a known phenomenon in the case both of bishops and of
   monks. (4) That his language about demons and the power of the sign of
   the Cross in dispersing them is quite of a piece with what is related
   in the Vita (see notes passim). (5) On the clairvoyance of Antony, and
   one or two kindred matters which offer points of contact with phenomena
   that have been recently the subject of careful research, notes will be
   found below giving modern references. On the whole, one could wish that
   Athanasius, who is in so many ways surprisingly in touch with the
   modern mind (supra, introd. to de Incar and Prolegg. ch. iv. §2 d and
   §3), had not written a biography revealing such large credulity. But we
   must measure this credulity of his not by the evidential methods of our
   own day, but by those of his own. If we compare the Vita, not with our
   modern biographies but with those, say, of Paul and Hilarion by Jerome,
   its superiority is striking (this is pointed out by W. Israël in
   Zeitschr für Wiss. Theol. 1878, pp. 130, 137, 145, 153). For myself I
   should certainly prefer to believe that Athanasius had not written many
   things in the Vita: but I would far rather he had written them all than
   the one passage Hist. Ar. §38 fin.

   b. Theology. That there should be certain characteristic differences
   from the theology of Athanasius is what one would expect in an account
   of Antony that bore any relation to the historical person. Such is the
   anthropomorphic tendency, shewn especially in the corporeal nature
   ascribed to demons. Such perhaps is a tinge of naive semi-pelagianism
   about the Hermit's language (§20 and elsewhere); we cannot forget the
   connection of Cassian's Collations with Egyptian monasticism. Once
   again, Antony's shame of the body is not in the spirit of the writer ad
   Amunem' (Gwatkin, Studies, p. 102). Lastly, in Antony's account of the
   heathen gods (§76) we miss the characteristic Euhemerism of Athanasius
   (see supra, pp. 10, 62, &c.). Throughout, in fact, the ruder monastic
   instinct crops up from under the Athanasian style and thought of the
   biographer. But the latter is also unmistakable (see the notes passim),
   and the differences have been certainly made too much of. I will give
   one example from Mr. Gwatkin, who says (ubi supra), Athanasius does not
   speak of pronoia like the Vita (c. 49, 66, 74), for de Fuga 25
   specially refers to his providential escape from Syrianus, and c. Gent.
   47, pronoia ton panton is very incidental.' Now certainly the constant
   introduction of pronoia, which Mr. Gwatkin has understated, is a marked
   feature of the Vita. But I am not prepared to say that Athanasius could
   not speak in this way. The word is common, and even characteristic, in
   his writings. A few examples will support this statement; more will be
   referred to in the index to this volume.

   De Incarn. 2.1. ten ton holon pronoian kath' heauton ouk einai
   mothologousin.

   14. 6. tou dia tes idias pronoias...didaskontos peri tou patros.

   Epist. Æg. 15. blepontes...panta taxei kai pronoi& 139; kinoumena.

   Apol. Fug. 17. emele gar autois...mete ten horismenen para tes Pronoias
   krisin prolambanein (and so in §§9, 16, 22, 25 of this short tract).

   Orat. iii. 37. O Pater en to Uio ton panton ten pronoian poieitai.

   If each one of these and numberless other references to Providence is
   very incidental,' those in the Vita may surely claim the benefit
   (whatever that may be) of the same formula.

   The above are the principal materials for a decision as to the
   genuineness of the Vita: and I do not see how they can justify any
   opinion but that stated at the outset. Against the Vita we have certain
   historical difficulties (intercourse with Athanasius, peregrini
   fratres, Balacius), and arguments ex silentio, a kind of evidence
   seldom conclusive. For it, we have a quite unusual array of external
   evidence, including an almost contemporary version, the absence of any
   room for its date at a safe distance from its traditional author, and
   the many points of contact, as well as the characteristic differences
   between the Vita and the writings of Athanasius. Moreover on the
   kindred question of the origin of monasticism, Weingarten's theory
   breaks down, and leads him to suicidal steps in more than one
   direction. Although, therefore, it is permissible to keep an open mind
   on the subject, we must recognise that the enterprise of the recent
   assailants of the Vita is at present at a dead halt, that overwhelming
   probability is against them.

   But if Athanasius wrote the Vita, it does not follow that all its less
   edifying details are true, nor that its portraiture is free from
   subjectivity [982] . At the same time, to the present writer at least,
   the lineaments of a genuine man, homoiopathous hemin, stand out from
   the story. Doubtless there is idealisation, panegyric, an absence of
   sinfulness (Gwatkin, Studies, p. 100). But the moderate value set on
   miracles (38, 56), the absence of the element of fear from his religion
   (42, &c.), his serene courtesy (73) and uniform cheerfulness (67, 70),
   the caution against being tempted to excess in ascetic exercises (25),
   the ready half-humorous good sense (73, 85) of the man, are human
   touches which belong to flesh and blood, not to hagiographic
   imagination. But here the question is one of individual taste. At any
   rate the Vita embodies the best spirit of early monasticism. It was the
   pure desire to serve God and fulfil the spirit of the Gospel that led
   Antony to part with all that might make the world precious to him, and
   to betake himself to his long voluntary martyrdom of solitude,
   privation, and prayer. We see nothing but tenderness and love of men in
   his character, nothing of the fierce bloodthirsty fanaticism which in
   persons like Senuti made fifth-century monasticism a reproach to the
   Christian name. Had Antony lived in our time, he might have felt that
   the solitary life was a renunciation of the highest vocation of which
   man is capable, the ministry to the material and spiritual needs of
   others. But it is not given to man to see all aspects of truth at once
   and to our bustling, comfort-loving age, even the life of Antony has
   its lesson.

   The Vita has undoubtedly exercised a powerful and wide-spread
   influence. Upon it Jerome modelled his highly idealised tales of Paul
   and Hilarion; at Rome and all over the West it kindled the flame of
   monastic aspirations; it awoke in Augustine (Conf. viii. ubi supra) the
   resolution to renounce the world and give himself wholly to God. The
   ingens numerus of Latin manuscripts, and the imitation of its details
   in countless monastic biographies, testify to its popularity in the
   middle ages. Like monasticism itself, its good influence was not
   without alloy; but on the whole we may claim for it that it tended to
   stimulate the nobler of the impulses which underlie the monastic life.

   A few words may be added on the evidence of the Vita as to the form and
   motive of early monachism. In the Life of Antony, the stages are (1)
   ascetics living in the towns and villages, not withdrawn from society
   (§§3, 4); (2) solitary monasticism in the desert, away from human
   society; and, as the fame of Antony increases, (3) the formation (§44)
   of clusters of cells centering round some natural leader, the germ of
   the laura (such as the community of Tabennæ under Pachomius). Of
   organised monastic communities the Vita tells us nothing. With regard
   to the motive of the earliest monasticism, this has been variously
   sought in (1) the development of the ascetic element present in
   Christianity from the very first; (2) in the influence of the
   Alexandrian School, especially Origen, who again is influenced by the
   spirit of revolt against the body and detachment from the world which
   characterised neo-Platonism (see Bornemann's work mentioned above); (3)
   in the persecutions, which drove Christians to the desert (Eus. H. E.
   vi. 42), which some adopted as their home; (4) to the (not necessarily
   conscious) imitation of analogous heathen institutions, especially the
   societies of hagneuontes which were gathered round or in the temples of
   Serapis (Weingarten, R. E., X. 779-785. Revillout, p. 480 n, refers to
   Zoega, p. 542, for the fact that Pachomius himself was a monk of
   Serapis before his forced baptism by his Christian neighbours; and that
   after it he continued his ascetic life with no external difference. (5)
   To the desire to avoid civil obligations, already marked in the
   Rescript of Valens (Cod. Th. xii. 1. 63, quidam ignauiæ sectatores
   desertis civitatum muneribus, &c.). Of the above motives the Vita gives
   no support to any but the first, which it directly confirms, and
   perhaps indirectly to the second. The date of the Vita depends mainly
   on the view to be taken of §82, where see note 16.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [979] See the note in Vol. I. of this Series, p. 117, D.C.B. iv. 368,
   Theod. Ltzg. xiii. 493-499.

   [980] The silence of Ep. Fest. X. (338) is made much of by Weingarten,
   but there is nothing there to lead up to a reference to desert
   monasticism.

   [981] It is fortified by the silence of Eusebius' (1) as to monks in
   general (but yet see H. E. II. 17, vol. i., p. 116, note in this
   series); (2) as to the part played by Antony at Alexandria during the
   persecution (H. E. VII. 32, VIII. 13, IX. 6); (3) as to Constantine's
   letter to Antony (§81).

   [982] The life of Senuti (or Schnoudi'), by his disciple Visa, may be
   consulted in illustration of this point. See edition by Amélineau in
   vol. 4 of the Memoires de la Mission archéologique Française au Caire,
   1888.
