# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume VI.   Jerome - Letters and Select Works
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume VI
# father: jerome
# work: Against Jovinianus
# clavis: CPL-610
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Fremantle / Schaff English translation of Adversus Jovinianum (Books I-II).

Against Jovinianus.

   ------------------------

   Book I.

   Jovinianus, concerning whom we know little more than is to be found in
   the two following books, had published at Rome a Latin treatise
   containing all, or part of the opinions here controverted, viz. (1)
   "That a virgin is no better as such than a wife in the sight of God.
   (2) Abstinence is no better than a thankful partaking of food. (3) A
   person baptized with the Spirit as well as with water cannot sin. (4)
   All sins are equal. (5) There is but one grade of punishment and one of
   reward in the future state." In addition to this he held the birth of
   our Lord to have been by a "true parturition," and was thus at issue
   with the orthodoxy of the time, according to which the infant Jesus
   passed through the walls of the womb as His Resurrection body
   afterwards did out of the tomb or through the closed doors. Pammachius,
   Jerome's friend, brought Jovinian's book under the notice of Siricius,
   bishop of Rome, and it was shortly afterwards condemned in synods at
   that city and at Milan (about a.d. 390). He subsequently sent
   Jovinian's books to Jerome, who answered them in the present treatise
   in the year 393. Nothing more is known of Jovinian, but it has been
   conjectured from Jerome's remark in the treatise against Vigilantius,
   where Jovinian is said to have "amidst pheasants and pork rather
   belched out than breathed out his life," and by a kind of
   transmigration to have transmitted his opinions into Vigilantius, that
   he had died before 409, the date of that work.

   The first book is wholly on the first proposition of Jovinianus, that
   relating to marriage and virginity. The first three chapters are
   introductory. The rest may be divided into three parts:

   1 (ch. 4-13). An exposition, in Jerome's sense, of St. Paul's teaching
   in 1 Cor. vii.

   2 (ch. 14-39). A statement of the teaching which Jerome derives from
   the various books of both the Old and the New Testaments.

   3. A denunciation of Jovinianus (c. 40), and the praises of virginity
   and of single marriages derived from examples in the heathen world.

   The treatise gives a remarkable specimen of Jerome's system of
   interpreting Scripture, and also of the methods by which asceticism was
   introduced into the Church, and marriage brought into disesteem.

   1. Very few days have elapsed since the holy brethren of Rome sent to
   me the treatises of a certain Jovinian with the request that I would
   reply to the follies contained in them, and would crush with
   evangelical and apostolic vigour the [4254] Epicurus of Christianity. I
   read but could not in the least comprehend them. I began therefore to
   give them closer attention, and to thoroughly sift not only words and
   sentences, but almost every single syllable; for I wished first to
   ascertain his meaning, and then to approve, or refute what he had said.
   But the style is so barbarous, and the language so vile and such a heap
   of blunders, that I could neither understand what he was talking about,
   nor by what arguments he was trying to prove his points. At one moment
   he is all bombast, at another he grovels: from time to time he lifts
   himself up, and then like a wounded snake finds his own effort too much
   for him. Not satisfied with the language of men, he attempts something
   loftier.

   [4255] "The mountains labour; a poor mouse is born."

   [4256] "That he's gone mad ev'n mad Orestes swears."

   Moreover he involves everything in such inextricable confusion that the
   saying of [4257] Plautus might be applied to him:--"This is what none
   but a Sibyl will ever read."

   To understand him we must be prophets. We read Apollo's [4258] raving
   prophetesses. We remember, too, what [4259] Virgil says of senseless
   noise. [4260] Heraclitus, also, surnamed the Obscure, the philosophers
   find hard to understand even with their utmost toil. But what are they
   compared with our riddle-maker, whose books are much more difficult to
   comprehend than to refute? Although (we must confess) the task of
   refuting them is no easy one. For how can you overcome a man when you
   are quite in the dark as to his meaning? But, not to be tedious to my
   reader, the introduction to his second book, of which he has discharged
   himself like a sot after a night's debauch, will show the character of
   his eloquence, and through what bright flowers of rhetoric he takes his
   stately course.

   2. "I respond to your invitation, not that I may go through life with a
   high reputation, but may live free from idle rumour. I beseech the
   ground, the young shoots of our plantations, the plants and trees of
   tenderness snatched from the whirlpool of vice, to grant me audience
   and the support of many listeners. We know that the Church through
   hope, faith, charity, is inaccessible and impregnable. In it no one is
   immature: all are apt to learn: none can force a way into it by
   violence, or deceive it by craft."

   3. What, I ask, is the meaning of these portentous words and of this
   grotesque description? Would you not think he was in a feverish dream,
   or that he was seized with madness and ought to be put into the strait
   jacket which Hippocrates prescribed? However often I read him, even
   till my heart sinks within me, I am still in uncertainty of his
   meaning. [4261] Everything starts from, everything depends upon,
   something else. It is impossible to make out any connection; and,
   excepting the proofs from Scripture which he has not dared to exchange
   for his own lovely flowers of rhetoric, his words suit all matter
   equally well, because they suit no matter at all. This circumstance led
   me shrewdly to suspect that his object in proclaiming the excellence of
   marriage was only to disparage virginity. For when the less is put upon
   a level with the greater, the lower profits by comparison, but the
   higher suffers wrong. For ourselves, we do not follow the views of
   [4262] Marcion and Manichæus, and disparage marriage; nor, deceived by
   the error of [4263] Tatian, the leader of the Encratites, do we think
   all intercourse impure; he condemns and rejects not only marriage but
   also food which God created for the use of man. We know that in a great
   house, there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood
   and earthenware. And that upon the foundation, Christ, which Paul the
   master-builder laid, some build gold, silver, precious stones: others,
   on the contrary, hay, wood, straw. We are not ignorant of the words,
   [4264] "Marriage is honourable among all, and the bed undefiled." We
   have read God's first command, [4265] "Be fruitful, and multiply, and
   replenish the earth"; but while we honour marriage we prefer virginity
   which is the offspring of marriage. Will silver cease to be silver, if
   gold is more precious than silver? Or is despite done to tree and corn,
   if we prefer the fruit to root and foliage, or the grain to stalk and
   ear? Virginity is to marriage what fruit is to the tree, or grain to
   the straw. Although the hundred-fold, the sixty-fold, and the
   thirty-fold spring from one earth and from one sowing, yet there is a
   great difference in respect of number. The thirty-fold has reference to
   marriage. The very way the [4266] fingers are combined--see how they
   seem to embrace, tenderly kiss, and pledge their troth either to
   other--is a picture of husband and wife. The sixty-fold applies to
   widows, because they are placed in a position of difficulty and
   distress. Hence the upper finger signifies their depression, and the
   greater the difficulty in resisting the allurements of pleasure once
   experienced, the greater the reward. Moreover (give good heed, my
   reader), to denote a hundred, the right hand is used instead of the
   left: a circle is made with the same fingers which on the left hand
   represented widowhood, and thus the crown of virginity is expressed. In
   saying this I have followed my own impatient spirit rather than the
   course of the argument. For I had scarcely left harbour, and had barely
   hoisted sail, when a swelling tide of words suddenly swept me into the
   depths of the discussion. I must stay my course, and take in canvas for
   a little while; nor will I indulge my sword, anxious as it is to strike
   a blow for virginity. The farther back the catapult is drawn, the
   greater the force of the missile. To linger is not to lose, if by
   lingering victory is better assured. I will briefly set forth our
   adversary's views, and will drag them out from his books like snakes
   from the holes where they hide, and will separate the venomous head
   from the writhing body. What is baneful shall be discovered, that, when
   we have the power, it may be crushed.

   He says that "virgins, widows, and married women, who have been once
   passed through the laver of Christ, if they are on a par in other
   respects, are of equal merit."

   He endeavours to show that "they who with full assurance of faith have
   been born again in baptism, cannot be overthrown by the devil."

   His third point is "that there is no difference between abstinence from
   food, and its reception with thanksgiving."

   The fourth and last is "that there is one reward in the kingdom of
   heaven for all who have kept their baptismal vow."

   4. This is the hissing of the old serpent; by counsel such as this the
   dragon drove man from Paradise. For he promised that if they would
   prefer fulness to fasting they should be immortal, as though it were an
   impossibility for them to fall; and while he promises they shall be as
   Gods, he drives them from Paradise, with the result that they who,
   while naked and unhampered, and as virgins unspotted enjoyed the
   fellowship of the Lord were cast down into the vale of tears, and sewed
   skins together to clothe themselves withal. But, not to detain the
   reader any longer, I will keep to the division given above and taking
   his propositions one by one will rely chiefly on the evidence of
   Scripture to refute them, for fear he may chatter and complain that he
   was overcome by rhetorical skill rather than by force of truth. If I
   succeed in this and with the aid of a cloud of witnesses from both
   Testaments prove too strong for him, I will then accept his challenge,
   and adduce illustrations from secular literature. I will show that even
   among philosophers and distinguished statesmen, the virtuous are wont
   to be preferred by all to the voluptuous, that is to say men like
   [4267] Pythagoras, [4268] Plato and [4269] Aristides, to [4270]
   Aristippus, [4271] Epicurus and [4272] Alcibiades. I entreat virgins of
   both sexes and all such as are continent, the married also and the
   twice married, to assist my efforts with their prayers. Jovinian is the
   common enemy. For he who maintains all to be of equal merit, does no
   less injury to virginity in comparing it with marriage than he does to
   marriage, when he allows it to be lawful, but to the same extent as
   second and third marriages. But to digamists and trigamists also he
   does wrong, for he places on a level with them whoremongers and the
   most licentious persons as soon as they have repented; but perhaps
   those who have been married twice or thrice ought not to complain, for
   the same whoremonger if penitent is made equal in the kingdom of heaven
   even to virgins. I will therefore explain more clearly and in proper
   sequence the arguments he employs and the illustrations he adduces
   respecting marriage, and will treat them in the order in which he
   states them. And I beg the reader not to be disturbed if he is
   compelled to read Jovinian's nauseating trash. He will all the more
   gladly drink Christ's antidote after the devil's poisonous concoction.
   Listen with patience, ye virgins; listen, I pray you, to the voice of
   the most voluptuous of preachers; nay rather close your ears, as you
   would to the Syren's fabled songs, and pass on. For a little while
   endure the wrongs you suffer: think you are crucified with Christ, and
   are listening to the blasphemies of the Pharisees.

   5. First of all, he says, God declares that [4273] "therefore shall a
   man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife:
   and they shall be one flesh." And lest we should say that this is a
   quotation from the Old Testament, he asserts that it has been [4274]
   confirmed by the Lord in the Gospel--"What God hath joined together,
   let not man put asunder": and he immediately adds, [4275] "Be fruitful,
   and multiply, and replenish the earth." He next repeats the names of
   Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalalel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, Noah,
   and tells us that they all had wives and in accordance with the will of
   God begot sons, as though there could be any table of descent or any
   history of mankind without wives and children. "There," says he, "is
   Enoch, who walked with God and was carried up to heaven. There is Noah,
   the only person who, except his wife, and his sons and their wives, was
   saved at the deluge, although there must have been many persons not of
   marriageable age, and therefore presumably virgins. Again, after the
   deluge, when the human race started as it were anew, men and women were
   paired together and a fresh blessing was pronounced on procreation,
   [4276] "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." Moreover,
   free permission was given to eat flesh, [4277] "Every moving thing that
   liveth shall be food for you; as the green herb have I given you all."
   He then flies off to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of whom the first had
   three wives, the second one, the third four, Leah, Rachel, Billah, and
   Zilpah, and he declares that Abraham by his faith merited the blessing
   which he received in begetting his son. Sarah, typifying the Church,
   when it had ceased to be with her after the manner of women, exchanged
   the curse of barrenness for the blessing of child-bearing. We are
   informed that Rebekah went like a prophet to inquire of the Lord, and
   was told, [4278] "Two nations and two peoples are in thy womb," that
   Jacob served for his wife, and that when Rachel, thinking it was in the
   power of her husband to give her children, said, [4279] "Give me
   children, or else I die," he replied, [4280] "Am I in God's stead, who
   hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?" so well aware was he
   that the fruit of marriage cometh from the Lord and not from the
   husband. We next learn that Joseph, a holy man of spotless chastity,
   and all the patriarchs, had wives, and that God blessed them all alike
   through the lips of Moses. Judah also and Thamar are brought upon the
   scene, and he censures Onan, slain by the Lord, because he, grudging to
   raise up seed to his brother, marred the marriage rite. He refers to
   Moses and the leprosy of Miriam, who, because she chided her brother on
   account of his wife, was stricken by the avenging hand of God. He
   praises Samson, I may even say extravagantly panegyrizes the uxorious
   Nazarite. Deborah also and Barak are mentioned, because, although they
   had not the benefit of virginity, they were victorious over the iron
   chariots of Sisera and Jabin. He brings forward Jael, the wife of Heber
   the Kenite, and extols her for arming herself with the [4281] stake. He
   says there was no difference between Jephthah and his virgin daughter,
   who was sacrificed to the Lord: nay, of the two, he prefers the faith
   of the father to that of the daughter who met death with grief and
   tears. He then comes to Samuel, another Nazarite of the Lord, who from
   infancy was brought up in the tabernacle and was clad in a linen ephod,
   or, as the words are rendered, in linen vestments: he, too, we are
   told, begot sons without a stain upon his priestly purity. He places
   Boaz and his wife Ruth side by side in his repository, and traces the
   descent of Jesse and David from them. He then points out how David
   himself, for the price of two hundred foreskins and at the peril of his
   life, was bedded with the king's daughter. What shall I say of Solomon,
   whom he includes in the list of husbands, and represents as a type of
   the Saviour, maintaining that of him it was written, [4282] "Give the
   king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king's son"?
   And [4283] "To him shall be given of the gold of Sheba, and men shall
   pray for him continually." Then all at once he makes a jump to Elijah
   and Elisha, and tells us as a great secret that the spirit of Elijah
   rested on Elisha. Why he mentioned this he does not say. It can hardly
   be that he thinks Elijah and Elisha, like the rest, were married men.
   The next step is to Hezekiah, upon whose praises he dwells, and yet (I
   wonder why) forgets to mention that he said, [4284] "Henceforth I will
   beget children." He relates that Josiah, a righteous man, in whose time
   the book of Deuteronomy was found in the temple, was instructed by
   Huldah, wife of Shallum. Daniel also and the three youths are classed
   by him with the married. Suddenly he betakes himself to the Gospel, and
   adduces Zachariah and Elizabeth, Peter and his father-in-law, and the
   rest of the Apostles. His inference is thus expressed: "If they idly
   urge in defence of themselves the plea that the world in its early
   stage needed to be replenished, let them listen to the words of Paul,
   [4285] I desire therefore that the younger widows marry, bear
   children.' And [4286] Marriage is honourable and the bed undefiled.'
   And [4287] A wife is bound for so long time as her husband liveth; but
   if the husband be dead, she is free to be married to whom she will;
   only in the Lord.' And [4288] Adam was not beguiled, but the woman
   being beguiled hath fallen into transgression: but she shall be saved
   through the child-bearing, if they continue in faith and love and
   sanctification with sobriety.' Surely we shall hear no more of the
   famous Apostolic utterance, [4289] And they who have wives as though
   they had them not.' It can hardly be that you will say the reason why
   he wished them to be married was that some widows had already turned
   back after Satan: as though virgins never fell and their fall was not
   more ruinous. All this makes it clear that in forbidding to marry, and
   to eat food which God created for use, you have consciences seared as
   with a hot iron, and are followers of the Manichæans." Then comes much
   more which it would be unprofitable to discuss. At last he dashes into
   rhetoric and apostrophizes virginity thus: "I do you no wrong, Virgin:
   you have chosen a life of chastity on account of the present distress:
   you determined on the course in order to be holy in body and spirit: be
   not proud: you and your married sisters are members of the same
   Church."

   6. I have perhaps explained his position at too great a length, and
   become tedious to my reader; but I thought it best to draw up in full
   array against myself all his efforts, and to muster all the forces of
   the enemy with their squadrons and generals, lest after an early
   victory there should spring up a series of other engagements. I will
   not therefore do battle with single foes, nor will I be satisfied with
   skirmishes in which I meet small detachments of my opponents. The
   battle must be fought with the whole army of the enemy, and the
   disorderly rabble, fighting more like brigands than soldiers, must be
   repulsed by the skill and method of regular warfare. In the front rank
   I will set the Apostle Paul, and, since he is the bravest of generals,
   will arm him with his own weapons, that is to say, his own statements.
   For the Corinthians asked many questions about this matter, and the
   doctor of the Gentiles and master of the Church gave full replies. What
   he decreed we may regard as the law of Christ speaking in him. At the
   same time, when we begin to refute the several arguments, I trust the
   reader will give me his attention even before the Apostle speaks, and
   will not, in his eagerness to discuss the most weighty points, neglect
   the premises, and rush at once to the conclusion.

   7. Among other things the Corinthians asked in their letter whether
   after embracing the faith of Christ they ought to be unmarried, and for
   the sake of continence put away their wives, and whether believing
   virgins were at liberty to marry. And again, supposing that one of two
   Gentiles believed on Christ, whether the one that believed should leave
   the one that believed not? And in case it were allowable to take wives,
   would the Apostle direct that only Christian wives, or Gentiles also,
   should be taken? Let us then consider Paul's replies to these
   inquiries. [4290] "Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote: It is
   good for a man not to touch a woman. But, because of fornications, let
   each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her own husband.
   Let the husband render unto the wife her due: and likewise also the
   wife unto the husband. The wife hath not power over her own body, but
   the husband: And likewise also the husband hath not power over his own
   body, but the wife. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be by
   consent for a season, that ye may give yourselves unto prayer, and may
   be together again, that Satan tempt you not because of your
   incontinency. But this I say by way of permission not of commandment.
   Yet I would that all men were even as I myself. Howbeit each man hath
   his own gift from God, one after this manner, and another after that.
   But I say to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they
   abide even as I. But if they have not continency, let them marry: for
   it is better to marry than to burn." Let us turn back to the chief
   point of the evidence: "It is good," he says, "for a man not to touch a
   woman." If it is good not to touch a woman, it is bad to touch one: for
   there is no opposite to goodness but badness. But if it be bad and the
   evil is pardoned, the reason for the concession is to prevent worse
   evil. But surely a thing which is only allowed because there may be
   something worse has only a slight degree of goodness. He would never
   have added "let each man have his own wife," unless he had previously
   used the words "but, because of fornications." Do away with
   fornication, and he will not say "let each man have his own wife." Just
   as though one were to lay it down: "It is good to feed on wheaten
   bread, and to eat the finest wheat flour," and yet to prevent a person
   pressed by hunger from devouring cow-dung, I may allow him to eat
   barley. Does it follow that the wheat will not have its peculiar
   purity, because such an one prefers barley to excrement? That is
   naturally good which does not admit of comparison with what is bad, and
   is not eclipsed because something else is preferred. At the same time
   we must notice the Apostle's prudence. He did not say, it is good not
   to have a wife: but, it is good not to touch a woman: as though there
   were danger even in the touch: as though he who touched her, would not
   escape from her who "hunteth for the precious life," who causeth the
   young man's understanding to fly away. [4291] "Can a man take fire in
   his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? Or can one walk upon hot
   coals, and his feet not be scorched?" As then he who touches fire is
   instantly burned, so by the mere touch the peculiar nature of man and
   woman is perceived, and the difference of sex is understood. Heathen
   fables relate how [4292] Mithras and [4293] Ericthonius were begotten
   of the soil, in stone or earth, by raging lust. Hence it was that our
   Joseph, because the Egyptian woman wished to touch him, fled from her
   hands, and, as if he had been bitten by a mad dog and feared the
   spreading poison, threw away the cloak which she had touched. "But,
   because of fornications let each man have his own wife, and let each
   woman have her own husband." He did not say, because of fornication let
   each man marry a wife: otherwise by this excuse he would have thrown
   the reins to lust, and whenever a man's wife died, he would have to
   marry another to prevent fornication, but "have his own wife." Let him
   he says have and use his own wife, whom he had before he became a
   believer, and whom it would have been good not to touch, and, when once
   he became a follower of Christ, to know only as a sister, not as a wife
   unless fornication should make it excusable to touch her. "The wife
   hath not power over her own body, but the husband: and likewise also
   the husband hath not power over his own body, but the wife." The whole
   question here concerns those who are married men. Is it lawful for them
   to do what our Lord forbade in the Gospel, and to put away their wives?
   Whence it is that the Apostle says, "It is good for a man not to touch
   a woman." But inasmuch as he who is once married has no power to
   abstain except by mutual consent, and may not reject an unoffending
   partner, let the husband render unto the wife her due. He bound himself
   voluntarily that he might be under compulsion to render it. "Defraud ye
   not one the other, except it be by consent for a season, that ye may
   give yourselves unto prayer." What, I pray you, is the quality of that
   good thing which hinders prayer? which does not allow the body of
   Christ to be received? So long as I do the husband's part, I fail in
   continency. The same Apostle in another place commands us to pray
   always. If we are to pray always, it follows that we must never be in
   the bondage of wedlock, for as often as I render my wife her due, I
   cannot pray. The Apostle Peter had experience of the bonds of marriage.
   See how he fashions the Church, and what lesson he teaches Christians:
   [4294] "Ye husbands in like manner dwell with your wives according to
   knowledge, giving honour unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, as
   being also joint-heirs of the grace of life; to the end that your
   prayers be not hindered." Observe that, as S. Paul before, because in
   both cases the spirit is the same, so S. Peter now, says that prayers
   are hindered by the performance of marriage duty. When he says
   "likewise," he challenges the husbands to imitate their wives, because
   he has already given them commandment: [4295] "beholding your chaste
   conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning let it not be the
   outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing jewels of gold,
   or of putting on apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in
   the incorruptible apparel of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
   sight of God of great price." You see what kind of wedlock he enjoins.
   Husbands and wives are to dwell together according to knowledge, so
   that they may know what God wishes and desires, and give honour to the
   weak vessel, woman. If we abstain from intercourse, we give honour to
   our wives: if we do not abstain, it is clear that insult is the
   opposite of honour. He also tells the wives to let their husbands "see
   their chaste behaviour, and the hidden man of the heart, in the
   incorruptible apparel of a meek and quiet spirit." Words truly worthy
   of an apostle, and of Christ's rock! He lays down the law for husbands
   and wives, condemns outward ornament, while he praises continence,
   which is the ornament of the inner man, as seen in the incorruptible
   apparel of a meek and quiet spirit. In effect he says this: Since your
   outer man is corrupt, and you have ceased to possess the blessing of
   incorruption characteristic of virgins, at least imitate the
   incorruption of the spirit by subsequent abstinence, and what you
   cannot show in the body exhibit in the mind. For these are the riches,
   and these the ornaments of your union, which Christ seeks.

   8. The words which follow, "that ye may give yourselves unto prayer,
   and may be together again," might lead one to suppose that the Apostle
   was expressing a wish and not making a concession because of the danger
   of a greater fall. He therefore at once adds, "lest Satan tempt you for
   your incontinency." It is a fine permission which is conveyed in the
   words "be together again." What it was that he blushed to call by its
   own name, and thought only better than a temptation of Satan and the
   effect of incontinence, we take trouble to discuss as if it were
   obscure, although he has explained his meaning by saying, "this I say
   by way of permission, not by way of command." And do we still hesitate
   to speak of marriage as a concession to weakness, not a thing
   commanded, as though second and third marriages were not allowed on the
   same ground, as though the doors of the Church were not opened by
   repentance even to fornicators, and what is more, to the incestuous?
   Take the case of the man who outraged his step-mother. Does not the
   Apostle, after delivering him, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
   to Satan for the destruction of the flesh that his spirit might be
   saved, in the second Epistle take the offender back and strive to
   prevent a brother from being swallowed up by overmuch grief. The
   Apostle's wish is one thing, his pardon another. If a wish be
   expressed, it confers a right; if a thing is only called pardonable, we
   are wrong in using it. If you wish to know the Apostle's real mind, you
   must take in what follows: "but I would that all men were as I am."
   Happy is the man who is like Paul! Fortunate is he who attends to the
   Apostle's command, not to his concession. This, says he, I wish, this I
   desire that ye be imitators of me, as I also am of Christ, who was a
   Virgin born of a Virgin, uncorrupt of her who was uncorrupt. We,
   because we are men, cannot imitate our Lord's nativity; but we may at
   least imitate His life. The former was the blessed prerogative of
   divinity, the latter belongs to our human condition and is part of
   human effort. I would that all men were like me, that while they are
   like me, they may also become like Christ, to whom I am like. For
   [4296] "he that believeth in Christ ought himself also to walk even as
   He walked." [4297] "Howbeit each man hath his own gift from God, one
   after this manner, and another after that." What I wish, he says, is
   clear. But since in the Church there is a diversity of gifts, I
   acquiesce in marriage, lest I should seem to condemn nature. At the
   same time consider, that the gift of virginity is one, that of
   marriage, another. For were the reward the same for the married and for
   virgins, he would never after enjoining continence have said: [4298]
   "Each man hath his own gift from God, one after this manner, and
   another after that." Where there is a distinction in one particular,
   there is a diversity also in other points. I grant that even marriage
   is a gift of God, but between gift and gift there is great diversity.
   In fact the Apostle himself speaking of the same person who had
   repented of his incestuous conduct, says: [4299] "so that contrariwise
   ye should rather forgive him and comfort him, and to whom ye forgive
   anything, I forgive also." And that we might not think a man's gift
   contemptible, he added, [4300] "for what I also have forgiven, if I
   have forgiven anything, for your sakes have I forgiven it, in the
   presence of Christ." There is diversity in the gifts of Christ. Hence
   it is that by way of type Joseph has a coat of many colours. And in the
   forty-fifth psalm we read, [4301] "at thy right hand doth stand the
   queen in a vesture of gold wrought about with divers colours." And the
   Apostle Peter says, [4302] "as heirs together of the manifold grace of
   God," where the more expressive Greek word poikiles, i.e., varied, is
   used.

   9. Then come the words [4303] "But I say to the unmarried and to
   widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I. But if they have
   not continency, let them marry: for it is better to marry than to
   burn." Having conceded to married persons the enjoyment of wedlock and
   pointed out his own wishes, he passes on to the unmarried and to
   widows, sets before them his own practice for imitation, and calls them
   happy if they so abide. "But if they have not continency, let them
   marry," just as he said before "But because of fornications," and "Lest
   Satan tempt you, because of your incontinency." And he gives a reason
   for saying "If they have not continency, let them marry," viz. "It is
   better to marry than to burn." The reason why it is better to marry is
   that it is worse to burn. Let burning lust be absent, and he will not
   say it is better to marry. The word better always implies a comparison
   with something worse, not a thing absolutely good and incapable of
   comparison. It is as though he said, it is better to have one eye than
   neither, it is better to stand on one foot and to support the rest of
   the body with a stick, than to crawl with broken legs. What do you say,
   Apostle? I do not believe you when you say "Though I be rude in speech,
   yet am I not in knowledge." As humility is the source of the sayings
   "For I am not worthy to be called an Apostle," and "To me who am the
   least of the Apostles," and "As to one born out of due time," so here
   also we have an utterance of humility. You know the meaning of
   language, or you would not quote [4304] Epimenides, [4305] Menander,
   and [4306] Aratus. When you are discussing continence and virginity you
   say, "It is good for a man not to touch a woman." And, "It is good for
   them if they abide even as I." And, "I think that this is good by
   reason of the present distress." And, "That it is good for a man so to
   be." When you come to marriage, you do not say it is good to marry,
   because you cannot then add "than to burn;" but you say, "It is better
   to marry than to burn." If marriage in itself be good, do not compare
   it with fire, but simply say "It is good to marry." I suspect the
   goodness of that thing which is forced into the position of being only
   the lesser of two evils. What I want is not a smaller evil, but a thing
   absolutely good.

   10. So far the first section has been explained. Let us now come to
   those which follow. [4307] "But unto the married I give charge, yea not
   I, but the Lord. That the wife depart not from her husband (but and if
   she depart, let her remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her
   husband): and that the husband leave not his wife. But to the rest say
   I, not the Lord: If any brother hath an unbelieving wife, and she is
   content to dwell with him, let him not leave her," and so on to the
   words "As God hath called each, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all
   the churches." This passage has no bearing on our present controversy.
   For he ordains, according to the mind of the Lord, that excepting the
   cause of fornication, a wife must not be put away, and that a wife who
   has been put away, may not, so long as her husband lives, be married to
   another, or at all events that her duty is to be reconciled to her
   husband. But in the case of those who are already married at the time
   of conversion, that is to say, supposing one of the two were a
   believer, he enjoins that the believer shall not put away the
   unbeliever. And after stating his reason, viz., that the unbeliever who
   is unwilling to leave the believer becomes thereby a candidate for the
   faith, he commands, on the other hand, that if the unbeliever reject
   the faithful one on account of the faith of Christ, the believer ought
   to depart, lest husband or wife be preferred to Christ, in comparison
   with Whom we must hold even life itself cheap. Yet at the present day
   many women despising the Apostle's command, are joined to heathen
   husbands, and prostitute the temples of Christ to idols. They do not
   understand that they are part of His body though indeed they are His
   ribs. The Apostle is lenient to the union of unbelievers, who having
   (believing) husbands, afterwards come to believe in Christ. He does not
   extend his indulgence to those women who, although Christians, have
   been married to heathen husbands. To these he elsewhere says, [4308]
   "Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers: for what fellowship have
   righteousness and iniquity? or what communion hath light with darkness?
   And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what portion hath a
   believer with an unbeliever? And what agreement hath a temple of God
   with idols? For we are a temple of the living God." Although I know
   that crowds of matrons will be furious against me: although I know that
   just as they have shamelessly despised the Lord, so they will rave at
   me who am but a flea and the least of Christians: yet I will speak out
   what I think. I will say what the Apostle has taught me, that they are
   not on the side of righteousness, but of iniquity: not of light, but of
   darkness: that they do not belong to Christ, but to Belial: that they
   are not temples of the living God, but shrines and idols of the dead.
   And, if you wish to see more clearly how utterly unlawful it is for a
   Christian woman to marry a Gentile, consider what the same Apostle
   says, [4309] "A wife is bound for so long time as her husband liveth:
   but if the husband be dead, she is free to be married to whom she will;
   only in the Lord," that is, to a Christian. He who allows second and
   third marriages in the Lord, forbids first marriages with a Gentile.
   Whence Abraham also makes his servant swear upon his thigh, that is, on
   Christ, Who was to spring from his seed, that he would not bring an
   alien-born as a wife for his son Isaac. And Ezra checked an offence of
   this kind against God by making his countrymen put away their wives.
   And the prophet Malachi thus speaks, [4310] "Judah hath dealt
   treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in
   Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the Lord which he
   loveth, and hath married the daughter of a strange god. The Lord will
   cut off the man that doeth this, [4311] him that teacheth and him that
   learneth, out of the tents of Jacob, and him that offers an offering
   unto the Lord of hosts." I have said this that they who compare
   marriage with virginity, may at least know that such marriages as these
   are on a lower level than digamy and trigamy.

   11. In the above discussion the Apostle has taught that the believer
   ought not to depart from the unbeliever, but remain in marriage as the
   faith found them, and that each man whether married or single should
   continue as he was when baptized into Christ; and then he suddenly
   introduces the metaphors of circumcision and uncircumcision, of bond
   and free, and under those metaphors treats of the married and
   unmarried. [4312] "Was any man called being circumcised? let him not
   become uncircumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
   nothing: but the keeping of the commandments of God. Let each man abide
   in that calling wherein he was called. Wast thou called being a
   bondservant? Care not for it: but even if thou canst become free, use
   it rather. For he that was called in the Lord being a bondservant, is
   the Lord's freedman; likewise he that was called, being free, is
   Christ's bondservant. Ye were bought with a price; become not
   bondservants of men. Brethren, let each man, wherein he was called,
   therein abide with God." Some, I suppose, will find fault with the
   Apostle's way of reasoning. I would therefore ask first, What we are to
   infer from his suddenly passing in a discussion concerning husbands and
   wives to a comparison of Jew and Gentile, bond and free, and then
   returning, when this point is settled, to the question about virgins,
   and telling us "Concerning virgins I have no commandment from the
   Lord"; what has a comparison of Jew and Gentile, bond and free, to do
   with wedlock and virginity? In the next place, how are we to understand
   the words "Hath any been called in uncircumcision, let him not be
   circumcised"? [4313] Can a man who has lost his foreskin restore it
   again at his pleasure? Then, in what sense are we to explain "For he
   that was called in the Lord, being a bondservant, is the Lord's
   freedman: likewise he that was called, being free, is Christ's
   bondservant." Fourthly, how is it that he who commanded servants to
   obey their masters according to the flesh, now says, "Become not
   bondservants of men." Lastly, how are we to connect with slavery, or
   with circumcision, his saying "Brethren, let each man, wherein he was
   called, therein abide with God," which even contradicts his previous
   opinion. We heard him say "Become not bondservants of men." How can we
   then possibly abide in that vocation wherein we were called, when many
   at the time they became believers had masters according to the flesh,
   whose bondservants they are now forbidden to be? Moreover, what has the
   argument about our abiding in the vocation wherein we were called, to
   do with circumcision? for in another place the same Apostle cries aloud
   "Behold I Paul tell you that, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
   you nothing"? We must conclude, therefore, that a higher meaning should
   be given to circumcision and uncircumcision, bond and free, and that
   these words must be taken in close connection with what has gone
   before. "Was anyone called being circumcised? let him not become
   uncircumcised." If, he says, at the time you were called and became a
   believer in Christ, if I say, you were called being circumcised from a
   wife, that is, unmarried, do not marry a wife, that is, do not become
   uncircumcised, lest you lay upon the freedom of circumcision and
   chastity the burden of marriage. Again, if anyone was called in
   uncircumcision, let him not be circumcised. You had a wife, he says,
   when you believed: do not think the faith of Christ a reason for
   disagreement, because God called us in peace. [4314] "Circumcision is
   nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the
   commandments of God." For neither celibacy nor marriage availeth
   anything without works, since even faith, which is specially
   characteristic of Christians, if it have not works, is said to be dead,
   and vestal virgins and Juno's widows might upon these terms be numbered
   with the saints. "Let each man in the vocation wherein he was called,
   therein abide." Whether he had, or had not, a wife when he believed,
   let him remain in that condition in which he was when called.
   Accordingly he does not so strongly urge virgins to be married, as
   forbid divorce. And as he debars those who have wives from putting them
   away, so he cuts off from virgins the power of being married. "Thou
   wast called being a slave, heed it not; but even if thou canst become
   free, use it rather." Even if you have, he says, a wife, and are bound
   to her, and pay her due, and have not power over your own body; or if,
   to speak more clearly, you are the bondservant of your wife, be not sad
   upon that account, nor sigh for the loss of your virginity. But even if
   you can find some causes of discord, do not, for the sake of thoroughly
   enjoying the liberty of chastity, seek your own welfare by destroying
   another. Keep your wife awhile, and do not go too fast for her lagging
   footsteps: wait till she follows. If you are patient, your spouse will
   become a sister, "For he that was called in the Lord, being a
   bondservant, is the Lord's freedman: likewise, he that was called being
   free, is Christ's bondservant." He gives his reasons for not wishing
   wives to be forsaken. He therefore says, I command that Gentiles who
   believe on Christ do not abandon the married state in which they were
   before embracing the faith: for he who had a wife when he became a
   believer, is not so strictly devoted to the service of God as virgins
   and unmarried persons. But, in a manner, he has more freedom, and the
   reins of his bondage are relaxed; and, while he is the bondservant of a
   wife, he is, so to speak, the freedman of the Lord. Moreover, he who
   when called by the Lord had not a wife and was free from the bondage of
   wedlock, he is truly Christ's bondservant. What happiness to be the
   bondservant, not of a wife but of Christ, to serve not the flesh, but
   the spirit! [4315] "For he who is joined unto the Lord is one spirit."
   There was some fear that by saying "Wast thou called being a
   bondservant? Care not for it: but, even if thou canst become free, use
   it rather," he might seem to have flouted continence, and to have given
   us up to the slavery of marriage. He therefore makes a remark which
   removes all cavil: "Ye were bought with a price, become not servants of
   men." We have been redeemed with the most precious blood of Christ: the
   Lamb was slain for us, and having been sprinkled with hyssop and the
   warm drops of His blood, we have rejected poisonous pleasure. Why do we
   at whose baptism Pharaoh died and all his host was drowned, again turn
   back in our hearts to Egypt, and after the manna, angels' food, sigh
   for the garlic and the onions and the cucumbers, and Pharaoh's meat?

   12. Having discussed marriage and continency he at length comes to
   virginity and says [4316] "Now concerning virgins I have no commandment
   of the Lord: but I give my judgement, as one that hath obtained mercy
   of the Lord to be faithful. I think therefore that this is good by
   reason of the present distress, namely, that it is good for a man to be
   as he is." Here our opponent goes utterly wild with exultation: this is
   his strongest battering-ram with which he shakes the wall of virginity.
   "See," says he, "the Apostle confesses that as regards virgins he has
   no commandment of the Lord, and he who had with authority laid down the
   law respecting husbands and wives, does not dare to command what the
   Lord has not enjoined. And rightly too. For what is enjoined is
   commanded, what is commanded must be done, and that which must be done
   implies punishment if it be not done. For it is useless to order a
   thing to be done and yet leave the individual free to do it or not do
   it. If the Lord had commanded virginity He would have seemed to condemn
   marriage, and to do away with the seed-plot of mankind, of which
   virginity itself is a growth. If He had cut off the root, how was He to
   expect fruit? If the foundations were not first laid, how was He to
   build the edifice, and put on the roof to cover all! Excavators toil
   hard to remove mountains; the bowels of the earth are pierced in the
   search for gold. And, when the tiny particles, first by the blast of
   the furnace, then by the hand of the cunning workman have been
   fashioned into an ornament, men do not call him blessed who has
   separated the gold from the dross, but him who wears the beautiful
   gold. Do not marvel then if, placed as we are, amid temptations of the
   flesh and incentives to vice, the angelic life be not exacted of us,
   but merely recommended. If advice be given, a man is free to proffer
   obedience; if there be a command, he is a servant bound to compliance.
   "I have no commandment," he says, "of the Lord: but I give my
   judgement, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful."
   If you have no commandment of the Lord, how dare you give judgement
   without orders? The Apostle will reply: Do you wish me to give orders
   where the Lord has offered a favour rather than laid down a law? The
   great Creator and Fashioner, knowing the weakness of the vessel which
   he made, left virginity open to those whom He addressed; and shall I,
   the teacher of the Gentiles, who have become all things to all men that
   I might gain all, shall I lay upon the necks of weak believers from the
   very first the burden of perpetual chastity? Let them [4317] begin with
   short periods of release from the marriage bond, and give themselves
   unto prayer, that when they have tasted the sweets of chastity they may
   desire the perpetual possession of that wherewith they were temporarily
   delighted. The Lord, when tempted by the Pharisees, and asked whether
   according to the law of Moses it was permitted to put away a wife,
   forbade the practice altogether. After weighing His words the disciples
   said to Him: [4318] "If the case of the man is so with his wife, it is
   not expedient to marry. But He said unto them, all men cannot receive
   this saying, but they to whom it is given. For there are eunuchs, which
   were so born from their mother's womb: and there are eunuchs, which
   were made eunuchs by men: and there are eunuchs, which made themselves
   eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive
   it, let him receive it." The reason is plain why the Apostle said,
   "concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord." Surely; because
   the Lord had previously said "All men cannot receive the word, but they
   to whom it is given," and "He that is able to receive it, let him
   receive it." [4319] The Master of the Christian race offers the reward,
   invites candidates to the course, holds in His hand the prize of
   virginity, points to the fountain of purity, and cries aloud [4320] "If
   any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink." "He that is able to
   receive it, let him receive it." He does not say, you must drink, you
   must run, willing or unwilling: but whoever is willing and able to run
   and to drink, he shall conquer, he shall be satisfied. And therefore
   Christ loves virgins more than others, because they willingly give what
   was not commanded them. And it indicates greater grace to offer what
   you are not bound to give, than to render what is exacted of you. The
   apostles, contemplating the burden of a wife, exclaimed, "If the case
   of the man is so with his wife, it is not expedient to marry." Our Lord
   thought well of their view. You rightly think, said He, that it is not
   expedient for a man who is hastening to the kingdom of heaven to take a
   wife: but it is a hard matter, and all men do not receive the saying,
   but they to whom it has been given. Some are eunuchs by nature, others
   by the violence of men. Those eunuchs please Me who are such not of
   necessity, but of free choice. Willingly do I take them into my bosom
   who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake, and
   in order to worship Me have renounced the condition of their birth. We
   must now explain the words, "Those who have made themselves eunuchs for
   the kingdom of heaven's sake." If they who have made themselves eunuchs
   have the reward of the kingdom of heaven, it follows that they who have
   not made themselves such cannot be placed with those who have. He who
   is able, he says, to receive it, let him receive it. It is a mark of
   great faith and of great virtue, to be the pure temple of God, to offer
   oneself a whole burnt-offering, and, according to the same apostle, to
   be holy both in body and in spirit. These are the eunuchs, who thinking
   themselves dry trees because of their impotence, hear by the mouth of
   [4321] Isaiah that they have a place prepared in heaven for sons and
   daughters. Their type is [4322] Ebed-melech the eunuch in Jeremiah, and
   the eunuch of Queen Candace in the [4323] Acts of the Apostles, who on
   account of the strength of his faith gained the name of a man. These
   are they to whom Clement, who was the successor of the Apostle Peter,
   and of whom the Apostle Paul makes mention, wrote letters, directing
   almost the whole of his discourse to the subject of virgin purity.
   After them there is a long series of apostolic men, martyrs, and men
   illustrious no less for holiness than for eloquence, with whom we may
   very easily become acquainted through their own writings. [4324] "I
   think, therefore," he says, "that this is good for the present
   distress." What is this distress which, in contempt of the marriage
   tie, longs for the liberty of virginity? [4325] "Woe unto them that are
   with child and to them that give suck in those days." We have not here
   a condemnation of harlots and brothels, of whose damnation there is no
   doubt, but of the swelling womb, and wailing infancy, the fruit as well
   as the work of marriage. "For it is good for a man so to be." If it is
   good for a man so to be, it is bad for a man not so to be. [4326] "Art
   thou bound unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a
   wife? Seek not a wife." Each one of us has his appointed bounds; let me
   have what is mine, and keep your own. If thou art bound to a wife, give
   her not a bill of divorce. If I am loosed from a wife, I will not seek
   a wife. As I do not dissolve marriages once contracted: so you should
   not bind what is loosed. And at the same time the meaning of the words
   must be taken into account. He who has a wife is regarded as a debtor,
   and is said to be uncircumcised, to be the servant of his wife, and
   like bad servants to be bound. But he who has no wife, in the first
   place owes no man anything, then is circumcised, thirdly is free,
   lastly, is loosed.

   13. Let us run through the remaining points, for our author is so
   voluminous that we cannot linger over every detail. "But and if thou
   marry, thou hast not sinned." It is one thing not to sin, another to do
   good. "And if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned." Not that virgin who
   has once for all dedicated herself to the service of God: for, should
   one of these marry, she will have damnation, because she has made of no
   account her first faith. But, if our adversary objects that this saying
   relates to widows, we reply that it applies with still greater force to
   virgins, since marriage is forbidden even to widows whose previous
   marriage had been lawful. For virgins who marry after consecration are
   rather incestuous than adulterous. And, for fear he should by saying,
   "And if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned," again stimulate the
   unmarried to be married, he immediately checks himself, and by
   introducing another consideration, invalidates his previous concession.
   "Yet," says he, "such shall have tribulation in the flesh." Who are
   they who shall have tribulation in the flesh? They to whom he had
   before indulgently said "But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned;
   and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Yet such shall have
   tribulation in the flesh." We in our inexperience thought that marriage
   had at least the joys of the flesh. But if they who are married have
   tribulation even in the flesh, which is imagined to be the sole source
   of their pleasure, what else is there to marry for, when in the spirit,
   and in the mind, and in the flesh itself there is tribulation. "But I
   would spare you." Thus, he says, I allege tribulation as a motive, as
   though there were not greater obligations to refrain. "But this I say,
   brethren, the time is shortened, that henceforth both those that have
   wives may be as though they had none." I am by no means now discussing
   virgins, of whose happiness no one entertains a doubt. I am coming to
   the married. The time is short, the Lord is at hand. Even though we
   lived nine hundred years, as did men of old, yet we ought to think that
   short which must one day have an end, and cease to be. But, as things
   are, and it is not so much the joy as the tribulation of marriage that
   is short, why do we take wives whom we shall soon be compelled to lose?
   [4327] "And those that weep, and those that rejoice, and those that
   buy, and those that use the world, as though they wept not, as though
   they rejoiced not, as though they bought not, as though they did not
   use the world: for the fashion of this world passeth away." If the
   world, which comprehends all things, passes away, yea if the fashion
   and intercourse of the world vanishes like the clouds, amongst the
   other works of the world, marriage too will vanish away. For after the
   resurrection there will be no wedlock. But if death be the end of
   marriage, why do we not voluntarily embrace the inevitable? And why do
   we not, encouraged by the hope of the reward, offer to God that which
   must be wrung from us against our will. "He that is unmarried is
   careful for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he
   that is married is careful for the things of the world, how he may
   please his wife, and is [4328] divided." Let us look at the difference
   between the cares of the virgin, and those of the married man. The
   virgin longs to please the Lord, the husband to please his wife, and
   that he may please her he is careful for the things of the world, which
   will of course pass away with the world. "And he is divided," that is
   to say, is distracted with manifold cares and miseries. This is not the
   place to describe the difficulties of marriage, and to revel in
   rhetorical commonplaces. I think I delivered myself fully as regards
   this point in my argument against [4329] Helvidius, and in the book
   which I addressed to [4330] Eustochium. At all events [4331]
   Tertullian, while still a young man, gave himself full play with this
   subject. And my teacher, [4332] Gregory of Nazianzus, discussed
   virginity and marriage in some Greek verses. I now briefly beg my
   reader to note that in the Latin manuscripts we have the reading "there
   is a difference also between the virgin and the wife." The words, it is
   true, have a meaning of their own, and have by me, as well as by
   others, been so explained as showing the bearing of the passage. Yet
   they lack apostolic authority, since the Apostle's words are as we have
   translated them--"He is careful for the things of the world, how he may
   please his wife, [4333] and he is divided." Having laid down this, he
   passes to the virgins and the continent, and says "The woman that is
   unmarried and a virgin thinks of the things of the Lord, that she may
   be holy in body and in spirit." Not every unmarried woman is also a
   virgin. But every virgin is of course unmarried. It may be, that regard
   for elegance of expression led him to repeat the same idea by means of
   another word and speak of "a woman unmarried and a virgin"; or at least
   he may have wished to give to "unmarried" the definite meaning of
   "virgin," so that we might not suppose him to include harlots, united
   to no one by the fixed bonds of wedlock, among the "unmarried." Of
   what, then, does she that is unmarried and a virgin think? "The things
   of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit."
   Supposing there were nothing else, and that no greater reward followed
   virginity, this would be motive enough for her choice, to think of the
   things of the Lord. But he immediately points out the contents of her
   thought--that she may be holy both in body and spirit. For there are
   virgins in the flesh, not in the spirit, whose body is intact, their
   soul corrupt. But that virgin is a sacrifice to Christ, whose mind has
   not been defiled by thought, nor her flesh by lust. On the other hand,
   she who is married thinks of the things of the world, how she may
   please her husband. Just as the man who has a wife is anxious for the
   things of the world, how he may please his wife, so the married woman
   thinks of the things of the world, how she may please her husband. But
   we are not of this world, which lieth in wickedness, the fashion of
   which passeth away, and concerning which the Lord said to the Apostles,
   [4334] "If ye were of the world, the world would love its own." And
   lest perchance someone might suppose that he was laying the heavy
   burden of chastity on unwilling shoulders, he at once adds his reasons
   for persuading to it, and says: [4335] "And this I say for your profit;
   not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is seemly, and
   that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction." The Latin words
   do not convey the meaning of the Greek. What words shall we use to
   render Pros to euschemon kai euprosedron to Kuri& 251; aperispastos'
   The difficulty of translation accounts for the fact that the clause is
   completely wanting in Latin manuscripts. Let us, however, use the
   passage as we have translated it. The Apostle does not lay a snare upon
   us, nor does he compel us to be what we do not wish to be; but he gives
   his advice as to what is fair and seemly, he would have us attend upon
   the Lord and ever be anxious about that service, and await the Lord's
   will, so that like active and well-armed soldiers we may obey orders,
   and may do so without distraction, which, according to [4336]
   Ecclesiastes, is given to the men of this world that they may be
   exercised thereby. But if anyone considers that his virgin, that is,
   his flesh, is wanton and boiling with lust, and cannot be bridled, and
   he must do one of two things, either take a wife or fall, let him do
   what he will, he does not sin if he marry. Let him do, he says, what he
   will, not what he ought. He does not sin if he marry a wife; yet, he
   does not well if he marry: [4337] "But he that standeth stedfast in his
   heart, having no necessity, but hath power as touching his own will,
   and hath determined this in his own heart, to keep his own virgin,
   shall do well. So then both he that giveth his own virgin in marriage
   doeth well; and he that giveth her not in marriage shall do better."
   With marked propriety he had previously said "He who marries a wife
   does not sin": here he tells us "He that keepeth his own virgin doeth
   well." But it is one thing not to sin, another to do well. [4338]
   "Depart from evil," he says, "and do good." The former we forsake, the
   latter we follow. In this last lies perfection. But whereas he says
   "and he that giveth his virgin in marriage doeth well," it might be
   supposed that our remark does not hold good; he therefore forthwith
   detracts from this seeming good and puts it in the shade by comparing
   it with another, and saying, "and he that giveth her not in marriage
   shall do better." If he had not intended to draw the inference of doing
   better, he would never have previously referred to doing well. But
   where there is something good and something better, the reward is not
   in both cases the same, and where the reward is not one and the same,
   there of course the gifts are different. The difference, then, between
   marriage and virginity is as great as that between not sinning and
   doing well; nay rather, to speak less harshly, as great as between good
   and better.

   14. He has ended his discussion of wedlock and virginity, and has
   carefully steered between the two precepts without turning to the right
   hand or to the left. He has followed the royal road and fulfilled the
   command [4339] not to be righteous over much. Now again he compares
   monogamy with digamy, and as he had subordinated marriage to virginity,
   so he makes second marriages inferior to first, and says, [4340] "A
   wife is bound for so long time as her husband liveth; but if the
   husband be dead, she is free to be married to whom she will; only in
   the Lord. But she is happier if she abide as she is, after my
   judgement: and I think that I also have the Spirit of God." He allows
   second marriages, but to such persons as wish for them and are not able
   to contain; lest, [4341] having "waxed wanton against Christ," they
   desire to marry, "having condemnation, because they have rejected their
   first faith;" and he makes the concession because many had already
   turned aside after Satan. [4342] "But," says he, "they will be happier
   if they abide as they are," and he immediately adds the weight of
   Apostolic authority, "after my judgement." And that an Apostle's
   authority might not, like that of an ordinary man, be without weight,
   he added, "and I think that I also have the Spirit of God." When he
   incites to continence, it is not by the judgement or spirit of man, but
   by the judgement and Spirit of God; when, however, he grants the
   indulgence of marriage, he does not mention the Spirit of God, but
   weighs his judgement with wisdom, and adapts the severity of the strain
   to the weakness of the individual. In this sense we must take the whole
   of the following passage: [4343] "For the woman that hath a husband is
   bound by law to the husband while he liveth; but if the husband die,
   she is discharged from the law of the husband. So then if, while the
   husband liveth, she be joined to another man, she shall be called an
   adulteress: but if the husband die, she is free from the law, so that
   she is no adulteress, though she be joined to another man." And
   similarly the words to Timothy, [4344] "I desire therefore that the
   younger widows marry, bear children, rule the household, give none
   occasion to the adversary for reviling: for already some are turned
   aside after Satan," and so on. For as on account of the danger of
   fornication he allows virgins to marry, and makes that excusable which
   in itself is not desirable, so to avoid this same fornication, he
   allows second marriages to widows. For it is better to know a single
   husband, though he be a second or third, than to have many paramours:
   that is, it is more tolerable for a woman to prostitute herself to one
   man than to many. At all events this is so if the Samaritan woman in
   John's Gospel who said she had her sixth husband was reproved by the
   Lord because he was not her husband. For where there are more husbands
   than one the proper idea of a husband, who is a single person, is
   destroyed. At the beginning one rib was turned into one wife. "And they
   two," he says, "shall be one flesh": not three, or four; otherwise, how
   can they be any longer two, if they are several. Lamech, a man of blood
   and a murderer, was the first who divided one flesh between two wives.
   Fratricide and digamy were abolished by the same punishment--that of
   the deluge. The one was avenged seven times, the other seventy times
   seven. The guilt is as widely different as are the numbers. What the
   holiness of second marriage is, appears from this--that a person twice
   married [4345] cannot be enrolled in the ranks of the clergy, and so
   the Apostle tells Timothy, [4346] "Let none be enrolled as a widow
   under threescore years old, having been the wife of one man." The whole
   command concerns those widows who are supported on the alms of the
   Church. The age is therefore limited, so that those only may receive
   the food of the poor who can no longer work. And at the same time,
   consider that she who has had two husbands, even though she be a widow,
   decrepit, and in want, is not a worthy recipient of the Church's funds.
   But if she be deprived of the bread of charity, how much more is she
   deprived of that bread which cometh down from heaven, and of which if a
   man eat unworthily, he shall be guilty of outrage offered to the body
   and the blood of Christ?

   15. The passages, however, which I have adduced in support of my
   position and in which it is permitted to widows, if they so desire, to
   marry again, are interpreted by some concerning those widows who had
   lost their husbands and were found in that condition when they became
   Christians. For, supposing a person baptized and her husband dead, it
   would not be consistent if the Apostle were to bid her marry another,
   when he enjoins even those who have wives to be as though they had them
   not. And this is why the number of wives which a man may take is not
   defined, because when Christian baptism has been received, even though
   a third or a fourth wife has been taken, she is reckoned as the first.
   Otherwise, if, after baptism and after the death of a first husband, a
   second is taken why should not a sixth after the death of the second,
   third, fourth, and fifth, and so on? For it is possible, that through
   some strange misfortune, or by the judgement of God cutting short
   repeated marriages, a young woman may have several husbands, while an
   old woman may be left a widow by her first husband in extreme age. The
   first Adam was married once: the second was unmarried. Let the
   supporters of second marriages shew us as their leader a third Adam who
   was twice married. But granted that Paul allowed second marriages: upon
   the same grounds it follows that he allows even third and fourth
   marriages, or a woman may marry as often as her husband dies. The
   Apostle was forced to choose many things which he did not like. He
   circumcised Timothy, and shaved his own head, practised going barefoot,
   let his hair grow long, and cut it at Cenchrea. And he had certainly
   chastised the Galatians, and blamed Peter because for the sake of
   Jewish observances he separated himself from the Gentiles. As then in
   other points connected with the discipline of the Church he was a Jew
   to Jews, a Gentile to Gentiles, and was made all things to all men,
   that he might gain all: so too he allowed second marriages to
   incontinent persons, and did not limit the number of marriages, in
   order that women, although they saw themselves permitted to take a
   second husband, in the same way as a third or a fourth was allowed,
   might blush to take a second, lest they should be compared to those who
   were three or four times married. If more than one husband be allowed,
   it makes no difference whether he be a second or a third, because there
   is no longer a question of single marriage. [4347] "All things are
   lawful, but not all things are expedient." I do not condemn second, nor
   third, nor, pardon the expression, eighth marriages: I will go still
   further and say that I welcome even a penitent whoremonger. Things that
   are equally lawful must be weighed in an even balance.

   16. But he takes us to the Old Testament, and beginning with Adam goes
   on to Zacharias and Elizabeth. He next confronts us with Peter and the
   rest of the Apostles. We are therefore bound to traverse the same
   course of argument and show that chastity was always preferred to the
   condition of marriage. And as regards Adam and Eve we must maintain
   that before the fall they were virgins in Paradise: but after they
   sinned, and were cast out of Paradise, they were immediately married.
   Then we have the passage, [4348] "For this cause shall a man leave his
   father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and the twain shall
   become one flesh," in explanation of which the Apostle straightway
   adds, [4349] "This mystery is great, but I speak in regard of Christ,
   and of the Church." Christ in the flesh is a virgin, in the spirit he
   is once married. For he has one Church, concerning which the same
   Apostle says, [4350] "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also
   loved the Church." If Christ loves the Church holily, chastely, and
   without spot, let husbands also love their wives in chastity. And let
   everyone know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour,
   not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles who know not God:
   [4351] "For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification:
   seeing that ye have put off the old man with his doings, and have put
   on the new man, which is being renewed unto knowledge after the image
   of him that created him: where there cannot be male and female, Greek
   and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman,
   freeman: but Christ is all, and in all." The link of marriage is not
   found in the image of the Creator. When difference of sex is done away,
   and we are putting off the old man, and putting on the new, then we are
   being born again into Christ a virgin, who was both born of a virgin,
   and is born again through [4352] virginity. And whereas he says "Be
   fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth," it was necessary
   first to plant the wood and to let it grow, so that there might be an
   after-growth for cutting down. And at the same time we must bear in
   mind the meaning of the phrase, "replenish the earth." Marriage
   replenishes the earth, virginity fills Paradise. This too we must
   observe, at least if we would faithfully follow the Hebrew, that while
   Scripture on the first, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth days relates
   that, having finished the works of each, "God saw that it was good," on
   the second day it omitted this altogether, leaving us to understand
   that two is not a good number because it destroys unity, and prefigures
   the marriage compact. Hence it was that all the animals which Noah took
   into the ark by pairs were unclean. Odd numbers denote cleanness. And
   yet by the double number is represented another mystery: that not even
   in beasts and unclean birds is second marriage approved. For unclean
   animals went in two and two, and clean ones by sevens, so that Noah
   after the flood might be able to immediately offer to God sacrifices
   from the latter.

   17. But if Enoch was translated, and Noah was preserved at the deluge,
   I do not think that Enoch was translated because he had a wife, but
   because he was [4353] the first to call upon God and to believe in the
   Creator; and the Apostle Paul fully instructs us concerning him in the
   Epistle to the Hebrews. Noah, moreover, who was preserved as a kind of
   second root for the human race, must of course be preserved together
   with his wife and sons, although in this there is a Scripture mystery.
   The ark, [4354] according to the Apostle Peter, was a type of the
   Church, in which eight souls were saved. When Noah entered into it,
   both he and his sons were separated from their wives; but when he
   landed from it, they united in pairs, and what had been separated in
   the ark, that is, in the Church, was joined together in the intercourse
   of the world. And at the same time if the ark had many compartments and
   little chambers, and was made with second and third stories, and was
   filled with different beasts, and was furnished with dwellings, great
   or small, according to the kind of animal, I think all this diversity
   in the compartments was a figure of the manifold character of the
   Church.

   18. He raises the objection that when God gave his second blessing,
   permission was granted to eat flesh, which had not in the first
   benediction been allowed. He should know that just as divorce according
   to the Saviour's word was not permitted from the beginning, but on
   account of the hardness of our heart was a concession of Moses to the
   human race, so too the eating of flesh was unknown until the deluge.
   But after the deluge, like the quails given in the desert to the
   murmuring people, the poison of flesh-meat was offered to our teeth.
   The Apostle writing to the Ephesians [4355] teaches that God had
   purposed in the fulness of time to sum up and renew in Christ Jesus all
   things which are in heaven and in earth. Whence also the Saviour
   himself in the Revelation of John says, [4356] "I am Alpha and Omega,
   the beginning and the ending." At the beginning of the human race we
   neither ate flesh, nor gave bills of divorce, nor suffered circumcision
   for a sign. Thus we reached the deluge. But after the deluge, together
   with the giving of the law which no one could fulfil, flesh was given
   for food, and divorce was allowed to hard-hearted men, and the knife of
   circumcision was applied, as though the hand of God had fashioned us
   with something superfluous. But once Christ has come in the end of
   time, and Omega passed into Alpha and turned the end into the
   beginning, we are no longer allowed divorce, nor are we circumcised,
   nor do we eat flesh, for the Apostle says, [4357] "It is good not to
   eat flesh, nor to drink wine." For wine as well as flesh was
   consecrated after the deluge.

   19. What shall I say of Abraham who had three wives, as Jovinianus
   says, and received circumcision as a sign of his faith? If we follow
   him in the number of his wives, let us also follow him in circumcision.
   We must not partly follow, partly reject him. Isaac, moreover, the
   husband of one wife, Rebecca, prefigures the Church of Christ, and
   reproves the wantonness of second marriage. And if Jacob had two pairs
   of wives and concubines, and our opponent will not admit that
   blear-eyed Leah, ugly and prolific, was a type of the synagogue, but
   that Rachel, beautiful and long barren, indicated the mystery of the
   Church, let me remind him that when Jacob did this thing he was among
   the Assyrians, and in Mesopotamia in bondage to a hard master. But when
   he wished to enter the holy land, he raised on Mount Galeed [4358] the
   heap of witness, in token that the lord of Mesopotamia had failed to
   find anything among his baggage, and there swore that he would never
   return to the place of his bondage; and when, [4359] after wrestling
   with the angel at the brook Jabbok, he began to limp, because the great
   muscle of his thigh was withered, he at once gained the name of Israel.
   [4360] Then the wife whom he once loved, and for whom he had served,
   was slain by the son of sorrow near Bethlehem which was destined to be
   the birthplace of our Lord, the herald of virginity: and the intimacies
   of Mesopotamia died in the land of the Gospel.

   20. But I wonder why he set [4361] Judah and Tamar before us for an
   example, unless perchance even harlots give him pleasure; or [4362]
   Onan who was slain because he grudged his brother seed. Does he imagine
   that we approve of any sexual intercourse except for the procreation of
   children? As regards Moses, it is clear that he would have been in
   peril at the inn, if [4363] Sephora which is by interpretation a bird,
   had not circumcised her son, and cut off the foreskin of marriage with
   the knife which prefigured the Gospel. This is that Moses who when he
   saw a great vision and heard an angel, or the Lord speaking in the
   bush, [4364] could not by any means approach to him without first
   loosing the latchet of his shoe, that is, putting off the bonds of
   marriage. And we need not be surprised at this in the case of one who
   was a prophet, lawgiver, and the friend of God, seeing that all the
   people when about to draw nigh to Mount Sinai, and to hear the voice
   speaking to them, were commanded to sanctify themselves in three days,
   and keep themselves from their wives. I am out of order in violating
   historical sequence, but I may point out that the same thing was said
   by [4365] Ahimelech the priest to David when he fled to Nob: "If only
   the young men have kept themselves from women." And David answered, "of
   a truth about these three days." For the shew-bread, like the body of
   Christ, might not be eaten by those who rose from the marriage bed. And
   in passing we ought to consider the words "if only the young men have
   kept themselves from women." The truth is that, in view of the purity
   of the body of Christ, all sexual intercourse is unclean. In the law
   also it is enjoined that the [4366] high priest must not marry any but
   a virgin, nor must he take to wife a widow. If a virgin and a widow are
   on the same level, how is it that one is taken, the other rejected?
   [4367] And the widow of a priest is bidden abide in the house of her
   father, and not to contract a second marriage. [4368] If the sister of
   a priest dies in virginity, just as the priest is commanded to go to
   the funeral of his father and mother, so must he go to hers. But if she
   be married, she is despised as though she belonged not to him. He who
   has [4369] married a wife, and he who has planted a vineyard, an image
   of the propagation of children, is forbidden to go to the battle. For
   he who is the slave of his wife cannot be the Lord's soldier. And the
   laver in the tabernacle was cast from the mirrors of the women who
   [4370] fasted, signifying the bodies of pure virgins: And within,
   [4371] in the sanctuary, both cherubim, and mercy-seat, and the ark of
   the covenant, and the table of shew-bread, and the candle-stick, and
   the censer, were made of the purest gold. For silver might not be
   brought into the holy of holies.

   21. I must not linger over Moses when my purpose is at full speed to
   lightly touch on each topic and to sketch the outline of a proper
   knowledge of my subject. I will pass to Joshua the son of Nun, who was
   previously called Ause, or better, as in the Hebrew, Osee, that is,
   Saviour. For he, [4372] according to the epistle of Jude, saved the
   people of Israel and led them forth out of Egypt, and brought them into
   the land of promise. As soon as this Joshua [4373] reached the Jordan,
   the waters of marriage, which had ever flowed in the land, dried up and
   stood in one heap; and the whole people, barefooted and on dry ground,
   crossed over, and came to Gilgal, and there was a second time
   circumcised. If we take this literally, it cannot possibly stand. For
   if we had two foreskins, or if another could grow after the first was
   cut off, there would be room for speaking of a second circumcision. But
   the meaning is that Joshua circumcised the people who had crossed the
   desert, with the Gospel knife, and he circumcised them with a stone
   knife, that what in the case of Moses' son was prefigured in a few
   might under Joshua be fulfilled in all. Moreover, the very foreskins
   were heaped together and buried, and covered with earth, and the fact
   that the reproach of Egypt was taken away, and the name of the place,
   Gilgal, which is by interpretation [4374] revelation, show that while
   the people wandered in the desert uncircumcised their eyes were
   blinded. Let us see what follows. After this Gospel circumcision and
   the consecration of twelve stones at the place of revelation, the
   Passover was immediately celebrated, a lamb was slain for them, and
   they ate the food of the Holy Land. Joshua went forth, and was met by
   the Prince of the host, sword in hand, that is either to shew that he
   was ready to fight for the circumcised people, or to sever the tie of
   marriage. And in the same way that Moses was commanded, so was he:
   [4375] "loose thy shoe, for the place whereon thou standest is holy
   ground." For if the armed host of the Lord was represented by the
   trumpets of the priests, we may see in Jericho a type of the overthrow
   of the world by the preaching of the Gospel. And to pass over endless
   details (for it is not my purpose now to unfold all the mysteries of
   the Old Testament), [4376] five kings who previously reigned in the
   land of promise, and opposed the Gospel army, were overcome in battle
   with Joshua. I think it is clearly to be understood that before the
   Lord led his people from Egypt and circumcised them, sight, smell,
   taste, hearing, and touch had the dominion, and that to these, as to
   five princes, everything was subject. And when they [4377] took refuge
   in the cave of the body and in a place of darkness, Jesus entered the
   body itself and slew them, that the source of their power might be the
   instrument of their death.

   22. But it is now time for us to raise the standard of Joshua's
   chastity. It is written that Moses had a wife. Now Moses is interpreted
   both by our Lord and by the Apostle to mean the law: [4378] "They have
   Moses and the prophets." And [4379] "Death reigned from Adam until
   Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's
   transgression." And no one doubts that in both passages Moses signifies
   the law. We read that Moses, that is the law, had a wife: shew me then
   in the same way that Joshua the son of Nun had either wife or children,
   and if you can do so, I will confess that I am beaten. He certainly
   received the fairest spot in the division of the land of Judah, and
   died, not in the twenties, which are ever unlucky in Scripture--by them
   are reckoned the years of [4380] Jacob's service, [4381] the price of
   Joseph, and [4382] sundry presents which Esau who was fond of them
   received--but in the [4383] tens, whose praises we have often sung; and
   he was buried in [4384] Thamnath Sare, that is, most perfect
   sovereignty, or among those of a new covering, to signify the crowds of
   virgins, covered by the Saviour's aid on Mount Ephraim, that is, the
   fruitful mountain; on the north of the Mountain of Gaash, which is,
   being interpreted, disturbance: for [4385] "Mount Sion is on the sides
   of the north, the city of the Great King," is ever exposed to hatred,
   and in every trial says [4386] "But my feet had well nigh slipped." The
   book which bears the name of Joshua ends with his burial. Again in the
   book of Judges we read of him as though he had risen and come to life
   again, and by way of summary his works are extolled. We read too [4387]
   "So Joshua sent the people away, every man unto his inheritance, that
   they might possess the land." And "Israel served the Lord all the days
   of Joshua," and so on. There immediately follows: "And Joshua the son
   of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being an hundred and ten years
   old." Moses, moreover, only saw the land of promise; he could not
   enter: and [4388] "he died in the land of Moab, and the Lord buried him
   in the valley in the land of Moab over against Beth-peor: but no man
   knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day." Let us compare the burial of
   the two: Moses died in the land of Moab, Joshua in the land of Judæa.
   The former was buried in a valley over against the house of Phogor,
   which is, being interpreted, reproach (for the Hebrew Phogor
   corresponds to Priapus [4389] ); the latter in Mount Ephraim on the
   north of Mount Gaash. And in the simple expressions of the sacred
   Scriptures there is always a more subtle meaning. The Jews gloried in
   children and child-bearing; and the barren woman, who had not offspring
   in Israel, was accursed; but blessed was he whose seed was in Sion, and
   his family in Jerusalem; and part of the highest blessing was, [4390]
   "Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, in the innermost parts of thy
   house, thy children like olive plants, round about thy table."
   Therefore his grave is described as placed in a valley over against the
   house of an idol which was in a special sense consecrated to lust. But
   we who fight under Joshua our leader, even to the present day know not
   where Moses was buried. For we despise Phogor, and all his shame,
   knowing that they who are in the flesh cannot please God. And the Lord
   before the flood had said [4391] "My spirit shall not abide in man for
   ever, for that he also is flesh." Wherefore, when Moses died, the
   people of Israel mourned for him; but Joshua like one on his way to
   victory was unmourned. For marriage ends at death; virginity thereafter
   begins to wear the crown.

   23. Next he brings forward Samson, and does not consider that the
   Lord's Nazarite was once shaven bald by a woman. And although Samson
   continues to be a type of the Saviour because he loved a harlot from
   among the Gentiles, which harlot corresponds to the Church, and because
   he slew more enemies in his death than he did in his life, yet he does
   not set an example of conjugal chastity. And he surely reminds us
   [4392] of Jacob's prophecy--he was shaken by his runaway steed, bitten
   by an adder and fell backwards. But why he enumerated Deborah, and
   Barak, and the wife of Heber the Kenite, I am at a loss to understand.
   For it is one thing to draw up a list of military commanders in
   historical sequence, another to indicate certain figures of marriage
   which cannot be found in them. And whereas he prefers the fidelity of
   the father Jephthah to the tears of the virgin daughter, that makes for
   us. For we are not commending virgins of the world so much as those who
   are virgins for Christ's sake, and most Hebrews blame the father for
   the rash vow he made, [4393] "If thou wilt indeed deliver the children
   of Ammon into mine hand, then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth
   of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the
   children of Ammon, it shall be for the Lord's, and I will offer it up
   for a burnt offering." Supposing (they say) a dog or an ass had met
   him, what would he have done? Their meaning is that God so ordered
   events that he who had improvidently made a vow, should learn his error
   by the death of his daughter. And if Samuel who was brought up in the
   tabernacle married a wife, how does that prejudice virginity? As if at
   the present day also there were not many married priests, and as though
   the Apostle did not [4394] describe a bishop as the husband of one
   wife, having children with all purity. At the same time we must not
   forget that Samuel was a Levite, not a priest or high-priest. Hence it
   was that his mother made for him a linen ephod, that is, a linen
   garment to go over the shoulders, which was the proper dress of the
   Levites and of the inferior order. And so he is not named in the Psalms
   among the priests, but among those who call upon the name of the Lord:
   [4395] "Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who
   call upon his name." For [4396] Levi begat Kohath, Kohath begat
   Amminadab, Amminadab begat Korah, Korah begat Assir, Assir begat
   Elkanah, Elkanah begat Zuph, Zuph begat Tahath, Tahath begat Eliel,
   Eliel begat Jeroham, Jeroham begat Elkanah, Elkanah begat Samuel. And
   no one doubts that the priests sprang from the stock of Aaron, Eleazar,
   and Phinees. And seeing that they had wives, they would be rightly
   brought against us, if, led away by the error of the Encratites, we
   were to maintain that marriage deserved censure, and our high priest
   were not after the order of Melchizedek, without father, without
   mother, [4397] A'genealogetos , that is, unmarried. And much fruit
   truly did Samuel reap from his children! he himself pleased God, but
   [4398] begat such children as displeased the Lord. But if in support of
   second marriage, he urges the instance of Boaz and Ruth, let him know
   that in the Gospel (S. Matt. i. 6) to typify the Church even Rahab the
   harlot is reckoned among our Lord's ancestors.

   24. He boasts that David bought his wife for two hundred foreskins. But
   he should remember that David had numerous other wives, and afterwards
   received Michal, Saul's daughter, whom her father had delivered to
   another, and when he was old got heat from the embrace of the
   Shunammite maiden. And I do not say this because I am bold enough to
   disparage holy men, but because it is one thing to live under the law,
   another to live under the Gospel. David slew Uriah the Hittite and
   committed adultery with Bathsheba. And because he was a man of
   blood--the reference is not, as some think, to his wars, but to the
   [4399] murder--he was not permitted to build a temple of the Lord. But
   as for us, [4400] if we cause one of the least to stumble, and if we
   say to a brother [4401] Raca, or [4402] use our eyes improperly, it
   were good that a millstone were hanged about our neck, we shall be in
   danger of Gehenna, and a mere glance will be reckoned to us for
   adultery. He passes on to Solomon, through whom wisdom itself sang its
   own praises. Seeing that not content with dwelling upon his praises, he
   calls him uxorious, I am surprised that he did not add the words of the
   Canticles: [4403] "There are threescore queens, and fourscore
   concubines, and maidens without number," and those of the First Book of
   Kings; [4404] And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three
   hundred concubines, and others without number." These are they who
   turned away his heart from the Lord: and yet before he had many wives,
   and fell into sins of the flesh, at the beginning of his reign and in
   his early years he built a temple to the Lord. For every one is judged
   not for what he will be, but for what he is. But if Jovinianus approves
   the example of Solomon, he will no longer be in favour of second and
   third marriages only, but unless he has seven hundred wives and three
   hundred concubines, he cannot be the king's antitype or attain to his
   merit. I earnestly again and again remind you, my reader, that I am
   compelled to speak as I do, and that I do not disparage our
   predecessors under the law, but am well aware that they served their
   generation according to their circumstances, and fulfilled the Lord's
   command to increase, and multiply, and replenish the earth. And what is
   more they were figures of those that were to come. But we to whom it is
   said, [4405] "The time is shortened, that henceforth those that have
   wives may be as though they had none," have a different command, and
   for us virginity is consecrated by the Virgin Saviour.

   25. What folly it was to include Elijah and Elisha in a list of married
   men, is plain without a word from me. For, since John Baptist came in
   the spirit and power of Elijah, and John was a virgin, it is clear that
   he came not only in Elijah's spirit, but also in his bodily chastity.
   Then the passage relating to Hezekiah might be adduced (though
   Jovinianus with his wonted stupidity did not notice it), in which after
   his recovery and the addition of fifteen years to his life he said,
   "Now will I beget children." It must be remembered, however, that in
   the Hebrew texts the passage is not so, but runs thus: [4406] "The
   father to the children shall make known thy faithfulness." Nor need we
   wonder that Huldah, the prophetess, and wife of Shallum, was [4407]
   consulted by Josiah, King of Judah, when the captivity was approaching
   and the wrath of the Lord was falling upon Jerusalem: since it is the
   rule of Scripture when holy men fail, to praise women to the reproach
   of men. And it is superfluous to speak of Daniel, for the Hebrews to
   the present day affirm that the three youths were eunuchs, in
   accordance with the declaration of God which Isaiah utters to Hezekiah:
   [4408] "And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
   beget, shall they take away: and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
   the King of Babylon." And again in Daniel we read: [4409] "And the king
   spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring in
   certain of the children of Israel, even of the seed royal and of the
   nobles: youth in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in
   all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science." The
   conclusion is that if Daniel and the three youths were chosen from the
   seed royal, and if Scripture foretold that that there should be eunuchs
   of the seed royal, these men were those who were made eunuchs. If he
   meets us with the argument that in Ezekiel [4410] it is said that Noah,
   Daniel and Job in a sinful land could not free their sons and
   daughters, we reply that the words are used hypothetically. Noah and
   Job were not in existence at that time: we know that they lived many
   ages before. And the meaning is this: if there were such and such men
   in a sinful land, they shall not be able to save their own sons and
   daughters: because the righteousness of the father shall not save the
   son, nor shall the sin of one be imputed to another. [4411] "For the
   soul that sinneth, it shall die." This, too, must be said, that Daniel,
   as the history of his book shows, was taken captive with King Jehoiakim
   at the same time that Ezekiel was also led into captivity. How then
   could he have sons who was still a youth? And only three years had
   elapsed when he was brought in to wait upon the king. Let no one
   suppose that Ezekiel at this time remembers Daniel as a man, not as a
   youth; for "It came to pass," he says, [4412] "in the sixth year," that
   is of King Jehoiakim, "in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the
   month:" and, "as I sat in my house, and the elders of Judah sat before
   me." Yet on that same day it was said to him, [4413] "Though these
   three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it." Daniel was therefore a
   youth, and known to the people, either on account of his interpretation
   of the king's dreams, [4414] or on account of the release of Susannah,
   and the slaying of the elders. And it is clearly proved that at the
   time these things were spoken of Noah, Daniel, and Job, Daniel was
   still a youth and could not have had sons and daughters, whom he might
   save by his righteousness. So far concerning the Law.

   26. Coming to the Gospel he sets before us Zacharias and Elizabeth,
   Peter and his mother-in-law, and, with a shamelessness to which we have
   now grown accustomed, fails to understand that they, too, ought to have
   been reckoned among those who served the Law. For the Gospel had no
   being before the crucifixion of Christ--it was consecrated by His
   passion and by His blood. In accordance with this rule Peter and the
   other Apostles (I must give Jovinianus something now and then out of my
   abundance) had indeed wives, but those which they had taken before they
   knew the Gospel. But once they were received into the Apostolate, they
   forsook the offices of marriage. For when Peter, representing the
   Apostles, says to the Lord: [4415] "Lo we have left all and followed
   thee," the Lord answered him, [4416] "Verily I say unto you, there is
   no man that hath left house or wife, or brethren, or parents, or
   children for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold
   more in this time, and in the world to come eternal life." But if, in
   order to show that all the Apostles had wives, he meets us with the
   words [4417] "Have we no right to lead about women or wives" (for gune
   in Greek has both meanings) "even as the rest of the apostles, and
   Cephas, and the brethren of the Lord?" let him add what is found in the
   Greek copies, "Have we no right to lead about women that are sisters,
   or wives?" This makes it clear that the writer referred to other holy
   women, who, in accordance with Jewish custom, ministered to their
   teachers of their substance, as we read was the practice with even our
   Lord himself. Where there is a previous reference to eating and
   drinking, and the outlay of money, and mention is afterwards made of
   women that are sisters, it is quite clear, as we have said, that we
   must understand, not wives, but those women who ministered of their
   substance. And we read the same account in the Old Testament of the
   Shunammite who was wont to welcome Elisha, and to put for him a table,
   and bread, and a candlestick, and the rest. At all events if we take
   gunaikas to mean wives, not women, the addition of the word sisters
   destroys the effect of the word wives, and shews that they were related
   in spirit, not by wedlock. Nevertheless, with the exception of the
   Apostle Peter, it is not openly stated that the Apostles had wives; and
   since the statement is made of one while nothing is said about the
   rest, we must understand that those of whom Scripture gives no such
   description had no wives. Yet Jovinianus, who has arrayed against us
   Zacharias and Elizabeth, Peter and his wife's mother, should know, that
   John was the son of Zacharias and Elizabeth, that is, a virgin was the
   offspring of marriage, the Gospel of the law, chastity of matrimony; so
   that by a virgin prophet the virgin Lord might be both announced and
   baptized. But we might say concerning Peter, that he had a
   mother-in-law when he believed, and no longer had a wife, although in
   the [4418] "Sentences" we read of both his wife and daughter. But for
   the present our argument must be based wholly on Scripture. He has made
   his appeal to the Apostles, because he thinks that they, who hold the
   chief authority in our moral system and are the typical Christian
   teachers, were not virgins. If, then, we allow that they were not
   virgins (and, with the exception of Peter, the point cannot be proved),
   yet I must tell him that it is to the Apostles that the words of Isaiah
   relate: [4419] "Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a small
   remnant, we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like unto
   Gomorrah." So, then, they who were by birth Jews could not under the
   Gospel recover the virginity which they had lost in Judaism. And yet
   John, one of the disciples, who is related to have been the youngest of
   the Apostles, and who was a virgin when he embraced Christianity,
   remained a virgin, and on that account was more beloved by our Lord,
   and lay upon the breast of Jesus. And what Peter, who had had a wife,
   did not dare ask, [4420] he requested John to ask. And after the
   resurrection, when Mary Magdalene told them that the Lord had risen,
   [4421] they both ran to the sepulchre, but John outran Peter. And when
   they were fishing in the ship on the lake of Gennesaret, Jesus stood
   upon the shore, and the Apostles knew not who it was they saw; [4422]
   the virgin alone recognized a virgin, and said to Peter, "It is the
   Lord." Again, after hearing the prediction that he must be bound by
   another, and led whither he would not, and must suffer on the cross,
   Peter said, "Lord what shall this man do?" being unwilling to desert
   John, with whom he had always been united. Our Lord said to him, "What
   is that to thee if I wish him so to be?" Whence the saying went abroad
   among the brethren that that disciple should not die. Here we have a
   proof that virginity does not die, and that the defilement of marriage
   is not washed away by the blood of martyrdom, but virginity abides with
   Christ, and its sleep is not death but a passing to another state. If,
   however, Jovinianus should obstinately contend that John was not a
   virgin, (whereas we have maintained that his virginity was the cause of
   the special love our Lord bore to him), let him explain, if he was not
   a virgin, why it was that he was loved more than the other Apostles.
   But you say, [4423] the Church was founded upon Peter: although [4424]
   elsewhere the same is attributed to all the Apostles, and they all
   receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the
   Church depends upon them all alike, yet one among the twelve is chosen
   so that when a head has been appointed, there may be no occasion for
   schism. But why was not John chosen, who was a virgin? Deference was
   paid to age, because Peter was the elder: one who was a youth, I may
   say almost a boy, could not be set over men of advanced age; and a good
   master who was bound to remove every occasion of strife among his
   disciples, and who had said to them, [4425] "Peace I leave with you, my
   peace I give unto you," and, [4426] "He that is the greater among you,
   let him be the least of all," would not be thought to afford cause of
   envy against the youth whom he had loved. We maybe sure that John was
   then a boy because ecclesiastical history most clearly proves that he
   lived to the reign of Trajan, that is, he fell asleep in the
   sixty-eighth year after our Lord's passion, as I have briefly noted in
   my treatise on Illustrious Men. [4427] Peter is an Apostle, and John is
   an Apostle--the one a married man, the other a virgin; but Peter is an
   Apostle only, John is both an Apostle and an Evangelist, and a prophet.
   An Apostle, because he wrote to the Churches as a master; an
   Evangelist, because he composed a Gospel, a thing which no other of the
   Apostles, excepting Matthew, did; a prophet, for he saw in the island
   of Patmos, to which he had been banished by the Emperor Domitian as a
   martyr for the Lord, an Apocalypse containing the boundless mysteries
   of the future. Tertullian, more over, relates that he was sent to Rome,
   and that having been plunged into a jar of boiling oil he came out
   fresher and more active than when he went in. But his very Gospel is
   widely different from the rest. Matthew as though he were writing of a
   man begins thus: "The book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the son
   of David, the son of Abraham;" Luke begins with the priesthood of
   Zacharias; Mark with a prophecy of the prophets Malachi and Isaiah. The
   first has the face of a man, on account of the genealogical table; the
   second, the face of a calf, on account of the priesthood; the third,
   the face of a lion, on account of the voice of one crying in the
   desert, [4428] "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths
   straight." But John like an eagle soars aloft, and reaches the Father
   Himself, and says, [4429] "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
   was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with
   God," and so on. The virgin writer expounded mysteries which the
   married could not, and to briefly sum up all and show how great was the
   privilege of John, or rather of virginity in John, the Virgin Mother
   [4430] was entrusted by the Virgin Lord to the Virgin disciple.

   27. But we toil to no purpose. For our opponent urges against us the
   Apostolic sentence and says, [4431] "Adam was first formed, then Eve;
   and Adam was not beguiled, but the woman being beguiled hath fallen
   into transgression: but she shall be saved through the child-bearing,
   if they continue in faith and love and sanctification with sobriety."
   Let us consider what led the Apostle to make this declaration: [4432]
   "I desire therefore that the men pray in every place, lifting up holy
   hands, without wrath and disputing." So in due course he lays down
   rules of life for the women and says "In like manner that women adorn
   themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not
   with braided hair, and gold or pearls or costly raiment; but (which
   becometh women professing godliness) through good works. Let a woman
   learn in quietness with all subjection. But I permit not a woman to
   teach, nor to have dominion over a man, but to be in quietness." And
   that the lot of a woman might not seem a hard one, reducing her to the
   condition of a slave to her husband, the Apostle recalls the ancient
   law and goes back to the first example: that Adam was first made, then
   the woman out of his rib; and that the Devil could not seduce Adam, but
   did seduce Eve; and that after displeasing God she was immediately
   subjected to the man, and began to turn to her husband; and he points
   out that she who was once tied with the bonds of marriage and was
   reduced to the condition of Eve, might blot out the [4433] old
   transgression by the [4434] procreation of children: provided, however,
   that she bring up the children themselves in the faith and love of
   Christ, and in sanctification and chastity; for we must not adopt the
   faulty reading of the Latin texts, sobrietas, but castitas, that is,
   [4435] sophrosune . You see how you are mastered by the witness of this
   passage also, and cannot but be driven to admit that what you thought
   was on the side of marriage tells in favour of virginity. For if the
   woman is saved in child-bearing, and the more the children the greater
   the safety of the mothers, why did he add "if they continue in faith
   and love and sanctification with chastity"? The woman will then be
   saved, if she bear not children who will remain virgins: if what she
   has herself lost, she attains in her children, and makes up for the
   loss and decay, of the root by the excellence of the flower and fruit.

   28. Above, in passing, when our opponent adduced Solomon, who, although
   he had many wives, nevertheless built the temple, I briefly replied
   that it was my intention to run over the remaining points. Now that he
   may not cry out that both Solomon and others under the law, prophets
   and holy men, have been dishonoured by us, let us show what this very
   man with his many wives and concubines thought of marriage. For no one
   can know better than he who suffered through them, what a wife or woman
   is. Well then, he says in the Proverbs: [4436] "The foolish and bold
   woman comes to want bread." What bread? Surely that bread which cometh
   down from heaven: and he immediately adds [4437] "The earth-born perish
   in her house, rush into the depths of hell." Who are the earth-born
   that perish in her house? They of course who follow the first Adam, who
   is of the earth, and not the second, who is from heaven. And again in
   another place: "Like a worm in wood, so a wicked woman destroyeth her
   husband." But if you assert that this was spoken of bad wives, I shall
   briefly answer: What necessity rests upon me to run the risk of the
   wife I marry proving good or bad? [4438] "It is better," he says, "to
   dwell in a desert land, than with a contentious and passionate woman in
   a wide house." How seldom we find a wife without these faults, he knows
   who is married. Hence that sublime orator, Varius Geminus [4439] says
   well "The man who does not quarrel is a bachelor." [4440] "It is better
   to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman
   in a house in common." If a house common to husband and wife makes a
   wife proud and breeds contempt for the husband: how much more if the
   wife be the richer of the two, and the husband but a lodger in her
   house! She begins to be not a wife, but mistress of the house; and if
   she offend her husband, they must part. [4441] "A continual dropping on
   a wintry day" turns a man out of doors, and so will a contentious woman
   drive a man from his own house. She floods his house with her constant
   nagging and daily chatter, and ousts him from his own home, that is the
   Church. Hence the same Solomon previously commands: [4442] "My son
   flows forth beyond." And the Apostle, writing to the Hebrews, says
   "Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things spoken,
   lest haply we flow forth beyond." But who can hide from himself what is
   thus enigmatically expressed? [4443] "The horseleech had three
   daughters, dearly loved, but they satisfied her not, and a fourth is
   not satisfied when you say Enough; the grave, and woman's love, and the
   earth that is not satisfied with water, and the fire that saith not,
   Enough." The horse-leech is the devil, the daughters of the devil are
   dearly loved, and they cannot be satisfied with the blood of the slain:
   the grave, and woman's love, and the earth dry and scorched with heat.
   It is not the harlot, or the adulteress who is spoken of; but woman's
   love in general is accused of ever being insatiable; put it out, it
   bursts into flame; give it plenty, it is again in need; it enervates a
   man's mind, and engrosses all thought except for the passion which it
   feeds. What we read in the parable which follows is to the same effect:
   "For three things the earth doth tremble, and for four which it cannot
   bear: for a servant when he is king: and a fool when he is filled with
   meat: for an odious woman when she is married to a good husband: and an
   handmaid that is heir to her mistress." See how a wife is classed with
   the greatest evils. But if you reply that it is an odious wife, I will
   give you the same answer as before--the mere possibility of such danger
   is in itself no light matter. For he who marries a wife is uncertain
   whether he is marrying an odious woman or one worthy of his love. If
   she be odious, she is intolerable. If worthy of love, her love is
   compared to the grave, to the parched earth, and to fire.

   29. Let us come to Ecclesiastes and adduce a few corroborative passages
   from him also. [4444] "To everything there is a season, and a time to
   every purpose under the heaven: a time to be born, and a time to die: a
   time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted." We
   brought forth young under the law with Moses, let us die under the
   Gospel with Christ. We planted in marriage, let us by chastity pluck up
   that which was planted. "A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
   embracing: a time to love, and a time to hate: a time for war, and a
   time for peace." And at the same time he warns us not to prefer the law
   to the Gospel; nor to think that virgin purity is to be placed on a
   level with marriage: [4445] "Better," he says, "is the end of a thing
   than the beginning thereof." And he immediately adds: "Say not thou,
   what is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou
   dost not inquire wisely concerning this." And he gives the reason why
   the latter days are better than the former: [4446] "For wisdom with an
   inheritance is good." Under the law carnal wisdom was followed by the
   sword of death; under the Gospel an eternal inheritance awaits
   spiritual wisdom. "Behold, this have I found, [4447] saith the
   Preacher, one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
   those have I not found. Behold this only have I found, that God made
   man upright; but they have sought out many inventions." He says that he
   had found man upright. Consider the force of the words. The word man
   comprehends both male and female. "But a woman," he says, "among all
   these have I not found." Let us read the beginning of Genesis, and we
   shall find Adam, that is man, called both male and female. Having then
   been created by God good and upright, by our own fault we have fallen
   to a worse condition; and that which in Paradise had been upright, when
   we left Paradise was corrupt. If you object that before they sinned
   there was a distinction in sex between male and female, and that they
   could without sin have come together, it is uncertain what might have
   happened. For we cannot know the judgements of God, and anticipate his
   sentence as we choose. What really happened is plain enough,--that they
   who in Paradise remained in perpetual virginity, when they were
   expelled from Paradise were joined together. Or if Paradise admits of
   marriage, and there is no difference between marriage and virginity,
   what prevented their previous intercourse even in Paradise? They are
   driven out of Paradise; and what they did not there, they do on earth;
   so that from the very earliest days of humanity virginity was
   consecrated by Paradise, and marriage by earth. [4448] "Let thy
   garments be always white." The eternal whiteness of our garments is the
   purity of virginity. In the morning we sowed our seed, and in the
   evening let us not cease. Let us who served marriage under the law,
   serve virginity under the Gospel.

   30. I pass to the Song of Songs, and whereas our opponent thinks it
   makes altogether for marriage, I shall show that it contains the
   mysteries of virginity. Let us hear what the bride says before that the
   bridegroom comes to earth, suffers, descends to the lower world, and
   rises again. [4449] "We will make for thee likenesses of gold with
   ornaments of silver while the king sits at his table." Before the Lord
   rose again, and the Gospel shone, the bride had not gold, but
   likenesses of gold. As for the silver, however, which she professes to
   have at the marriage, she not only had silver ornaments, but she had
   them in variety--in widows, in the continent, and in the married. Then
   the bridegroom makes answer to the bride, and teaches her that the
   shadow of the old law has passed away, and the truth of the Gospel has
   come. [4450] "Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away, for lo, the
   winter is past, the rain is over and gone." This relates to the Old
   Testament. Once more he speaks of the Gospel and of virginity: "The
   flowers appear on the earth, the time of the pruning of vines has
   come." Does he not seem to you to say the very same thing that the
   Apostle says: [4451] "The time is shortened that henceforth both those
   that have wives may be as though they had none"? And more plainly does
   he herald chastity: [4452] "The voice," he says, "of the turtle is
   heard in our land." The turtle, the chastest of birds, always dwelling
   in lofty places, is a type of the Saviour. Let us read the works of
   naturalists and we shall find that it is the nature of the turtle-dove,
   if it lose its mate, not to take another; and we shall understand that
   second marriage is repudiated even by dumb birds. And immediately the
   turtle says to its fellow: [4453] "The fig tree hath put forth its
   green figs," that is, the commandments of the old law have fallen, and
   the blossoming vines of the Gospel give forth their fragrance. Whence
   the Apostle also says, [4454] "We are a sweet savour of Christ." [4455]
   "Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. O my dove, thou art in the
   clefts of the rock, in the covert of the steep place. Let me see thy
   countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
   countenance is comely." [4456] Whilst thou coveredst thy countenance
   like Moses and the veil of the law remained, I neither saw thy face,
   nor did I condescend to hear thy voice. I said, [4457] "Yea, when ye
   make many prayers, I will not hear." But now with unveiled face behold
   my glory, and shelter thyself in the cleft and steep places of the
   solid rock. On hearing this the bride disclosed the mysteries of
   chastity: [4458] "My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth his
   flock among the lilies," that is among the pure virgin bands. Would you
   know what sort of a throne our true Solomon, the Prince of Peace, has,
   and what his attendants are like? [4459] "Behold," he says, "it is the
   litter of Solomon: threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty
   men of Israel. They all handle the sword, and are expert in war: every
   man hath his sword upon his thigh." They who are about Solomon have
   their sword upon their thigh, like Ehud, the left-handed judge, who
   slew the fattest of foes, a man devoted to the flesh, and cut short all
   his pleasures. [4460] "I will get me," he says, "to the mountain of
   myrrh;" to those, that is, who have mortified their bodies; "and to the
   hill of frankincense," to the crowds of pure virgins; "and I will say
   to my bride, thou art all fair, my love, and there is no spot in thee."
   Whence too the Apostle: [4461] "That he might present the church to
   himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
   thing." [4462] "Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, with me from
   Lebanon. Thou shalt come [4463] and pass on from the beginning of
   faith, from the top of Sanir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the
   mountains of the leopards." Lebanon is, being interpreted, whiteness.
   Come then, fairest bride, concerning whom it is elsewhere said [4464]
   "Who is she that cometh up, all in white?" and pass on by way of this
   world, from the beginning of faith, and from Sanir, which is by
   interpretation, God of light, as we read in the psalm: [4465] "Thy word
   is a lantern unto my feet, and light unto my path;" and "from Hermon,"
   that is, consecration: and "flee from the lions' dens, and the
   mountains of the leopards who cannot change their spots." Flee, he
   says, from the lions' dens, flee from the pride of devils, that when
   thou hast been consecrated to me, I may be able to say unto thee:
   [4466] "Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my bride, thou hast
   ravished mine heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy
   neck." What he says is something like this--I do not reject marriage:
   you have a second eye, the left, which I have given to you on account
   of the weakness of those who cannot see the right. But I am pleased
   with the right eye of virginity, and if it be blinded the whole body is
   in darkness. And that we might not think he had in view carnal love and
   bodily marriage, he at once excludes this meaning by saying [4467]
   "Thou hast ravished my heart, my bride, my sister." The name sister
   excludes all suspicion of unhallowed love. "How fair are thy breasts
   with wine," those breasts concerning which he had said above, My
   beloved is mine, and I am his: "betwixt my breasts shall he lie," that
   is in the princely portion of the heart where the Word of God has its
   lodging. What wine is that which gives beauty to the breasts of the
   bride, and fills them with the milk of chastity? That, forsooth, of
   which the bridegroom goes on to speak: [4468] "I have drunk my wine
   with my milk. Eat, O friends: yea, drink and be drunken, my brethren."
   Hence the Apostles also were said to be filled with new wine; with new,
   he says, not with old wine; because [4469] new wine is put into fresh
   wine-skins, and they [4470] did not walk in oldness of the letter, but
   in newness of the Spirit. This is wine wherewith when youths and
   maidens are intoxicated, they at once thirst for virginity; they are
   filled with the spirit of chastity, and the prophecy of Zechariah comes
   to pass, at least if we follow the Hebrew literally, for he prophesied
   concerning virgins: [4471] "And the streets of the city shall be full
   of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof. For what is his
   goodness, and what is his beauty, but the corn of the elect, and wine
   that giveth birth to virgins?" They are virgins of whom it is written
   in the forty-fifth psalm: [4472] "The virgins her companions that
   follow her shall be brought unto thee. With gladness and rejoicing
   shall they be led: they shall enter into the King's palace."

   31. Then follows: [4473] "A garden shut up is my sister, my bride: a
   garden shut up, a fountain sealed." That which is shut up and sealed
   reminds us of the mother of our Lord who was a mother and a Virgin.
   Hence it was that no one before or after our Saviour was laid in his
   new tomb, hewn in the solid rock. And yet she that was ever a Virgin is
   the mother of many virgins. For next we read: "Thy shoots are an
   orchard of pomegranates with precious fruits." By pomegranates and
   fruits is signified the blending of all virtues in virginity. [4474]
   "My beloved is white and ruddy"; white in virginity, ruddy in
   martyrdom. And because He is white and ruddy, therefore it is
   immediately added [4475] "His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is
   altogether lovely." The virgin bridegroom having been praised by the
   virgin bride, in turn praises the virgin bride, and says to her: [4476]
   "How beautiful are thy feet in sandals, [4477] O daughter of Aminadab,"
   which is, being interpreted, a people that offereth itself willingly.
   For virginity is voluntary, and therefore the steps of the Church in
   the beauty of chastity are praised. This is not the time for me like a
   commentator to explain all the mysteries of virginity from the Song of
   Songs; I have no doubt that the fastidious reader will turn up his nose
   at what has already been said.

   32. Isaiah tells of the mystery of our faith and hope: [4478] "Behold a
   virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name
   Emmanuel." I know that the Jews are accustomed to meet us with the
   objection that in Hebrew the word Almah does not mean a virgin, but a
   young woman. And, to speak truth, a virgin is properly called Bethulah,
   but a young woman, or a girl, is not Almah, but Naarah! [4479] What
   then is the meaning of Almah? A hidden virgin, that is, not merely
   virgin, but a virgin and something more, because not every virgin is
   hidden, shut off from the occasional sight of men. Then again, Rebecca,
   on account of her extreme purity, and because she was a type of the
   Church which she represented in her own virginity, is described in
   Genesis as Almah, not Bethulah, as may clearly be proved from the words
   of Abraham's servant, spoken by him in Mesopotamia: [4480] "And he
   said, O Lord, the God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my
   way which I go: behold I stand by the fountain of water; and let it
   come to pass, that the maiden which cometh forth to draw, to whom I
   shall say, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of this pitcher to
   drink; and she shall say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw
   for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed
   for my master's son." Where he speaks of the maiden coming forth to
   draw water, the Hebrew word is Almah, that is, a virgin secluded, and
   guarded by her parents with extreme care. Or, if this be not so, let
   them at least show me where the word is applied to married women as
   well, and I will confess my ignorance. "Behold a virgin shall conceive
   and bear a son." If virginity be not preferred to marriage, why did not
   the Holy Spirit choose a married woman, or a widow? For at that time
   Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser, was alive,
   distinguished for purity, and always free to devote herself to prayers
   and fasting in the temple of God. If the life, and good works, and
   fasting without virginity can merit the advent of the Holy Spirit, she
   might well have been the mother of our Lord. Let us hasten to the rest:
   [4481] "The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed thee
   to scorn." To her whom he called daughter the prophet also gave the
   title virgin, for fear that if he spoke only of a daughter, it might be
   supposed that she was married. This is the virgin daughter whom
   elsewhere he thus addresses: [4482] "Sing, O barren, thou that dost not
   bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not
   travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate, than the
   children of the married wife, saith the Lord." This is she of whom God
   by the mouth of Jeremiah speaks, saying: [4483] "Can a maid forget her
   ornaments, or a bride her attire." Concerning her we read of a great
   miracle in the same prophecy [4484] --that a woman should compass a
   man, and that the Father of all things should be contained in a
   virgin's womb.

   33. "Granted," says Jovinianus, "that there is a difference between
   marriage and virginity, what have you to say to this,--Suppose a virgin
   and a widow were baptized, and continued as they were, what difference
   will there be between them?" What we have already said concerning Peter
   and John, Anna and Mary, may be of service here. For if there is no
   difference between a virgin and a widow, both being baptized, because
   baptism makes a new man, upon the same principle harlots and
   prostitutes, if they are baptized, will be equal to virgins. If
   previous marriage is no prejudice to a baptized widow, and past
   pleasures and the exposure of their bodies to public lust are no
   detriment in the case of harlots, once they have approached the laver
   they will gain the rewards of virginity. It is one thing to unite with
   God a mind pure and free from any stain of memory, another to remember
   the foul and forced embraces of a man, and in recollection to act a
   part which you do not in person. Jeremiah, who was [4485] sanctified in
   the womb, and was known in his mother's belly, enjoyed the high
   privilege because he was predestined to the blessing of virginity. And
   when all were captured, and even the vessels of the temple were
   plundered by the King of Babylon, he alone was [4486] liberated by the
   enemy, knew not the insults of captivity, and was supported by the
   conquerors; and Nebuchadnezzar, though he gave Nebuzaradan no charge
   concerning the Holy of Holies, did give him charge concerning Jeremiah.
   For that is the true temple of God, and that is the Holy of Holies,
   which is consecrated to the Lord by pure virginity. On the other hand,
   Ezekiel, who was kept captive in Babylon, who saw the [4487] storm
   approaching from the north, and the whirlwind sweeping all before it,
   says, [4488] "My wife died in the evening and I did in the morning as I
   was commanded." For the Lord had previously told him that in that day
   he should open his mouth, and speak, and no longer keep silence. Mark
   well, that while his wife was living he was not at liberty to admonish
   the people. His wife died, the bond of wedlock was broken, and without
   the least hesitation he constantly devoted himself to the prophetic
   office. For he who was called being free, is truly the Lord's
   bondservant. I do not deny the blessedness of widows who remain such
   after their baptism; nor do I disparage those wives who maintain their
   chastity in wedlock; but as they attain a greater reward with God than
   married women who pay the marriage due, let widows themselves be
   content to give the preference to virginity. For if a chastity which
   comes too late, when the glow of bodily pleasure is no longer felt,
   makes them feel superior to married women, why should they not
   acknowledge themselves inferior to perpetual virginity.

   34. All that goes for nothing, says Jovinianus, because even bishops,
   priests, and deacons, husbands of one wife, and having children, were
   appointed by the Apostle. Just as the Apostle [4489] says he has no
   commandment respecting virgins, and yet gives his advice, as one who
   had obtained mercy from the Lord, and is anxious throughout the whole
   discussion to give virginity the preference over marriage, and advises
   what he does not venture to command, lest he seem to lay a snare, and
   to put a heavier burden upon man's nature than it can bear; so also in
   establishing the constitution of the Church, inasmuch as the elements
   of the early Church were drawn from the Gentiles, he made the rules for
   fresh believers somewhat lighter that they might not in alarm shrink
   from keeping them. Then, again, the Apostles and elders wrote [4490]
   letters from Jerusalem that no heavier burden should be laid on Gentile
   believers than that they should keep themselves from idolatry, and from
   fornication, and from things strangled. As though they were providing
   for infant children, they gave them milk to drink, not solid food. Nor
   did they lay down rules for continence, nor hint at virginity, nor urge
   to fasting, nor repeat the directions [4491] given in the Gospel to the
   Apostles, not to have two tunics, nor scrip, nor money in their
   girdles, nor staff in their hand, nor shoes on their feet. And they
   certainly did not bid them, [4492] if they wished to be perfect, go and
   sell all that they had and give to the poor, and "come follow me." For
   if the young man who boasted of having done all that the law enjoins,
   when he heard this went away sorrowful, because he had great
   possessions, and the Pharisees derided an utterance such as this from
   our Lord's lips: how much more would the vast multitude of Gentiles,
   whose highest virtue consisted in not plundering another's goods, have
   repudiated the obligation of perpetual chastity and continence, when
   they were told in the letter to keep themselves from idols, and from
   fornication, seeing that fornication was heard of among them, and such
   fornication as was not "even among the Gentiles." But the very choice
   of a bishop makes for me. For he does not say: Let a bishop be chosen
   who marries one wife and begets children; but who marries one wife, and
   [4493] has his children in subjection and well disciplined. You surely
   admit that he is no bishop who during his episcopate begets children.
   The reverse is the case--if he be discovered, he will not be bound by
   the ordinary obligations of a husband, but will be condemned as an
   adulterer. Either permit [4494] priests to perform the work of marriage
   with the result that virginity and marriage are on a par: or if it is
   unlawful for priests to touch their wives, they are so far holy in that
   they imitate virgin chastity. But something more follows. A layman, or
   any believer, cannot pray unless he abstain from sexual intercourse.
   Now a priest must always offer sacrifices for the people: he must
   therefore always pray. And if he must always pray, he must always be
   released from the duties of marriage. For even under the old law they
   who used to offer sacrifices for the people not only remained in their
   houses, but purified themselves for the occasion by separating from
   their wives, nor would they drink wine or strong drink which are wont
   to stimulate lust. That married men are elected to the priesthood, I do
   not deny: the number of virgins is not so great as that of the priests
   required. Does it follow that because all the strongest men are chosen
   for the army, weaker men should not be taken as well? All cannot be
   strong. If an army were constituted of strength only, and numbers went
   for nothing, the feebler men might be rejected. As it is, men of second
   or third-rate strength are chosen, that the army may have its full
   numerical complement. How is it, then, you will say, that frequently at
   the ordination of priests a virgin is passed over, and a married man
   taken? Perhaps because he lacks other qualifications in keeping with
   virginity, or it may be that he is thought a virgin, and is not: or
   there may be a stigma on his virginity, or at all events virginity
   itself makes him proud, and while he plumes himself on mere bodily
   chastity, he neglects other virtues; he does not cherish the poor: he
   is too fond of money. It sometimes happens that a man has a gloomy
   visage, a frowning brow, a walk as though he were in a solemn
   procession, and so offends the people, who, because they have no fault
   to find with his life, hate his mere dress and gait. Many are chosen
   not out of affection for themselves, but out of hatred for another. In
   most cases the election is won by mere simplicity, while the shrewdness
   and discretion of another candidate elicit opposition as though they
   were evils. Sometimes the judgement of the commoner people is at fault,
   and in testing the qualities of the priesthood, the individual inclines
   to his own character, with the result that he looks not so much for a
   good candidate as for one like himself. Not unfrequently it happens
   that married men, who form the larger portion of the people, in
   approving married candidates seem to approve themselves, and it does
   not occur to them that the mere fact that they prefer a married person
   to a virgin is evidence of their inferiority to virgins. What I am
   going to say will perhaps offend many. Yet I will say it, and good men
   will not be angry with me, because they will not feel the sting of
   conscience. Sometimes it is the fault of the bishops, who choose into
   the ranks of the clergy not the best, but the cleverest, men, and think
   the more simple as well as innocent ones incapable; or, as though they
   were distributing the offices of an earthly service, they give posts to
   their kindred and relations; or they listen to the dictates of wealth.
   And, worse than all, they give promotion to the clergy who besmear them
   with flattery. To take the other view, if the Apostle's meaning be that
   marriage is necessary in a bishop, the Apostle himself ought not to
   have been a bishop, for he said, [4495] "Yet I would that all men were
   even as I myself." And John will be thought unworthy of this rank, and
   all the virgins, and the continent, the fairest gems that give grace
   and ornament to the Church. Bishop, priest, and deacon, are not
   honourable distinctions, but names of offices. And we do not read:
   [4496] "If a man seeketh the office of a bishop, he desireth a good
   degree," but, "he desireth a good work," because by being placed in the
   higher order an opportunity is afforded him, if he choose to avail
   himself of it, for the practice of virtue.

   35. "The bishop, then, must be without reproach, so that he is the
   slave of no vice: "the husband of one wife," that is, in the past, not
   in the present; "sober," or [4497] better, as it is in the Greek,
   "vigilant," that is nephaleon; "chaste," for that is the [4498] meaning
   of sophrona; [4499] "distinguished," both by chastity and conduct:
   "hospitable," so that he imitates Abraham, and with strangers, nay
   rather in strangers, entertains Christ; "apt to teach," for it profits
   nothing to enjoy the consciousness of virtue, unless a man be able to
   instruct the people intrusted to him, so that he can exhort in
   doctrine, and refute the gainsayers; [4500] "not a drunkard," for he
   who is constantly in the Holy of Holies and offers sacrifices, will not
   drink wine and strong drink, since wine is a luxury. If a bishop drink
   at all, let it be in such a way that no one will know whether he has
   drunk or not. "No striker," that is, [4501] a striker of men's
   consciences, for the Apostle is not pointing out what a boxer, but a
   pontiff ought not to do. He directly teaches what he ought to do: "but
   gentle, not contentious, no lover of money, one that ruleth well his
   own house, having his children in subjection with all chastity." See
   what chastity is required in a bishop! If his child be unchaste, he
   himself cannot be a bishop, and he offends God in the same way as did
   [4502] Eli the priest, who had indeed rebuked his sons, but because he
   had not put away the offenders, fell backwards and died before the lamp
   of God went out. [4503] "Women in like manner must be chaste," and so
   on. In every grade, and in both sexes, chastity has the chief place.
   You see then that the blessedness of a bishop, priest, or deacon, does
   not lie in the fact that they are bishops, priests, or deacons, but in
   their having the virtues which their names and offices imply.
   Otherwise, if a deacon be holier than his bishop, his lower grade will
   not give him a worse standing with Christ. If it were so, Stephen the
   deacon, the first to wear the martyr's crown, would be less in the
   kingdom of heaven than many bishops, and than Timothy and Titus, whom I
   venture to make neither inferior nor yet superior to him. Just as in
   the legions of the army there are generals, tribunes, centurions,
   javelin-men, and light-armed troops, common soldiers, and companies,
   but once the battle begins, all distinctions of rank are dropped, and
   the one thing looked for is valour: so too in this camp and in this
   battle, in which we contend against devils, not names but deeds are
   needed: and under the true commander, Christ, not the man who has the
   highest title has the greatest fame, but he who is the bravest warrior.

   36. But you will say: "If everybody were a virgin, what would become of
   the human race"? Like shall here beget like. If everyone were a widow,
   or continent in marriage, how will mortal men be propagated? Upon this
   principle there will be nothing at all for fear that something else may
   cease to exist. To put a case: if all men were philosophers, there
   would be no husbandmen. Why speak of husbandmen? there would be no
   orators, no lawyers, no teachers of the other professions. If all men
   were leaders, what would become of the soldiers? If all were the head,
   whose head would they be called, when there were no other members? You
   are afraid that if the desire for virginity were general there would be
   no prostitutes, no adulteresses, no wailing infants in town or country.
   Every day the blood of adulterers [4504] is shed, adulterers are
   condemned, and lust is raging and rampant in the very presence of the
   laws and the symbols of authority and the courts of justice. Be not
   afraid that all will become virgins: virginity is a hard matter, and
   therefore rare, because it is hard: "Many are called, few chosen." Many
   begin, few persevere. And so the reward is great for those who have
   persevered. If all were able to be virgins, our Lord would never have
   said: [4505] "He that is able to receive it, let him receive it:" and
   the Apostle would not have hesitated to give his advice,-- [4506] "Now
   concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord." Why then, you
   will say, were the organs of generation created, and why were we so
   fashioned by the all-wise creator, that we burn for one another, and
   long for natural intercourse? To reply is to endanger our modesty: we
   are, as it were, between two rocks, the [4507] Symplegades of necessity
   and virtue, on either side; and must make shipwreck of either our sense
   of shame, or of the cause we defend: If we reply to your suggestions,
   shame covers our face. If shame secures silence, in a manner we seem to
   desert our post, and to leave the ground clear to the raging foe. Yet
   it is better, as the story goes, to shut our eyes and fight like the
   [4508] blindfold gladiators, than not to repel with the shield of truth
   the darts aimed at us. I can indeed say: "Our hinder parts which are
   banished from sight, and the lower portions of the abdomen, which
   perform the functions of nature, are the Creator's work." But inasmuch
   as the physical conformation of the organs of generation testifies to
   difference of sex, I shall briefly reply: Are we never then to forego
   lust, for fear that we may have members of this kind for nothing? Why
   then should a husband keep himself from his wife? Why should a widow
   persevere in chastity, if we were only born to live like beasts? Or
   what harm does it do me if another man lies with my wife? For as the
   teeth were made for chewing, and the food masticated passes into the
   stomach, and a man is not blamed for giving my wife bread: similarly if
   it was intended that the organs of generation should always be
   performing their office, when my vigour is spent let another take my
   place, and, if I may so speak, let my wife quench her burning lust
   where she can. But what does the Apostle mean by exhorting to
   continence, if continence be contrary to nature? What does our Lord
   mean when He instructs us in the various kinds of eunuchs. [4509]
   Surely [4510] the Apostle who bids us emulate his own chastity, must be
   asked, if we are to be consistent, Why are you like other men, Paul?
   Why are you distinguished from the female sex by a beard, hair, and
   other peculiarities of person? How is it that you have not swelling
   bosoms, and are not broad at the hips, narrow at the chest? Your voice
   is rugged, your speech rough, your eyebrows more shaggy. To no purpose
   you have all these manly qualities, if you forego the embraces of
   women. I am compelled to say something and become a fool: but you have
   forced me to dare to speak. Our Lord and Saviour, [4511] Who though He
   was in the form of God, condescended to take the form of a servant, and
   became obedient to the Father even unto death, yea the death of the
   cross--what necessity was there for Him to be born with members which
   He was not going to use? He certainly was circumcised to manifest His
   sex. Why did he cause John the Apostle and John the Baptist to make
   themselves eunuchs through love of Him, after causing them to be born
   men? Let us then who believe in Christ follow His example. And if we
   knew Him after the flesh, let us no longer know Him according to the
   flesh. The substance of our resurrection bodies will certainly be the
   same as now, though of higher glory. For the Saviour after His descent
   into hell had so far the selfsame body in which He was crucified, that
   [4512] He showed the disciples the marks of the nails in His hands and
   the wound in His side. Moreover, if we deny the identity of His body
   because [4513] He entered though the doors were shut, and this is not a
   property of human bodies, we must deny also that Peter and the Lord had
   real bodies because they [4514] walked upon the water, which is
   contrary to nature. [4515] "In the resurrection of the dead they will
   neither marry nor be given in marriage, but will be like the angels."
   What others will hereafter be in heaven, that virgins begin to be on
   earth. If likeness to the angels is promised us (and there is no
   difference of sex among the angels), we shall either be of no sex as
   are the angels, or at all events which is clearly proved, though we
   rise from the dead in our own sex, we shall not perform the functions
   of sex.

   37. But why do we argue, and why are we eager to frame a clever and
   victorious reply to our opponent? [4516] "Old things have passed away,
   behold all things have become new." I will run through the utterances
   of the Apostles, and as to the instances afforded by Solomon I added
   short expositions to facilitate their being understood, so now I will
   go over the passages bearing on Christian purity and continence, and
   will make of many proofs a connected series. By this method I shall
   succeed in omitting nothing relating to chastity, and shall avoid being
   tediously long. Amongst other passages, Paul the Apostle writes to the
   Romans: [4517] "What fruit then had ye at that time in the things
   whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death. But
   now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
   fruit unto sanctification, and the end eternal life." I suppose too
   that the end of marriage is death. But the compensating fruit of
   sanctification, fruit belonging either to virginity or to continence,
   is eternal life. And afterwards: [4518] "Wherefore, my brethren, ye
   also were made dead to the law through the body of Christ; that ye
   should be joined to another, even to him who was raised from the dead,
   that we might bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the
   flesh, the sinful passions, which were through the law, wrought in our
   members to bring forth fruit unto death. But now we have been
   discharged from the law, having died to that wherein we were holden; so
   that we serve in newness of the Spirit, and not in oldness of the
   letter." "When," he says, "we were in the flesh, and not in the newness
   of the Spirit but in the oldness of the letter," we did those things
   which pertained to the flesh, and bore fruit unto death. But now
   because we are dead to the law, through the body of Christ, let us bear
   fruit to God, that we may belong to Him who rose from the dead. And
   elsewhere, having previously said, [4519] "I know that the law is
   spiritual," and having discussed at some length the violence of the
   flesh which frequently drives us to do what we would not, he at last
   continues: "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of the
   body of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord." And
   again, "So then I myself with the mind serve the law of God; but with
   the flesh the law of sin." And, [4520] "There is therefore now no
   condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
   flesh. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free
   from the law of sin and death." And more clearly in what follows he
   teaches that Christians do not walk according to the flesh but
   according to the Spirit: [4521] "For they that are after the flesh do
   mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the spirit the
   things of the spirit. For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind
   of the spirit is life and peace: because the mind of the flesh is
   enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
   indeed can it be: and they that are in the flesh cannot please God. But
   ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
   God dwelleth in you," and so on to where he says, [4522] "So then,
   brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh:
   for if ye live after the flesh, ye must die; but if by the spirit ye
   mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by
   the Spirit of God, these are sons of God." If the [4523] wisdom of the
   flesh is enmity against God, and they who are in the flesh cannot
   please God, I think that they who perform the functions of marriage
   love the wisdom of the flesh, and therefore are in the flesh. The
   Apostle being desirous to withdraw us from the flesh and to join us to
   the Spirit, says afterwards: [4524] "I beseech you therefore, brethren,
   by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
   acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. And be not
   fashioned according to this world: but be ye transformed by the
   renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and
   acceptable and perfect will of God. For I say, through the grace that
   was given me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself
   more highly than he ought to think; but to think according to chastity"
   [4525] (not soberly as the Latin versions badly render), but "think,"
   he says, "according to chastity," for the Greek words are eis to
   sophronein. Let us consider what the Apostle says: "Be ye transformed
   by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and
   acceptable and perfect will of God." What he says is something like
   this--God indeed permits marriage, He permits second marriages, and if
   necessary, prefers even third marriages to fornication and adultery.
   But we who ought to present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
   acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service, should consider,
   not what God permits, but what He wishes: that we may prove what is the
   good and acceptable and perfect will of God. It follows that what He
   merely permits is neither good, nor acceptable, nor perfect. And he
   gives his reasons for this advice: [4526] "Knowing the season, that now
   it is high time for you to awake out of sleep: for now is salvation
   nearer to us than when we first believed. The night is far spent, and
   the day is at hand." And lastly: "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
   make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." God's
   will is one thing, His indulgence another. Whence, writing to the
   Corinthians, he says, [4527] "I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
   unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I
   have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not
   able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal."
   He who [4528] is in the merely animal state, and does not receive the
   things pertaining to the Spirit of God (for he is foolish, and cannot
   understand them, because they are spiritually discerned), he is not fed
   with the food of perfect chastity, but with the coarse milk of
   marriage. As through man came death, so also through man came the
   resurrection of the dead. As in Adam we all die, so in Christ we shall
   all be made alive. Under the law we served the old Adam, under the
   Gospel let us serve the new Adam. For the first man Adam was made a
   living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. [4529] "The
   first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is of heaven. As is
   the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly,
   such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of
   the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I
   say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
   neither doth corruption inherit incorruption." This is so clear that no
   explanation can make it clearer: "Flesh and blood," he says, "cannot
   inherit the Kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherit
   incorruption." If corruption attaches to all intercourse, and
   incorruption is characteristic of chastity, the rewards of chastity
   cannot belong to marriage. [4530] "For we know that if the earthly
   house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, a
   house not made with hands, eternal, in the heavens. For verily in this
   we groan, longing to be clothed upon with our habitation which is from
   heaven. We are willing to be absent from the body, and to be at home
   with the Lord. Wherefore also we make it our aim, whether in the body,
   or out of the body, to be well-pleasing unto God." And by way of more
   fully explaining what he did not wish them to be he says elsewhere:
   [4531] "I espoused you to one husband, that I might present you as a
   pure virgin to Christ." But if you choose to apply the words to the
   whole Assembly of believers, and in this betrothal to Christ include
   both married women, and the twice-married, and widows, and virgins,
   that also makes for us. For whilst he invites all to chastity and to
   the reward of virginity, he shows that virginity is more excellent than
   all these conditions. And again writing to the Galatians he says:
   [4532] "Because by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified."
   Among the works of the law is marriage, and accordingly under it they
   are cursed who have no children. And if under the Gospel it is
   permitted to have children, it is one thing to make a concession to
   weakness, another to hold out rewards to virtue.

   38. Something else I will say to my friends who marry and after long
   chastity and continence begin to burn and are as wanton as the brutes:
   [4533] "Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now
   perfected in the flesh? Did ye suffer so many things in vain?" If the
   Apostle in the case of some persons loosens the cords of continence,
   and lets them have a slack rein, he does so on account of the infirmity
   of the flesh. This is the enemy he has in view when he once more says:
   [4534] "Walk by the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
   flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
   the flesh." It is unnecessary now to speak of the works of the flesh:
   it would be tedious, and he who chooses can easily gather them from the
   letter of the Apostle. I will only speak of the Spirit and its fruits,
   love, joy, peace, long suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
   meekness, [4535] continence. All the virtues of the Spirit are
   supported and protected by continence, which is as it were their solid
   foundation and crowning point. Against such there is no law. [4536]
   "And they that are of Christ have crucified their flesh with the
   passions and the lusts thereof. If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit
   let us also walk." Why do we who with Christ have crucified our flesh
   and its passions and desires again desire to do the things of the
   flesh? [4537] "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he
   that soweth unto his own flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but
   he that soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life."
   I think that he who has a wife, so long as he reverts to the practice
   in question, that Satan may not tempt him, is sowing to the flesh and
   not to the Spirit. And he who sows to the flesh (the words are not
   mine, but the Apostle's) reaps corruption. God the Father chose us in
   Christ before the foundation of the world, that we might be holy and
   without spot before Him. [4538] We walked in the lusts of the flesh,
   doing the desires of the flesh and of the thoughts, and were children
   of wrath, even as the rest. But now He has raised us up with Him, and
   made us to sit with Him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, [4539]
   that we may put away according to our former manner of life the old
   man, which is corrupt according to the lusts of deceit, and that
   blessing may be applied to us which so finely concludes the mystical
   Epistle to the Ephesians: [4540] "Grace be with all them that love our
   Lord Jesus Christ in uncorruptness." [4541] "For our citizenship is in
   heaven; from whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:
   who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be
   conformed to the body of his glory. [4542] Whatsoever things then are
   true, whatsoever are chaste, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
   things pertain to purity, let us join ourselves to these, let us follow
   these. [4543] Christ hath reconciled us in his body to God the Father
   through his death, and has presented us holy and without spot, and
   without blame before himself: in whom we have been also circumcised,
   not with the circumcision made with hands, to the spoiling of the body
   of the flesh, but with the circumcision of Christ, having been buried
   with him in baptism, wherein also we rose with him. If then we have
   risen with Christ, let us seek those things which are above, where
   Christ sitteth on the right hand of God; let us set our affections on
   things above, not upon the things that are upon the earth. For we are
   dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ our life
   shall appear, then we also shall appear with him in glory. [4544] No
   soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of this life; that
   he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier. [4545] For the grace
   of God hath appeared, bringing salvation to all men, instructing us, to
   the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
   purely and righteously and godly in this present world."

   39. The day would not be long enough were I to attempt to relate all
   that the Apostle enjoins concerning purity. These things are those
   concerning which our Lord said to the Apostles: [4546] "I have yet many
   things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he,
   the Spirit of truth, is come, he shall guide you into all the truth."
   After the crucifixion of Christ, we find in the [4547] Acts of the
   Apostles that one house, that of Philip the Evangelist, produced four
   virgin daughters, to the end that Cæsarea, where the Gentile Church had
   been consecrated in the person of Cornelius the centurion, might afford
   an illustration of virginity. And whereas our Lord said in the Gospel:
   [4548] "The law and the prophets were until John," they because they
   were virgins are related to have prophesied even after John. For they
   could not be bound by the law of the Old Testament, who had shone with
   the brightness of virginity. Let us pass on to James, who was called
   the brother of the Lord, a man of such sanctity and righteousness, and
   distinguished by so rigid and perpetual a virginity, that even [4549]
   Josephus, the Jewish historian, relates that the overthrow of Jerusalem
   was due to his death. He, the first bishop of the Church at Jerusalem,
   which was composed of Jewish believers, to whom Paul went, accompanied
   by Titus and Barnabas, says in his Epistle: [4550] "Be not deceived, my
   beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect boon is from above,
   coming down from the Father of lights, [4551] with whom there is no
   difference, neither shadow that is cast by turning. Of his own will he
   brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of
   first-fruits of his creatures." Himself a virgin, he teaches virginity
   in a mystery. Every perfect gift cometh down from above, where marriage
   is unknown; and it cometh down, not from any one you please, but from
   the Father of lights, Who says to the apostles, "Ye are the light of
   the world;" with Whom there is no difference of Jew, or Gentile, nor
   does that shadow which was the companion of the law, trouble those who
   have believed from among the nations; but with His word He begat us,
   and with the word of truth, because some shadow, image, and likeness of
   truth went before in the law, that we might be the first-fruits of His
   creatures. And as He who was Himself the [4552] first begotten from the
   dead has raised all that have died in Him: so He who was a virgin,
   consecrated the first-fruits of His virgins in His own virgin self. Let
   us also consider what Peter thinks of the calling of the Gentiles:
   [4553] "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
   according to his great mercy begat us again unto a living hope by the
   resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance
   incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in
   heaven for you, who by the power of God are guarded through faith unto
   a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time." Where we read of an
   inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
   prepared in heaven and reserved for the last time, and of the hope of
   eternal life when they will neither marry, nor be given in marriage,
   there, in other words, the privileges of virginity are described. For
   he shows as much in what follows: [4554] "Wherefore girding up the
   loins of your mind, be sober and set your hope perfectly on the grace
   that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as
   children of obedience, not fashioning yourselves according to your
   former lusts in the time of your ignorance; but like as he which called
   you is holy, be ye yourselves also holy in all manner of living;
   because it is written, ye shall be holy; for I am holy. [4555] For we
   were not redeemed with contemptible things, with silver or gold; but
   with the precious blood of a lamb without spot, Jesus Christ, [4556]
   that we might purify our souls in obedience to the truth, having been
   begotten again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through
   the word of God, [4557] who liveth and abideth. And as living stones
   let us be built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood offering up
   spiritual sacrifices through Christ our Lord. [4558] For we are an
   elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own
   possession. [4559] Christ died for us in the flesh. Let us arm
   ourselves with the same conversation as did Christ; for he that hath
   suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin; that we should no longer
   live the rest of our time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the
   will of God. For the time past is sufficient for us when we walked in
   lasciviousness, lusts, and other vices. Great and precious are the
   promises attaching to virginity which He has given us, [4560] that
   through it we may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped
   from the corruption that is in the world through lust. [4561] The Lord
   knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to keep the
   unrighteous under punishment unto the day of judgement, but chiefly
   them that walk after the flesh in the lust of defilement, and despise
   dominion, daring, self-willed. For they, as beasts of burden, without
   reason, think only of their belly and their lusts, railers who shall in
   their corruption be destroyed, and shall receive the reward of
   iniquity: men that count unrighteousness delight, spots and blemishes,
   thinking of nothing but their pleasures; having eyes full of adultery
   and insatiable lust, deceiving souls not yet strengthened by the love
   of Christ. For they utter swelling words and easily snare the unlearned
   with the seduction of the flesh; promising them liberty while they
   themselves are the slaves of vice, luxury, and corruption. For of what
   a man is overcome, of the same is he also brought into bondage. But if,
   after they had escaped the defilements of the world through the
   knowledge of our Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again overcome by that
   which they before overcame, the last state is become worse with them
   than the first. And it were better for them not to have known the way
   of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn back and forsake the
   holy commandment delivered unto them. And it has happened unto them
   according to the true proverb, the dog hath turned to his own vomit
   again, and the sow that had washed to wallowing in the mire." I have
   hesitated, for fear of being tedious, to quote the whole passage of the
   second Epistle of Peter, and have merely shown that the Holy Spirit in
   prophecy foretold the teachers of this time and their heresy. Lastly,
   he more clearly denotes them, saying, [4562] "In the last days seducing
   mockers shall come, walking after their own lusts."

   40. The Apostle has described Jovinianus speaking with swelling cheeks
   and nicely balancing his inflated utterances, promising heavenly
   liberty, when he himself is the slave of vice and self-indulgence, a
   dog returning to his vomit. For although he boasts of being a monk, he
   has exchanged his dirty tunic, bare feet, common bread, and drink of
   water, for a snowy dress, sleek skin, honey-wine and dainty dishes, for
   the sauces of [4563] Apicius and [4564] Paxamus, for baths and
   rubbings, and for the cook-shops. Is it not clear that he prefers his
   belly to Christ, and thinks his ruddy complexion worth the kingdom of
   heaven? And yet that handsome monk so fat and sleek, and of bright
   appearance, who always walks with the air of a bridegroom, must either
   marry a wife if he is to show that virginity and marriage are equal: or
   if he does not marry one, it is useless for him to bandy words with us
   when his acts are on our side. And John agrees with this almost to the
   letter: [4565] "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
   world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
   For all that is in the world is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of
   the eyes, and the pride of this life, which is not of the Father, but
   is of the world." And, "The world passeth away, and the lust thereof:
   but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever. A new commandment
   have I written unto you, which thing is true both in Christ and in you;
   because the darkness is passing away, and the true light already
   shineth." And again, [4566] "Beloved, now are we the children of God,
   and it is not yet made manifest what we shall be. But we know that, if
   he shall be manifested, we shall be like him: for we shall see him even
   as he is. And every one that hath this hope purifieth himself, even as
   he is pure. [4567] Herein is our love made perfect, if we have boldness
   in the day of judgement: that as he is, even so may we be in this
   world." The Epistle of Jude also expresses nearly the same: [4568]
   "Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." Let us read the
   Apocalypse of John, and we shall there find the Lamb upon Mount Sion,
   [4569] and with Him "a hundred and forty-four thousand of them that
   were sealed, having His name and the name of His Father written in
   their foreheads, who sing a new song, and no one can sing that song
   save they who have been redeemed out of the earth. These are they who
   have not defiled themselves with women, for they continued virgins.
   These follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth: for they were redeemed
   from among men, first-fruits to God and to the Lamb, and in their mouth
   was found no guile, and they are without spot." [4570] Out of each
   tribe, the tribe of Dan excepted, the place of which is taken by the
   tribe of Levi, twelve thousand virgins who have been sealed are spoken
   of as future believers, who have not defiled themselves with women. And
   that we may not suppose the reference to be to those who know not
   harlots, he immediately added: "For they continued virgins." Whereby he
   shows that all who have not preserved their virginity, in comparison of
   pure and angelic chastity and of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, are
   defiled. [4571] "These are they who sing a new song which no man can
   sing except him that is a virgin. These are first-fruits unto God and
   unto the Lamb, and are without blemish." If virgins are first-fruits,
   it follows that widows and the continent in marriage, come after the
   first-fruits, that is, are in the second and third rank: nor can a lost
   people be saved unless it offer such sacrifices of chastity to God, and
   with pure victims reconcile the spotless Lamb. It would be endless work
   to explain the Gospel mystery of the ten virgins, five of whom were
   wise and five foolish. All I say now is, that as mere virginity without
   other works does not save, so all works without virginity, purity,
   continence, chastity, are imperfect. And we shall not be hindered in
   the least from taking this view by the objection of our opponent that
   our Lord was at Cana of Galilee, and joined in the marriage festivities
   when He turned water into wine. I shall very briefly reply, that He Who
   was circumcised on the eighth day, and for Whom a pair of turtle-doves
   and two young pigeons were offered on the day of purification, like
   others before He suffered, shewed His approval of Jewish custom, that
   He might not seem to give His enemies just cause for putting Him to
   death on the pretext that He destroyed the law and condemned nature.
   And even this was done for our sakes. For by going once to a marriage,
   He taught that men should marry only once. Moreover, at that time it
   was possible to injure virginity if marriage were not placed next to
   it, and the purity of widowhood in the third rank. But now when
   heretics are condemning wedlock, and despise the ordinance of God, we
   gladly hear anything he [4572] may say in praise of marriage. For the
   Church does not condemn marriage, but makes it subordinate; nor does
   she reject it, but regulates it; for she knows, as was said before,
   that [4573] in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and
   silver, but also of wood and earthenware; and that some are to honour,
   some to dishonour; and that whoever cleanses himself will be a vessel
   of honour, necessary, prepared for every good work.

   41. I have given enough and more than enough illustrations from the
   divine writings of Christian chastity and angelic virginity. But as I
   understand that our opponent in his commentaries summons us to the
   tribunal of worldly wisdom, and we are told that views of this kind are
   never accepted in the world, and that our religion has invented a dogma
   against nature, I will quickly run through Greek and Roman and Foreign
   History, and will show that virginity ever took the lead of chastity.
   Fable relates that Atalanta, the virgin of Calydonian fame, lived for
   the chase and dwelt always in the woods; in other words that she did
   not set her heart on marriage with its troubles of pregnancy and of
   sickness, but upon the nobler life of freedom and chastity. [4574]
   Harpalyce too, a Thracian virgin, is described by the famous poet; and
   so is [4575] Camilia, queen of the Volsci, on whom, when she came to
   his assistance, Turnus had no higher praise which he could bestow than
   to call her a virgin. "O Virgin, Glory of Italy!" And that famous
   daughter of [4576] Leos, the lady of the brazen house, ever a virgin,
   is related to have freed her country from pestilence by her voluntary
   death: and the blood of the virgin [4577] Iphigenia is said to have
   calmed the stormy winds. What need to tell of the Sibyls of Erythræ and
   Cumæ, and the eight others? for Varro asserts there were ten whose
   ornament was virginity, and divination the reward of their virginity.
   But if in the Æolian dialect "Sibyl" is represented by Theoboule, we
   must understand that a knowledge of the Counsel of God is rightly
   attributed to virginity alone. We read, too, that Cassandra and
   Chryseis, prophetesses of Apollo and Juno, were virgins. And there were
   innumerable priestesses of the Taurian Diana, and of Vesta. One of
   these, Munitia, being suspected of unchastily was [4578] buried alive,
   which would be in my opinion an unjust punishment, unless the violation
   of virginity were considered a serious crime. At all events how highly
   the Romans always esteemed virgins is clear from the fact that consuls
   and generals even in their triumphal chariots and bringing home the
   spoils of conquered nations, were wont to make way for them to pass.
   And so did men of all ranks. When [4579] Claudia, a Vestal Virgin, was
   suspected of unchastily, and a vessel containing the image of Cybele
   was aground in the Tiber, it is related that she, to prove her
   chastity, with her girdle drew the ship which a thousand men could not
   move. Yet, as [4580] the uncle of Lucan the poet says, it would have
   been better if this circumstance had decorated a chastity tried and
   proved, and had not pleaded in defence of a chastity equivocal. No
   wonder that we read such things of human beings, when heathen error
   also invented the virgin goddesses Minerva and Diana, and placed the
   Virgin among the twelve signs of the Zodiac, by means of which, as they
   suppose, the world revolves. It is a proof of the little esteem in
   which they held marriage that they did not even among the scorpions,
   centaurs, crabs, fishes, and capricorn, thrust in a husband and wife.
   When the thirty tyrants of Athens had slain Phidon at the banquet, they
   commanded his virgin daughters to come to them, naked like harlots, and
   there upon the ground, red with their father's blood, to act the
   wanton. For a little while they hid their grief, and then when they saw
   the revellers were intoxicated, going out on the plea of easing nature,
   they embraced one another and threw themselves into a well, that by
   death they might save their virginity. The virgin daughter of Demotion,
   chief of the Areopagites, having heard of the death of her betrothed,
   [4581] Leosthenes, who had originated the Lamian war, slew herself, for
   she declared that although in body she was a virgin, yet if she were
   compelled to accept another, she should regard him as her second
   husband, when she had given her heart to Leosthenes. So close a
   friendship long existed between Sparta and Messene that for the
   furtherance of certain religious rites they even exchanged virgins.
   Well, on one occasion when the men of Messene attempted to outrage
   fifty Lacedæmonian virgins, out of so many not one consented, but they
   all most gladly died in defence of their chastity. Whence there arose a
   long and grievous war, and in the long run [4582] Mamertina was
   destroyed. Aristoclides, tyrant of Orchomenos, fell in love with a
   virgin of Stymphalus, and when after the death of her father she took
   refuge in the temple of Diana, and embraced the image of the goddess
   and could not be dragged thence by force, she was slain on the spot.
   Her death caused such intense grief throughout Arcadia that the people
   took up arms and avenged the virgin's death. [4583] Aristomenes of
   Messene, a just man, at a time when the Lacedæmonians, whom he had
   conquered, were celebrating by night the festival called the [4584]
   Hyacinthia, carried off from the sportive bands fifteen virgins, and
   fleeing all night at full speed got away from the Spartan territory.
   His companions wished to outrage them, but he admonished them to the
   best of his power not to do so, and when certain refused to obey, he
   slew them, and restrained the rest by fear. The maidens were afterwards
   ransomed by their kinsmen, and on seeing Aristomenes condemned for
   murder would not return to their country until clasping the knees of
   the judges they beheld the protector of their chastity acquitted. How
   shall we sufficiently praise the daughters of Scedasus at Leuctra in
   Boeotia? It is related that in the absence of their father they
   hospitably entertained two youths who were passing by, and who having
   drunk to excess violated the virgins in the course of the night. Being
   unwilling to survive the loss of their virginity, the maidens inflicted
   deadly wounds on one another. Nor would it be right to omit mention of
   the Locrian virgins. They were sent to Ilium according to custom which
   had lasted for nearly a thousand years, and yet not one gave occasion
   to any idle tale or filthy rumour of virginity defiled. Could any one
   pass over in silence the seven virgins of Miletus who, when the Gauls
   spread desolation far and wide, that they might suffer no indignity at
   the hands of the enemy, escaped disgrace by death, and left to all
   virgins the lesson of their example--that noble minds care more for
   chastity than life? Nicanor having conquered and overthrown Thebes was
   himself overcome by a passion for one captive virgin, whose voluntary
   self-surrender he longed for. A captive maid, he thought, must be only
   too glad. But he found that virginity is dearer to the pure in heart
   than a kingdom, when with tears and grief he held her in his arms slain
   by her own hand. Greek writers tell also of another Theban virgin who
   had been deflowered by a Macedonian foe, and who, hiding her grief for
   a while, slew the violator of her virginity as he slept, and then
   killed herself with the sword, so that she would neither live when her
   chastity was lost, nor die before she had avenged herself.

   42. To come to the Gymnosophists of India, the opinion is
   authoritatively handed down that Budda, the founder of their religion,
   had his birth through the side of a virgin. And we need not wonder at
   this in the case of Barbarians when cultured Greece supposed that
   Minerva at her birth sprang from the head of Jove, and Father Bacchus
   from his thigh. [4585] Speusippus also, Plato's nephew, and [4586]
   Clearchus in his eulogy of Plato, and [4587] Anaxelides in the second
   book of his philosophy, relates that Perictione, the mother of Plato,
   was violated by an apparition of Apollo, and they agree in thinking
   that the prince of wisdom was born of a virgin. [4588] Timæus writes
   that the [4589] virgin daughter of [4590] Pythagoras was at the head of
   a band of virgins, and instructed them in chastity. [4591] Diodorus,
   the disciple of Socrates, is said to have had five daughters skilled in
   dialectics and distinguished for chastity, of whom a full account is
   given by Philo the master of [4592] Carneades. And mighty Rome cannot
   taunt us as though we had invented the story of the birth of our Lord
   and Saviour from a virgin; for the Romans believe that the founders of
   their city and race were the offspring of the virgin [4593] Ilia and of
   Mars.

   43. Let these allusions to the virgins of the world, brief and hastily
   gathered from many histories, now suffice. I will proceed to married
   women who were reluctant to survive the decease or violent death of
   their husbands for fear they might be forced into a second marriage,
   and who entertained a marvellous affection for the only husbands they
   had. This may teach us that second marriage was repudiated among the
   heathen. Dido, the sister of Pygmalion, having collected a vast amount
   of gold and silver, sailed to Africa, and there built Carthage. And
   when her hand was sought in marriage by Iarbas, king of Libya, she
   deferred the marriage for a while until her country was settled. Not
   long after, having raised a [4594] funeral pyre to the memory of her
   former husband Sichæus, she preferred to "burn rather than to marry."
   Carthage was built by a woman of chastity, and its end was a tribute to
   the excellence of the virtue. For the [4595] wife of Hasdrubal, when
   the city was captured and set on fire, and she saw that she could not
   herself escape capture by the Romans, took her little children in
   either hand and leaped into the burning ruins of her house.

   44. What need to tell of the wife of [4596] Niceratus, who, not
   enduring to wrong her husband, inflicted death upon herself rather than
   subject herself to the lust of the thirty tyrants whom Lysander had set
   over conquered Athens? [4597] Artemisia, also, wife of Mausolus, is
   related to have been distinguished for chastity. Though she was queen
   of Caria, and is extolled by great poets and historians, no higher
   praise is bestowed upon her than that when her husband was dead she
   loved him as much as when he was alive, and built a tomb so great that
   even to the present day all costly sepulchres are called after his
   name, mausoleums. [4598] Teuta, queen of the Illyrians, owed her long
   sway over brave warriors, and her frequent victories over Rome, to her
   marvellous chastity. The Indians and almost all the Barbarians have a
   plurality of wives. It is a law with them that the favourite wife must
   be burned with her dead husband. The wives therefore vie with one
   another for the husband's love, and the highest ambition of the rivals,
   and the proof of chastity, is to be considered worthy of death. So then
   she that is victorious, having put on her former dress and ornaments,
   lies down beside the corpse, embracing and kissing it, and to the glory
   of chastity despises the flames which are burning beneath her. I
   suppose that she who dies thus, wants no second marriage. The famous
   Alcibiades, the friend of Socrates, when Athens was conquered, fled to
   Pharnabazus, who took a bribe from Lysander the Lacedæmonian leader and
   ordered him to be slain. He was strangled, and when his head had been
   cut off it was sent to Lysander as proof of the murder, but the rest of
   his body lay unburied. His concubine, therefore, all alone, in defiance
   of the command of the cruel enemy, in the midst of strangers, and in
   the face of peril, gave him due burial, for she was ready to die for
   the dead man whom she had loved when living. Let matrons, Christian
   matrons at all events, imitate the fidelity of concubines, and exhibit
   in their freedom what she in her captivity preserved.

   45. Strato, ruler of Sidon, thought of dying by his own hand, that he
   might not be the sport of the Persians, who were close by and whose
   alliance he had discarded for the friendship of the king of Egypt. But
   he drew back in terror, and eying the sword which he had seized,
   awaited in alarm the approach of the enemy. His wife, knowing that he
   must be immediately taken, wrested the weapon from his hand, and
   pierced his side. When the body was properly laid out she lay down upon
   it in the agony of death, that she might not violate her virgin troth
   in the embraces of another. [4599] Xenophon, in describing the early
   years of the elder Cyrus, relates that when her husband Abradatas was
   slain, Panthea who had loved him intensely, placed herself beside the
   mangled body, then stabbed herself, and let her blood run into her
   husband's wounds. The [4600] queen whom the king her husband had shewn
   naked and without her knowledge to his friend, thought she had good
   cause for slaying the king. She judged that she was not beloved if it
   was possible for her to be exhibited to another. Rhodogune, daughter of
   Darius, after the death of her husband, put to death the nurse who was
   trying to persuade her to marry again. [4601] Alcestis is related in
   story to have voluntarily died for Admetus, and Penelope's chastity is
   the theme of Homer's song. Laodamia's praises are also sung by the
   poets, because, when [4602] Protesilaus was slain at Troy, she refused
   to survive him.

   46. I may pass on to Roman women; and the first that I shall mention is
   [4603] Lucretia, who would not survive her violated chastity, but
   blotted out the stain upon her person with her own blood. Duilius, the
   first Roman who won a [4604] naval triumph, took to wife a virgin,
   Bilia, of such extraordinary chastity that she was an example even to
   an age which held unchastity to be not merely vicious but monstrous.
   When he was grown old and feeble he was once in the course of a quarrel
   taunted with having bad breath. In dudgeon he betook himself home, and
   on complaining to his wife that she had never told him of it so that he
   might remedy the fault, he received the reply that she would have done
   so, but she thought that all men had foul breath as he had. In either
   case this chaste and noble woman deserves praise, whether she was not
   aware there was anything wrong with her husband, or if she patiently
   endured, and her husband discovered his unfortunate condition not by
   the disgust of a wife, but by the abuse of an enemy. At all events the
   woman who marries a second time cannot say this. Marcia, Cato's younger
   daughter, on being asked after the loss of her husband why she did not
   marry again, replied that she could not find a man who wanted her more
   than her money. Her words teach us that men in choosing their wives
   look for riches rather than for chastity, and that many in marrying use
   not their eyes but their fingers. That must be an excellent thing which
   is won by avarice! When the same lady was mourning the loss of her
   husband, and the matrons asked what day would terminate her grief, she
   replied, "The same that terminates my life." I imagine that a woman who
   thus followed her husband in heart and mind had no thought of marrying
   again. Porcia, whom [4605] Brutus took to wife, was a virgin; Cato's
   wife, [4606] Marcia, was not a virgin; but Marcia went to and fro
   between Hortensius and Cato, and was quite content to live without
   Cato; while [4607] Porcia could not live without Brutus; for women
   attach themselves closely to particular men, and to keep to one is a
   strong link in the chain of affection. When a relative urged Annia to
   marry again (she was of full age and a goodly person), she answered, "I
   shall certainly not do so. For, if I find a good man, I have no wish to
   be in fear of losing him: if a bad one, why must I put up with a bad
   husband after having had a good one?" [4608] Porcia the younger, on
   hearing a certain lady of good character, who had a second husband,
   praised in her house, replied, "A chaste and happy matron never marries
   more than once." Marcella the elder, on being asked by her mother if
   she was glad she was married, answered, "So much so that I want nothing
   more." [4609] Valeria, sister of the Messalas, when she lost her
   husband Servius, would marry no one else. On being asked why not, she
   said that to her, her husband Servius was ever alive.

   47. I feel that in giving this list of women I have said far more than
   is customary in illustrating a point, and that I might be justly
   censured by my learned reader. But what am I to do when the women of
   our time press me with apostolic authority, and before the first
   husband is buried, repeat from morning to night the precepts which
   allow a second marriage? Seeing they despise the fidelity which
   Christian purity dictates, let them at least learn chastity from the
   heathen. A book On Marriage, worth its weight in gold, passes under the
   name of [4610] Theophrastus. In it the author asks whether a wise man
   marries. And after laying down the conditions--that the wife must be
   fair, of good character, and honest parentage, the husband in good
   health and of ample means, and after saying that under these
   circumstances a wise man sometimes enters the state of matrimony, he
   immediately proceeds thus: "But all these conditions are seldom
   satisfied in marriage. A wise man therefore must not take a wife. For
   in the first place his study of philosophy will be hindered, and it is
   impossible for anyone to attend to his books and his wife. Matrons want
   many things, costly dresses, gold, jewels, great outlay, maid-servants,
   all kinds of furniture, litters and gilded coaches. Then come
   curtain-lectures the livelong night: she complains that one lady goes
   out better dressed than she: that another is looked up to by all: I am
   a poor despised nobody at the ladies' assemblies.' Why did you ogle
   that creature next door?' Why were you talking to the maid?' What did
   you bring from the market?' I am not allowed to have a single friend,
   or companion.' She suspects that her husband's love goes the same way
   as her hate. There may be in some neighbouring city the wisest of
   teachers; but if we have a wife we can neither leave her behind, nor
   take the burden with us. To support a poor wife, is hard: to put up
   with a rich one, is torture. Notice, too, that in the case of a wife
   you cannot pick and choose: you must take her as you find her. If she
   has a bad temper, or is a fool, if she has a blemish, or is proud, or
   has bad breath, whatever her fault may be--all this we learn after
   marriage. Horses, asses, cattle, even slaves of the smallest worth,
   clothes, kettles, wooden seats, cups, and earthenware pitchers, are
   first tried and then bought: a wife is the only thing that is not shown
   before she is married, for fear she may not give satisfaction. Our gaze
   must always be directed to her face, and we must always praise her
   beauty: if you look at another woman, she thinks that she is out of
   favour. She must be called my lady, her birth-day must be kept, we must
   swear by her health and wish that she may survive us, respect must be
   paid to the nurse, to the nursemaid, to the father's slave, to the
   foster-child, to the handsome hanger-on, to the curled darling who
   manages her affairs, and to the eunuch who ministers to the safe
   indulgence of her lust: names which are only a cloak for adultery. Upon
   whomsoever she sets her heart, they must have her love though they want
   her not. If you give her the management of the whole house, you must
   yourself be her slave. If you reserve something for yourself, she will
   not think you are loyal to her; but she will turn to strife and hatred,
   and unless you quickly take care, she will have the poison ready. If
   you introduce old women, and soothsayers, and prophets, and vendors of
   jewels and silken clothing, you imperil her chastity; if you shut the
   door upon them, she is injured and fancies you suspect her. But what is
   the good of even a careful guardian, when an unchaste wife cannot be
   watched, and a chaste one ought not to be? For necessity is but a
   faithless keeper of chastity, and she alone really deserves to be
   called pure, who is free to sin if she chooses. If a woman be fair, she
   soon finds lovers; if she be ugly, it is easy to be wanton. It is
   difficult to guard what many long for. It is annoying to have what no
   one thinks worth possessing. But the misery of having an ugly wife is
   less than that of watching a comely one. Nothing is safe, for which a
   whole people sighs and longs. One man entices with his figure, another
   with his brains, another with his wit, another with his open hand.
   Somehow, or sometime, the fortress is captured which is attacked on all
   sides. Men marry, indeed, so as to get a manager for the house, to
   solace weariness, to banish solitude; but a faithful slave is a far
   better manager, more submissive to the master, more observant of his
   ways, than a wife who thinks she proves herself mistress if she acts in
   opposition to her husband, that is, if she does what pleases her, not
   what she is commanded. But friends, and servants who are under the
   obligation of benefits received, are better able to wait upon us in
   sickness than a wife who makes us responsible for her tears (she will
   sell you enough to make a deluge for the hope of a legacy), boasts of
   her anxiety, but drives her sick husband to the distraction of despair.
   But if she herself is poorly, we must fall sick with her and never
   leave her bedside. Or if she be a good and agreeable wife (how rare a
   bird she is!), we have to share her groans in childbirth, and suffer
   torture when she is in danger. A wise man can never be alone. He has
   with him the good men of all time, and turns his mind freely wherever
   he chooses. What is inaccessible to him in person he can embrace in
   thought. And, if men are scarce, he converses with God. [4611] He is
   never less alone than when alone. Then again, to marry for the sake of
   children, so that our name may not perish, or that we may have support
   in old age, and leave our property without dispute, is the height of
   stupidity. For what is it to us when we are leaving the world if
   another bears our name, when even a son does not all at once take his
   father's title, and there are countless others who are called by the
   same name. Or what support in old age is he whom you bring up, and who
   may die before you, or turn out a reprobate? Or at all events when he
   reaches mature age, you may seem to him long in dying. Friends and
   relatives whom you can judiciously love are better and safer heirs than
   those whom you must make your heirs whether you like it or not. Indeed,
   the surest way of having a good heir is to ruin your fortune in a good
   cause while you live, not to leave the fruit of your labour to be used
   you know not how."

   48. When Theophrastus thus discourses, are there any of us, Christians,
   whose conversation is in heaven and who daily say [4612] "I long to be
   dissolved, and to be with Christ," whom he does not put to the blush?
   Shall a joint-heir of Christ really long for human heirs? And shall he
   desire children and delight himself in a long line of descendants, who
   will perhaps fall into the clutches of Antichrist, when we read that
   [4613] Moses and [4614] Samuel preferred other men to their own sons,
   and did not count as their children those whom they saw to be
   displeasing to God? When Cicero after [4615] divorcing Terentia was
   requested by [4616] Hirtius to marry his sister, he [4617] set the
   matter altogether on one side, and said that he could not possibly
   devote himself to a wife and to philosophy. Meanwhile that excellent
   partner, who had herself drunk wisdom at Tully's fountains, married
   [4618] Sallust his enemy, and took for her third husband Messala
   Corvinus, and thus, as it were, passed through three degrees of
   eloquence. Socrates had two wives, Xantippe and Myron, grand-daughter
   of Aristides. They frequently quarrelled, and he was accustomed to
   banter them for disagreeing about him, he being the ugliest of men,
   with snub nose, bald forehead, rough-haired, and bandy-legged. At last
   they planned an attack upon him, and having punished him severely, and
   put him to flight, vexed him for a long time. On one occasion when he
   opposed Xantippe; who from above was heaping abuse upon him, the
   termagant soused him with dirty water, but he only wiped his head and
   said, "I knew that a shower must follow such thunder as that." [4619]
   Metella, consort of L. Sulla the [4620] Fortunate (except in the matter
   of his wife) was [4621] openly unchaste. It was the common talk of
   Athens, as I learnt in my youthful years when we soon pick up what is
   bad, and yet Sulla was in the dark, and first got to know the secrets
   of his household through the abuse of his enemies. Cn. Pompey had an
   impure wife [4622] Mucia, who was surrounded by eunuchs from Pontus and
   troops of the countrymen of Mithridates. Others thought that he knew
   all and submitted to it; but a comrade told him during the campaign,
   and the conqueror of the whole world was dismayed at the sad
   intelligence. [4623] M. Cato, the Censor, had a wife Actoria Paula, a
   woman of low origin, fond of drink, violent, and (who would believe
   it?) haughty to Cato. I say this for fear anyone may suppose that in
   marrying a poor woman he has secured peace. When [4624] Philip king of
   Macedon, against whom [4625] Demosthenes thundered in his Philippics,
   was entering his bed-room as usual, his wife in a passion shut him out.
   Finding himself excluded he held his tongue, and consoled himself for
   the insult by reading a tragic poem. [4626] Gorgias the Rhetorician
   recited his excellent treatise on Concord to the Greeks, then at
   variance among themselves, at Olympia. Whereupon [4627] Melanthius his
   enemy observed: "Here is a man who teaches us concord, and yet could
   not make concord between himself his wife, and maid-servant, three
   persons in one house." The truth was that his wife envied the beauty of
   the girl, and drove the purest of men wild with daily quarrels. Whole
   tragedies of Euripides are censures on women. Hence Hermione says,
   [4628] "The counsels of evil women have beguiled me." In the
   semi-barbarous and remote city [4629] Leptis it is the custom for a
   daughter-in-law on [4630] the second day to beg the loan of a jar from
   her mother-in-law. The latter at once denies the request, and we see
   how true was the remark of [4631] Terence, ambiguously expressed on
   purpose--"How is this? do all mothers-in-law hate their
   daughters-in-law?" We read of a certain Roman noble who, when his
   friends found fault with him for having divorced a wife, beautiful,
   chaste, and rich, put out his foot and said to them, "And the shoe
   before you looks new and elegant, yet no one but myself knows where it
   pinches." Herodotus [4632] tells us that a woman puts off her modesty
   with her clothes. And our own comic poet [4633] thinks the man
   fortunate who has never been married. Why should I refer to Pasiphaë,
   [4634] Clytemnestra, and Eriphyle, the first of whom, the wife of a
   king and swimming in pleasure, is said to have lusted for a bull, the
   second to have killed her: husband for the sake of an adulterer, the
   third to have betrayed Amphiaraus, and to have preferred a gold
   necklace to the welfare of her husband. In all the bombast of tragedy
   and the overthrow of houses, cities, and kingdoms, it is the wives and
   concubines who stir up strife. Parents take up arms against their
   children: unspeakable banquets are served: and on account of the rape
   of one wretched woman Europe and Asia are involved in a ten years' war.
   We read of some who were divorced the day after they were married, and
   immediately married again. Both husbands are to blame, both he who was
   so soon dissatisfied, and he who was so soon pleased. Epicurus the
   patron of pleasure (though [4635] Metrodorus his disciple married
   Leontia) says that a wise man can seldom marry, because marriage has
   many drawbacks. And as riches, honours, bodily health, and other things
   which we call indifferent, are neither good nor bad, but stand as it
   were midway, and become good and bad according to the use and issue, so
   wives stand on the border line of good and ill. It is, moreover, a
   serious matter for a wise man to be in doubt whether he is going to
   marry a good or a bad woman. [4636] Chrysippus ridiculously maintains
   that a wise man should marry, that he may not outrage Jupiter [4637]
   Gamelius and Genethlius. For upon that principle the Latins would not
   marry at all, since they have no Jupiter who presides over marriage.
   But if, as he thinks, the life of men is determined by the names of
   gods, whoever chooses to sit will offend Jupiter [4638] Stator.

   49. Aristotle and Plutarch and our Seneca have written treatises on
   matrimony, out of which we have already made some extracts and now add
   a few more. "The love of beauty is the forgetting of reason and the
   near neighbour of madness; a foul blot little in keeping with a sound
   mind. It confuses counsel, breaks high and generous spirits, draws away
   men from great thoughts to mean ones; it makes men querulous,
   ill-tempered, foolhardy, cruelly imperious, servile flatterers, good
   for nothing, at last not even for love itself. For although in the
   intensity of passion it burns like a raging fire, it wastes much time
   through suspicions, tears, and complaints: it begets hatred of itself,
   and at last hates itself." The course of love is laid bare in Plato's
   Phædrus from beginning to end, and Lysias explains all its
   drawbacks--how it is led not by reason, but by frenzy, and in
   particular is a harsh gaoler over lovely wives. Seneca, too, relates
   that he knew an accomplished man who before going out used to tie his
   wife's garter upon his breast, and could not bear to be absent from her
   for a quarter of an hour; and this pair would never take a drink unless
   husband and wife alternately put their lips to the cup; and they did
   other things just as absurd in the extravagant outbursts of their warm
   but blind affection. Their love was of honourable birth, but it grew
   out of all proportion. And it makes no difference how honourable may be
   the cause of a man's insanity. Hence [4639] Xystus in his Sentences
   tells us that "He who too ardently loves his own wife is an adulterer."
   It is disgraceful to love another man's wife at all, or one's own too
   much. A wise man ought to love his wife with judgment, not with
   passion. Let a man govern his voluptuous impulses, and not rush
   headlong into intercourse. There is nothing blacker than to love a wife
   as if she were an adulteress. Men who say they have contracted marriage
   and are bringing up children, for the good of their country and of the
   race, should at least imitate the brutes, and not destroy their
   offspring in the womb; nor should they appear in the character of
   lovers, but of husbands. In some cases marriage has grown out of
   adultery: and, shameful to relate! men have tried to teach their wives
   chastity after having taken their chastity away. Marriages of that sort
   are quickly dissolved when lust is satiated. The first allurement gone,
   the charm is lost. What shall I say, says Seneca, of the poor men who
   in numbers are bribed to take the name of husband in order to evade the
   laws promulgated against bachelors? How can he who is married under
   such conditions be a guide to morality, teach chastity, and maintain
   the authority of a husband? It is the saying of a very learned man,
   that chastity must be preserved at all costs, and that when it is lost
   all virtue falls to the ground. This holds the primacy of all virtues
   in woman. This it is that makes up for a wife's poverty, enhances her
   riches, redeems her deformity, gives grace to her beauty; it makes her
   act in a way worthy of her forefathers whose blood it does not taint
   with bastard offspring; of her children, who through it have no need to
   blush for their mother, or to be in doubt about their father; and above
   all, of herself, since it defends her from external violation. There is
   no greater calamity connected with captivity than to be the victim of
   another's lust. The consulship sheds lustre upon men; eloquence gives
   eternal renown; military glory and a triumph immortalise an obscure
   family. Many are the spheres ennobled by splendid ability. The virtue
   of woman is, in a special sense, purity. It was this that made [4640]
   Lucretia the equal of Brutus, if it did not make her his superior,
   since Brutus learnt from a woman the impossibility of being a slave. It
   was this that made [4641] Cornelia a fit match for Gracchus, and [4642]
   Porcia for a second Brutus. [4643] Tanaquil is better known than her
   husband. His name, like the names of many other kings, is lost in the
   mists of antiquity. She, through a virtue rare among women, is too
   deeply rooted in the hearts of all ages for her memory ever to perish.
   Let my married sisters copy the examples of [4644] Theano, [4645]
   Cleobuline, Gorgente, [4646] Timoclia, the [4647] Claudias and
   Cornelias; and when they find the Apostle conceding second marriage to
   depraved women, they will read that before the light of our religion
   shone upon the world wives of one husband ever held high rank among
   matrons, that by their hands the sacred rites of Fortuna [4648]
   Muliebris were performed, that a priest or [4649] Flamen twice [4650]
   married was unknown, that the high-priests of Athens to this day [4651]
   emasculate themselves by drinking hemlock, and once they have been
   drawn in to the pontificate, cease to be men.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4254] From this expression and that quoted in the notice above, it
   would be supposed that Jerome knew Jovinianus and his mode of life. But
   there is no reason to think that he had this knowledge; and his
   imputations against his adversary must be taken as the inferences which
   he draws from his opinions.

   [4255] Hor. Ars Poet. 139.

   [4256] Pers. Sat. iii. 118.

   [4257] Plautus, Pseudolus, i. 1. 23. Has quidem, pol, credo, nisi
   Sibylla legerit, Interpretari alium potesse neminem.

   [4258] The allusion is probably to the Sybilline books.

   [4259] Æn x. 640.

   [4260] The philosopher of Ephesus. Flourished about b.c. 513.

   [4261] Ibi est distinctio. Instead of clearness we have to make a
   choice between possible meanings.

   [4262] Marcion lived about a.d. 150, and was co-temporary with
   Polycarp, who is said to have had a personal encounter with him at
   Rome. Unlike other Gnostics he professed to be purely Christian in his
   doctrines. He is specially noted for his violent treatment of
   Scripture: he rejected the whole of the Old Testament, while of the New
   he acknowledged only the Gospel of S. Luke and ten of S. Paul's
   Epistles, and from these he expunged whatever he did not approve of.
   His sect lasted until the sixth century.

   [4263] By birth an Assyrian, and a pupil of Justin Martyr. His
   followers were called Encratites, or Temperates, from their great
   austerity. They also bore the names Water-drinkers and Renouncers.

   [4264] Heb. xiii. The Revised Ver. translates "let marriage be, etc."
   There is no verb in the original, the sentence being probably designed
   to be a Christian proverb, and capable of serving either as an
   assertion or as a precept. The revised rendering is preferred by the
   chief modern commentators.

   [4265] Gen. i. 28.

   [4266] For much interesting information relating to counting on the
   fingers, and for authorities on the subject, see Mayor's note on
   Juvenal x. 249.

   [4267] The philosopher of Crotona, in Italy, b.c. 580-510. See some of
   his sayings in Jerome's Apology, iii. 39-40.

   [4268] The great teacher of the Academy at Athens; lived b.c. 428-389.

   [4269] Surnamed the "Just." He was the opponent of Themistocles. He
   fought at Marathon (490), and although in exile did good service at
   Salamis (480). He was now recalled, and after commanding the Athenians
   at Platæa (479) died, probably in 468, so poor that he did not leave
   enough to pay for his funeral.

   [4270] Flourished about b.c. 370. A disciple of Socrates, and founder
   of the Cyrenaic School of Philosophy; he was luxurious in his life, and
   held pleasure to be the highest good.

   [4271] Epicurus (b.c. 342-270), though a disciple of Aristippus, does
   not appear to have deserved the odium attached to his name by Jerome
   and many others. "Pleasure with him was not a mere momentary and
   transitory sensation, but something lasting and imperishable,
   consisting in pure and noble enjoyments, that is, in ataraxia and
   aponia, or the freedom from pain and from all influences which disturb
   the peace of our mind, and thereby our happiness which is the result of
   it." See Zeller's Socrates and the Socratic Schools (Reichel's
   translation), second ed., p. 337 sq.

   [4272] The famous Athenian, talented, reckless and unscrupulous; born
   about b.c. 450, assassinated 404.

   [4273] Gen. ii. 24.

   [4274] Matt. xix. 5.

   [4275] Gen. i. 28; ix. 1.

   [4276] Gen. ix. 1.

   [4277] Gen. ix. 3.

   [4278] Gen. xxv. 23.

   [4279] Gen. xxx. 1.

   [4280] Gen. xxx. 2.

   [4281] Palo. Rev. Vers. tent-pin.

   [4282] Ps. lxxii. 1.

   [4283] Ps. lxxii. 15.

   [4284] Is. xxxviii. 19. Sept.

   [4285] 1 Tim. v. 14.

   [4286] Hebr. xiii. 4. See note on sec. 3.

   [4287] 1 Cor. vii. 39.

   [4288] 1 Tim. ii. 14.

   [4289] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4290] 1 Cor. vii. 1 sq.

   [4291] Prov. vi. 27, 28.

   [4292] Mithras was the God of the Sun among the Persians. His worship
   was introduced at Rome under the Emperors, and thence spread over the
   empire.

   [4293] Son of Vulcan, king of Athens, and the first to drive a
   four-in-hand, Virg. G. iii. 113: "First to the chariot, Ericthonius
   dared four steeds to join, and o'er the rapid wheels victorious hang."

   [4294] 1 Pet. iii. 7.

   [4295] 1 Pet. iii. 2, 3.

   [4296] 1 John ii. 6.

   [4297] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4298] 2 Cor. ii. 7.

   [4299] 2 Cor. ii. 7.

   [4300] 2 Cor. ii. 10. Margin.

   [4301] Ps. xlv. 9, 13, 14.

   [4302] 1 Peter iii. 7, joined with 1 Peter iv. 10.

   [4303] 1 Cor. vii. 8.

   [4304] Tit. i. 12.

   [4305] 1 Cor. xv. 33.

   [4306] Acts xvii. 28.

   [4307] 1 Cor. vii. 10 sq.

   [4308] 2 Cor. vi. 14 sq.

   [4309] 1 Cor. vii. 39.

   [4310] Mal. ii. 11, 12.

   [4311] R.V. "To the man that doeth this, him that waketh and him that
   answereth."

   [4312] 1 Cor. vii. 18 sq.

   [4313] But S. Paul hints at a surgical operation. See Josephus, Antiq.
   Bk. xii. c. v. sec. 1, where certain apostates from Judaism are said
   "to have hid their circumcision that even when they were naked [in the
   gymnasium] they might appear to be Greeks." See also Celsus, Bk. vii.
   c. xxv.

   [4314] Gal. v. 19.

   [4315] 1 Cor. vi. 17.

   [4316] 1 Cor. vii. 25, 26.

   [4317] Ferias nuptiarum. The reference is to 1 Cor. vii. 5.

   [4318] Matt. xix. 10 sq.

   [4319] Jerome uses the Greek word agonothetes --President of the Games.

   [4320] S. John vii. 37.

   [4321] Is. lvi. 3.

   [4322] Jer. xxxviii. 7.

   [4323] Acts viii. 27.

   [4324] 1 Cor. vii. 26.

   [4325] Matt. xxiv. 19, &c.

   [4326] 1 Cor. vii. 27.

   [4327] 1 Cor. vii. 30 sqq.

   [4328] See Rev. Ver. Margin.

   [4329] See the treatise on the Perp. Virginity of the Blessed Virgin
   Mary. Rome, 384.

   [4330] Ep. xxii. on the guarding of virginity. Rome, 384.

   [4331] Jerome apparently, here, alludes to some early work of
   Tertullian not now extant.

   [4332] Jerome often alludes to his relation to Gregory, in the year
   381; he was present at the council of Constantinople, of which Gregory
   was then the bishop.

   [4333] This rendering supposes kai memeristai to be joined to the
   preceding sentence. The Vulgate has et divisus est, and so also the
   Æthiopic Version.

   [4334] S. John xv. 19.

   [4335] 1 Cor. vii. 35.

   [4336] 1 Cor. iii. 10.

   [4337] 1 Cor. vii. 37, 38.

   [4338] Ps. xxxvi. 27.

   [4339] Eccles. vii. 16.

   [4340] 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40.

   [4341] 1 Tim. v. 11, 15.

   [4342] 1 Cor. vii. 40.

   [4343] Rom vii. 2, 3.

   [4344] 1 Tim. v. 14, 15.

   [4345] See 1 Tim. iii. 12. Most ancient writers interpreted S. Paul's
   words as referring to second marriages after loss of first wife,
   however happening. And certain Councils decided in the same sense, e.g.
   Neocæsarea (a.d. 314). Ellicott's Pastoral Ep., fifth ed., p. 41.

   [4346] 1 Tim. v. 9. Other authorities, however, suppose the words to
   refer to an order of widows, and pertinently ask, would the Church thus
   limit her alms.

   [4347] 1 Cor. vi. 12.

   [4348] Eph. v. 31; Gen. ii.

   [4349] Eph. v. 32.

   [4350] Eph. v. 25; Col. iii. 9-11.

   [4351] 1 Thess. iv. 7.

   [4352] Lit. through a virgin. The allusion is, probably, to his baptism
   by a virgin, i.e., John Baptist.

   [4353] But see Gen. iv. 26.

   [4354] 1 Pet. iii. 20.

   [4355] Eph. i. 10.

   [4356] Rev. i. 8; xxii. 13.

   [4357] Rom. xiv. 21.

   [4358] Gen. xxxi. 46-49, where the heap itself is called Galeed.

   [4359] Gen. xxxii. 25, 28, 31.

   [4360] Gen. xxxv. 16, 20.

   [4361] Gen. xxxviii.

   [4362] Gen. xxxviii. 9.

   [4363] Ex. iv. 24-26.

   [4364] Ex. iii. 5.

   [4365] 1 Sam. xxi. 4.

   [4366] Levit. xxi. 13, 14.

   [4367] The reference is, probably, to Levit. xxii. 13. But the second
   marriage is not there prohibited, and in the ideal polity of Ezekiel
   (xliv. 22) a priest might marry the widow of a priest.

   [4368] Levit. xxi. 3.

   [4369] Deut. xx. 6, 7, where an indulgence, not a prohibition, is
   clearly indicated.

   [4370] Ex. xxxviii. 8. Sept. Vulg. "who watched;" Onkelos' Targum "who
   assembled to pray," and so the Syriac Version. The Hebrew word
   signifies "to go forth to war," but is applied to the temple service, a
   sort of militia sacra (Gesenius). Hence Rev. Version, "the serving
   women which served at the door of the tent of meeting;" and Margin,
   "the women which assembled to minister." Comp. Numb. iv. 3, 23, 30, 35,
   39; and 1 Sam. ii. 22.

   [4371] Ex. xxxvii.

   [4372] In Jude 5, instead of "the Lord," A. B. read Jesus, and this is
   accepted by many ancient, authorities. Farrar observes ("Early Days of
   Christianity," pop. ed., p, 128) "Jesus" is the more difficult, and
   therefore more probable reading of A. B. It is explained by 1 Cor. x.
   4, and the identification of the Messiah with the "Angel of the Lord"
   (Ex. xiv. 19; xxiii. 20, &c.) and with the Pillar of Fire in Philo.

   [4373] Josh. iii.

   [4374] Jerome derives Gilgal from nlh to uncover: the accepted
   derivation is from nll to roll.

   [4375] Ex. iii. 5; Jos. v. 15.

   [4376] Josh. x. 3.

   [4377] Josh. x. 16.

   [4378] S. Luke xvi. 29.

   [4379] Rom. v. 14.

   [4380] Gen. xxxi. 41.

   [4381] Gen. xxxvii. 28.

   [4382] Gen. xxxii. 14.

   [4383] Joshua died at the age of 110 years. Josh. xxiv. 29.

   [4384] Timnath-Serah was the original name of Joshua's inheritance
   (Josh. xix. 50), but in Judges ii. 9, we find the name changed to
   Timnath-Heres. Timnath-Serah and the tomb of its illustrious owner were
   shown in the time of Jerome (Letter cviii. 13). "Paula wondered greatly
   that he who assigned men their possessions had chosen for himself a
   rough and rocky spot." Jerome is looking at the inheritance with the
   eyes of an ardent controversialist when he describes it as "the fairest
   spot in the land of Judah."

   [4385] Ps. xlviii. 2. The correct rendering of the Hebrew is much
   disputed.

   [4386] Ps. lxxiii. 2.

   [4387] Josh. xxiv. 28.

   [4388] Deut. xxxiv. 6.

   [4389] Worshipped more especially at Lampsacus on the Hellespont. He
   was regarded as the promoter of fertility in vegetables and animals.

   [4390] Ps. cxxviii. 3.

   [4391] Gen. vi. 3. R.V. Strive or rule in.

   [4392] Gen. xlix. 17. Samson was of the tribe of Dan.

   [4393] Judg. xi. 30, 31.

   [4394] 1 Tim. iii. 2.

   [4395] Ps. xcix. 6.

   [4396] See 1 Chron. vi. 34-38.

   [4397] Heb. vii. 3. The Greek word in the text ("without genealogy") is
   unknown to secular writers, and occurs here only in the New Test. It
   cannot mean without descent (see verse 6). Unmarried appears to be a
   false inference from this supposed meaning. Ignatius also (Ep. ad.
   Philad.) reckoned Melchizedek among celibates. Rev. Version translates,
   "without genealogy," i.e., his ancestry was unrecorded. See Farrar's
   "Early Days of Christianity," pop. ed., p. 221.

   [4398] 1 Sam. ii. 22.

   [4399] See, however, 1 Chron. xxii. 8.

   [4400] S. Matt. xviii. 6.

   [4401] S. Matt. v. 22.

   [4402] S. Matt. v. 27.

   [4403] Cant. vi. 8.

   [4404] 1 Kings xi. 3.

   [4405] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4406] Is. xxxviii. 19.

   [4407] 2 Kings xxii. 14.

   [4408] 2 Kings xx. 18.

   [4409] Dan. i. 3, 4.

   [4410] Ezek. xiv. 14, 20.

   [4411] Ezek. xviii. 4.

   [4412] Ezek. viii. 1.

   [4413] Ezek. xiv. 14.

   [4414] Apocryphal additions to Daniel.

   [4415] Matt. xix. 27.

   [4416] Luke xviii. 29, 30.

   [4417] 1 Cor. ix. 5. The text has been much tampered with by the
   advocates or opponents of celibacy. The reading first quoted by Jerome
   is that of F, a manuscript of the eighth or ninth century, and is found
   in Tertullian; the other chief readings introduce the Greek equivalent
   for sister, either in the sing. or plural. The Rev. Version renders,
   "have we no right to lead about a wife that is a believer" (or sister).
   Augustine, Tertullian, Theodoret, &c., together with Cornelius-a-Lapide
   and Estius among the moderns, agree with Jerome in referring the
   passage to holy women who ministered to the Apostles as they did to the
   Lord Himself. The third canon of Nicæa is supposed to be directed
   against the practice encouraged by this interpretation of the Apostle's
   words.

   [4418] Attributed to Clement by Jerome.

   [4419] Isa. i. 9.

   [4420] S. John xiii. 25.

   [4421] S. John xx. 4.

   [4422] S. John xxi. 7 sq.

   [4423] S. Matt. xvi. 18.

   [4424] S. Matt. xviii. 18: S. John xx. 22, 23.

   [4425] S. John xiv. 27.

   [4426] S. Matt. xx. 27: S. Luke xxii. 26.

   [4427] See this book in Vol. III. of this series.

   [4428] Is. xl. 3.

   [4429] S. John i. 1.

   [4430] S. John xix. 26, 27.

   [4431] 1 Tim. ii. 13, 15.

   [4432] 1 Tim. ii. 8 sqq.

   [4433] Apparently, Eve's transgression imputed to her descendants.

   [4434] The original admits of the rendering "by means of her
   child-bearing." But Ellicott and others interpret of the Incarnation.

   [4435] Rev. Version, "sobriety." Sobermindedness or discretion are
   given by Ellicott (Notes on translation) as alternative renderings. The
   word cannot mean chastity, but rather "the well-balanced state of mind
   resulting from habitual self-restraint" in general.

   [4436] Prov. vi. 26?

   [4437] Prov. vii. 27; ix. 18.

   [4438] Prov. xxi. 19.

   [4439] Often mentioned by Seneca. A saying is reported of him: "Ho,
   traveller, stop. There is a miracle here: a man and his wife not at
   strife."

   [4440] Prov. xxi. 9; xxv. 24.

   [4441] Prov. xxvii. 15.

   [4442] Supereffluas. Prov. iii. 21 Sept., Heb. ii. 1. The Greek word
   signifies to fall away like flowing water. See Schleusner on
   pararruomai . In Heb. ii. 1, Rev. V. translates "We drift away:"
   Vaughan, "We be found to have leaked, or ebbed away."

   [4443] Prov. xxx. 15, 16.

   [4444] Eccles. iii. 1, 2, sqq.

   [4445] Eccles. vii. 10.

   [4446] R.V. "Good as an inheritance."

   [4447] Eccles. vii. 28, 29.

   [4448] Eccles. ix. 8.

   [4449] Cant. i. 10, 11. "Plaits of gold with studs of silver." R.V.

   [4450] Cant. ii. 1, 10-12.

   [4451] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4452] Cant. ii. 12.

   [4453] Verse 13.

   [4454] 2 Cor. ii. 15.

   [4455] Cant. ii. 13, 14.

   [4456] Ex. xxxiv. 33, 35; 2 Cor. iii. 7 sq.

   [4457] Is. i. 15.

   [4458] Cant. ii. 16.

   [4459] Cant. iii. 7, 8.

   [4460] Cant. iv. 6.

   [4461] Eph. v. 27.

   [4462] Cant. iv. 8.

   [4463] Sept. R.V. "Look from the top of Amana."

   [4464] Cant. viii. 5.

   [4465] Ps. cxix. 105.

   [4466] Cant. iv. 9.

   [4467] Cant. iv. 9, 10.

   [4468] Cant. v. 1.

   [4469] S. Matt. ix. 17.

   [4470] Rom. vii. 6.

   [4471] Zech. viii. 5; ix. 17, R.V. "How great is his goodness, and how
   great is his beauty! Corn shall make the young men flourish, and new
   wine the maids."

   [4472] Ps. xlv. 16, 17.

   [4473] Cant. iv. 12, 13.

   [4474] Cant. v. 10.

   [4475] Cant. v. 16.

   [4476] Cant. vii. 1.

   [4477] R.V. "O Prince's daughter!" Sept., also "daughter of Nadab."

   [4478] Is. vii. 14.

   [4479] Delitzsch remarks, "The assertion of Jerome is untenable." See
   Cheyne, critical note on Is. vii. 14. The word probably denotes a
   female, married or unmarried, just attaining maturity. But in every
   other passage, the context shows that the word is used of an unmarried
   woman.

   [4480] Gen. xxiv. 42 sq.

   [4481] Is. xxxvii. 22.

   [4482] Is. liv. 1.

   [4483] Jerem. ii. 32.

   [4484] Jer. xxxi. 22.

   [4485] Jer. i. 5.

   [4486] Jer. xxxix. 11; xl. i.

   [4487] Ezek. i. 4.

   [4488] Ezek. xxiv. 18.

   [4489] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

   [4490] Acts xv. 28, 29.

   [4491] S. Matt. x. 10: S. Luke x. 5.

   [4492] S. Matt. xix. 21.

   [4493] 1 Tim. iii. 2, 4; Tit. i. 6.

   [4494] Sacerdotes: that is, bishops.

   [4495] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4496] 1 Tim. iii. 1.

   [4497] V. supra, c. 27. R.V. "temperate." Ellicott observes, "under any
   circumstances the derivative translation Vigilant, Auth., though
   possibly defensible in the verb, is a needless and doubtful extension
   of the primary meaning."

   [4498] R.V. "orderly." V. above, c. 27.

   [4499] kosmion. R.V. "orderly."

   [4500] Non vinolentum. R.V. "no brawler," i.e., as the Margin explains,
   "not quarrelsome over wine." The original is not thus a mere synonym
   for nephalios in v. 2.

   [4501] So Chrysostom and Theodoret. The simple meaning appears to suit
   the context better.

   [4502] 1 Sam. ii. and iv.

   [4503] 1 Tim. iii. 11.

   [4504] The Code of Constantine, following the Mosaic law, imposed the
   penalty of death for adultery. See Gibbon, ch. xliv.

   [4505] S. Matt. xix. 12.

   [4506] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

   [4507] Two rocky islands in the Euxine, that, according to the fable,
   floated about, dashing against and rebounding from each other, until at
   length they became fixed on the passage of the Argo between them."

   [4508] Andabatæ.

   [4509] Matt. xix. 12.

   [4510] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4511] Phil. ii. 6-8.

   [4512] S. John xx. 20.

   [4513] S. John xx. 19.

   [4514] S. Matt. xiv. 28.

   [4515] S. Matt. xxii. 30.

   [4516] 2 Cor. v. 17.

   [4517] Rom. vi. 21, 22.

   [4518] Rom. vii. 4 sq.

   [4519] Rom. vii. 14, 24, 25.

   [4520] Rom. viii. 1, 2.

   [4521] Rom. viii. 5 sq.

   [4522] Rom. viii. 11, 14.

   [4523] R.V. "mind."

   [4524] Rom. xii. 1-3.

   [4525] See ch. 27.

   [4526] Rom. xiii. 11, 12, 14.

   [4527] 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2, 3.

   [4528] That is, under the dominion of the psyche, or principle of life
   common to man and the beasts, hence, natural. Opposed to the psyche is
   the pneuma, capable of being influenced by the Spirit of God. A man
   thus influenced is pneumatikos or spiritual. See also 1 Cor. xv. 44.

   [4529] 1 Cor. xv. 47 sq.

   [4530] 2 Cor. v. 1 sq.

   [4531] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

   [4532] Gal. ii. 16.

   [4533] Gal. iii. 3, 4.

   [4534] Gal. v. 16, 17.

   [4535] Properly, self-control in the wide sense.

   [4536] Gal. v. 24, 25.

   [4537] Gal. vi. 7, 8.

   [4538] Eph. ii. 3, 4.

   [4539] Eph. iv. 22.

   [4540] Eph. vi. 24.

   [4541] Phil. iii. 20, 21.

   [4542] Phil. iv. 8.

   [4543] Coloss. ii. 11; iii. 1 sq.

   [4544] 2 Tim. ii. 4.

   [4545] Titus ii. 11, 12.

   [4546] S. John xvi. 12, 13.

   [4547] xxi. 9.

   [4548] Matt. xi. 13.

   [4549] The passage is not found in existing copies of Josephus.

   [4550] S. James i. 16-18.

   [4551] R.V. "can be no variation." The word "difference," as used by
   Jerome, is explained by the context.

   [4552] Rev. i. 5.

   [4553] 1 Pet. i. 3-5.

   [4554] 1 Pet. i. 13-16.

   [4555] 1 Pet. i. 18, 19.

   [4556] 1 Pet. i. 22, 23.

   [4557] In Jerome's rendering living and abiding,' are attributes of
   God. But in the original the participles may be taken as predicates of
   either word or God. The R.V. refers them to the former.

   [4558] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

   [4559] 1 Pet. iv. 1 sq.

   [4560] 2 Pet. i. 4.

   [4561] 2 Pet. ii. 9 sq.

   [4562] 2 Pet. iii. 3.

   [4563] The notorious epicure of the time of Augustus and Tiberius.

   [4564] Paxamus wrote a treatise on cooking, which, Suidas states, was
   arranged in alphabetical order.

   [4565] 1 John ii. 15 sq.

   [4566] 1 John iii. 2, 3.

   [4567] 1 John iv. 7. R.V. "that we may have."

   [4568] Jude 23.

   [4569] xiv. 1 sq.

   [4570] Rev. vii. 5 sq.

   [4571] Apoc. xiv. 3, 4.

   [4572] or they may say.

   [4573] 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

   [4574] Virg. Æn i. 317.

   [4575] Virg. Æn. vii. 803: id. xi. 535.

   [4576] Leos was the hero from whom the tribe Leontis derived its name.
   Once when Athens was suffering from famine or plague, the oracle at
   Delphi demanded that his daughters should be sacrificed. The father
   complied. The shrine called Leocorium was erected by the Athenians to
   their honour.

   [4577] Jerome's memory appears to be at fault. When the Greek fleet was
   on its way to Troy, it was detained by a calm at Aulis. The seer
   Calchas advised that Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon should be
   sacrificed. See Dict. of Ant.

   [4578] According to the law of Numa, the punishment of a Vestal Virgin
   for violating the vow of chastity was stoning to death. Tarquinius
   Priscus first enacted that the offender should be buried alive, after
   being stripped of her badges of office, scourged and attired like a
   corpse. "From the time of the triumvirs each [Vestal] was preceded by a
   lictor when she went abroad; consuls and prætors made way for them, and
   lowered their fasces; even the tribunes of the plebs respected their
   holy character, and if any one passed under their litter, he was put to
   death."

   [4579] It is said, however, that Claudia (Quinta) was a Roman matron,
   not a Vestal Virgin. The soothsayers announced that only a chaste woman
   could move the vessel referred to. Claudia, who had been accused of
   incontinency, took hold of the rope, and the vessel forthwith followed
   her. b.c. 204.

   [4580] Seneca.

   [4581] In the year after the death of Alexander (b.c. 323), Leosthenes
   defeated Alexander's general Antipater, near Thermopylæ. Antipater then
   threw himself into the town of Lamia (in Phthiotis in Thessaly) which
   thus gave its name to the war. Leosthenes pressed the siege with great
   vigour, but was killed by a blow from a stone.

   [4582] Another name for Messana (or Messene), derived from the
   Mamertini, a people of Campania, some of whom were mercenaries in the
   army of the tyrant Agathocles, and were quartered in the town. At his
   death (b.c. 282) they rose and gained possession of it.

   [4583] The semi-legendary hero of the second war between Sparta and
   Messene. He lived about b.c. 270.

   [4584] The spring festival held in honour of Hyacinthus, the beautiful
   youth accidentally slain by Apollo, and from whose blood was said to
   have sprung the flower of the same name.

   [4585] He succeeded Plato as president of the Academy (b.c. 347-339).
   His works are all lost.

   [4586] One of Aristotle's pupils, and author of a number of works, none
   of which are extant.

   [4587] Diogenes Laërtius (so named from Laërte in Cilicia), who
   probably lived in the 2nd century after Christ, in the Third Book of
   his "Lives of the Philosophers" refers to a treatise by Anaxelides on
   the same subject. It has therefore been conjectured that Jerome may
   have written Philosophica Historia for philosophiae.

   [4588] Timæus of Locri, in Italy, a Pythagorean philosopher, is said to
   have been a teacher of Plato. There is an extant work bearing his name;
   but its genuineness is considered doubtful, and it is in all
   probability only an abridgment of Plato's dialogue of Timæus.

   [4589] Damo. Pythagoras is said to have entrusted his writings to her,
   and to have forbidden her to give them to any one. She strictly
   observed the command, although she was in extreme poverty, and received
   many requests to sell them. According to some accounts Pythagoras had
   another daughter, Myia.

   [4590] Flourished about b.c. 540-510.

   [4591] Clement of Alexandria (died about a.d. 220) in his Stromata
   (i.e. literally, patchwork) or Miscellanies, Bk. iv., relates the same
   story and gives the names of the daughters. The Diodorus referred to in
   the text lived at Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy Sorer (b.c.
   323-285), by whom he was said to have been surnamed Cronos or Saturn,
   on account of his inability to solve at once some dialectic problem
   when dining with the king, perhaps with a play upon the word chronos
   (time), or with a sarcastic allusion to Cronos as the introducer of the
   arts of civilized life. The philosopher is said to have taken the
   disgrace so much to heart, that he wrote a treatise on the problem, and
   then died in despair. Another account derives his name from his teacher
   Apollonius Cronus.

   [4592] Born about b.c. 213, died b.c. 129. He was the determined
   opponent of the Stoics, and maintained that neither our senses nor our
   understanding gives us a safe criterion of truth.

   [4593] The poetical name of Rhea Silvia, daughter of Numitor and mother
   of Romulus and Remus.

   [4594] According to the legend she stabbed herself on the funeral pyre.
   Jerome ignores the modifications introduced into the legend by Virgil,
   who, in defiance of the common chronology, makes Dido a contemporary of
   Æneas, and represents her as destroying herself when forsaken by the
   hero.

   [4595] Hasdrubal and his family, with 900 deserters and desperadoes,
   retired into the temple of Æsculapius, as if to make a brave defence.
   But the commandant's heart failed him; and, slipping out alone, he
   threw himself at the feet of Scipio, and craved for pardon. His wife,
   standing on the base of the temple, was near enough to witness the
   sight, and reproaching her husband with cowardice, cast herself with
   her children into the flames which were now wrapping the Citadel round
   on all sides. b.c. 146.

   [4596] Son of Nicias the celebrated Athenian general.

   [4597] She succeeded Mausolus and reigned b.c. 352-350.

   [4598] She was the wife of Agron, and assumed the sovereign power on
   the death of her husband, b.c. 231. War was declared against her by
   Rome in consequence of her having caused the assassination of an
   ambassador, and in 228 she obtained peace at the cost of the greater
   part of her dominions.

   [4599] Cyropædeia, Book vii.

   [4600] The wife of Candaules, also called Myrsilus. She was exhibited
   to Gyges, who, after the murder of her husband, married her. Herod. B.
   i.

   [4601] The story, as is well known, formed the subject of the play by
   Euripides bearing the heroine's name, which was brought out about b.c.
   438.

   [4602] Protesilaus was the first of the Greeks to fall at Troy.
   According to some accounts he was slain by Hector. When her husband was
   slain Laodamia begged the gods to allow her to converse with him for
   only 3 hours. The request having been granted, Hermes led Protesilaus
   back to the upper world, and when he died a second time, Laodamia died
   with him.

   [4603] The wife of L. Tarquinius Collatinus, whose rape by Sextus led
   to the dethronement of Tarquinius Superbus and the establishment of the
   republic.

   [4604] Over the Carthaginian fleet near Mylæ, 260 b.c.

   [4605] One of the assassins of Julius Cæsar. Jerome appears to be at
   fault here. Porcia, the daughter of Cato by his first wife Atilia,
   before marrying Brutus in 45 b.c., had been married to M. Bibulus and
   had borne him three children. He died in 48. After the death of Brutus
   in 42 she put an end to her own life, probably by the fumes of a
   charcoal fire.

   [4606] Marcia is related to have been ceded by Cato to his friend
   Hortensius. She continued to live with the latter until his death, when
   she returned to Cato.

   [4607] It has been conjectured that instead of "Marcia, Cato's younger
   daughter," a few lines above, we should read Porcia.

   [4608] Probably the daughter of Cato by his second wife Marcia.

   [4609] Jerome, apparently, makes a mistake here. Valeria, sister of the
   Messalas, married Sulla towards the end of his life. Valeria, the widow
   of Galerius, after the death of her husband in 311, rejected the
   proposals of Maximinus. Her consequent sufferings are related by Gibbon
   in his fourteenth chapter.

   [4610] The Greek philosopher to whom Aristotle bequeathed his library
   and the originals of his own writings. He died b.c. 287, after being
   President of the Academy for 35 years. If he were the author of the
   book here referred to, it is not to be found among his extant writings.

   [4611] Cicero at the beginning of the third book of the De Officiis,
   makes Cato quote this saying as one frequently in the mouth of Publius
   Scipio.

   [4612] Phil. i. 23.

   [4613] We hear very little of the two sons of Moses, Gershom and
   Eliezer. See Ex. iv. 20, xviii. 3, 1 Chron. xxiii. 14. Their promotion
   is nowhere recorded, and Moses appointed a person of another tribe to
   be his successor.

   [4614] See 1 Sam. viii. 1-4 and ch. ix.

   [4615] b.c. 46. "What grounds for displeasure she had given him besides
   her alleged extravagance it is hard to say. His letters to her during
   the previous year had been short and rather cold." Watson, Select
   Letters of Cicero, third ed. p. 397.

   [4616] Hirtius was the friend personal and political of Julius Cæsar,
   and during Cæsar's absence in Africa he lived principally at his
   Tusculan estate which adjoined Cicero's villa. Hirtius and Cicero
   though opposed to each other in politics were on good terms, and the
   former is said to have received lessons in oratory from the latter.

   [4617] But not long after divorcing Terentia he married Publilia, a
   young girl of whose property he had the management, in order to relieve
   himself from pecuniary difficulties. She seems to have received little
   affection from her husband. Watson, p. 397.

   [4618] This statement is without authority. See Long's Article on
   Sallust in Smith's Dict. of Classical Biography.

   [4619] Cæcilia Metella, the third of Sulla's five wives, had previously
   been married to M. Æmilius Scaurus, consul b.c. 115. She fell ill
   during the celebration of Sulla's triumph on account of his victory
   over Mithridates in 81; and as her recovery was hopeless, Sulla for
   religious reasons divorced her. She soon afterwards died, and Sulla
   honoured her memory with a splendid funeral.

   [4620] The famous dictator claimed the name Felix for himself in a
   speech which he delivered to the people at the close of the celebration
   of his triumph, because he attributed his success in life to the favour
   of the gods.

   [4621] But Sulla's youth and manhood were disgraced by the most sensual
   vices. He was indebted for a considerable portion of his wealth to a
   courtesan Nicopolis, and his death in b.c. 78 at the age of 60 was
   hastened by his dissolute mode of life.

   [4622] Pompey, like Sulla, was married five times. Mucia, his third
   wife, daughter of Q. Mucius Scævola, the augur, consul b.c. 95, was
   divorced by Pompey in 62, and afterwards married M. Æmilius Scaurus,
   son of the consul by Cæcilia and thus stepson of Sulla.

   [4623] Born b.c. 234, died b.c. 149. He was the great-grandfather of
   Cato of Utica.

   [4624] b.c. 382-336.

   [4625] b.c. 385-322.

   [4626] Born about b.c. 480 at Leontini in Sicily. He is said to have
   lived 105, or even 109 years. He was held in high esteem at Athens,
   where he had numerous distinguished pupils and imitators.

   [4627] An Athenian tragic poet, celebrated for his wit.

   [4628] See the Andromache.

   [4629] There were two cities of this name, Leptis Magna and Parva, in
   N. Africa.

   [4630] Or "on another day," that is, than the marriage day implied in
   the context.

   [4631] Terence, Hecyra II. i. 4.

   [4632] Bk. I. ch. 8. "Candaules addressed Gyges as follows: Gyges, as I
   think you do not believe me when I speak of my wife's beauty (for the
   ears of men are naturally more incredulous than their eyes), you must
   contrive to see her naked.' But he, exclaiming loudly, answered: Sire,
   what a shocking proposal do you make, bidding me behold my queen naked!
   With her clothes a woman puts off her modesty,'" etc.

   [4633] Perhaps Terence, Phormio I. iii. 21.

   [4634] For these legends, see Classical Dict.

   [4635] The most distinguished disciple and the intimate friend of
   Epicurus. His philosophy appears to have been of a more sensual kind
   than that of his master. He made perfect happiness to consist in having
   a well-constituted body. He died b.c. 277 in the 53rd year of his age,
   7 years before Epicurus.

   [4636] Chrysippus (b.c. 280-207) the Stoic philosopher, born at Soli in
   Cilicia. He opposed the prevailing scepticism and maintained the
   possibility of attaining certain knowledge. It was said of him "that if
   Chrysippus had not existed the Porch (i.e., Stoicism) could not have
   been." He is reported to have seldom written less than 500 lines a-day,
   and to have left behind him 705 works.

   [4637] That is Zeus, regarded as presiding over marriages and the
   tutelary god of races or families.

   [4638] Literally, "Jupiter who causes to stand": hence Jerome's play
   upon the word. Jupiter Stator was the god regarded as supporting,
   preserving, etc. Cic., Cat. I. 13, 31--"quem (sc. Jovem) statorem hujus
   urbis atque imperii vere nominamus."

   [4639] The greater number of manuscripts read Sextus, an alternative
   name for the same person. Jerome in his version of the Chronicon of
   Eusebius speaks of "Xystus a Pythagorean philosopher" who flourished at
   the time of Christ's birth; but there is great difficulty in
   establishing the identity of the author of the "Sentences." See also
   the Prolegomena to Rufinus who translated the Sentences of Xystus, in
   Vol. III. of this Series.

   [4640] See note above, p. 382.

   [4641] Daughter of P. Scipio Africanus, and wife of Ti. Sempronius
   Gracchus, censor b.c. 169. The people erected a statue to her with the
   inscription "Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi."

   [4642] See note p. 376.

   [4643] Wife of Tarquinius Priscus.

   [4644] Theano was the most celebrated of the female philosophers of the
   Pythagorean school. According to some authorities she was the wife of
   Pythagoras.

   [4645] Cleobuline, or Cleobule, was celebrated for her riddles in
   hexameter verse. One on the subject of the year runs thus--"A father
   has 12 children, and each of these 30 daughters, on one side white, and
   on the other side black, and though immortal they all die."

   [4646] Timoclia was a woman of Thebes, whose house at the capture of
   the city in b.c. 335 was broken into and pillaged by the soldiery. She
   was herself violated by the commander, whom she afterwards contrived to
   push into a well.

   [4647] A vestal virgin who proved her innocence of the unchastity
   imputed to her by setting free a stranded ship with her girdle.

   [4648] The epithet is said to have been given to the goddess at the
   time when Coriolanus was prevented by the entreaties of the women from
   destroying Rome.

   [4649] The name for any Roman priest devoted to the service of one
   particular god. He took his distinguishing title from the deity to whom
   he ministered, e.g. Flamen Martialis.

   [4650] Comp. Tertullian De Monogamia, last chapter--"Fortunæ, inquit,
   muliebri coronam non imponit, nisi univira...Pontifex Maximus et
   Flaminica (the wife of a Flamen) nubunt semel."

   [4651] See Origen, Contra Celsum, Bk. VII. The water hemlock, or
   cowbane, is the variety referred to.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book II.

   Jerome answers the second, third, and fourth propositions of
   Jovinianus.

   I. (c. 1-4). That those who have become regenerate cannot be overthrown
   by the devil, Jerome (c. 1) puts it that they cannot be tempted by the
   devil. He quotes 1 John i. 8-ii. 2, as shewing that faithful men can be
   tempted and sin and need an advocate. The expressions (3) in Heb. vi.
   as to those who crucify the Son of God afresh do not apply to ordinary
   sins after baptism, as supposed by Montanus and Novatus. The epistles
   to the Seven Churches show that the lapsed may return. The Angels, and
   even our Lord Himself, (4) could be tempted.

   II. (c. 5-17). That there is no difference (morally) between one who
   fasts and one who takes food with thanksgiving. Jovinian has quoted (5)
   many texts of Scripture to show that God has made animals for men's
   food. But (6) there are many other uses of animals besides food. And
   there are many warnings like 1 Cor. vi. 13, as to the danger arising
   from food. There are among the heathen (7) many instances of
   abstinence. They recognize (8) the evil of sensual allurements, and
   often, like Crates the Theban, (9) have cast away what would tempt
   them; the senses, they teach, (10) should be subject to reason; and,
   that (11) except for athletes (Christians do not want to be like Milo
   of Crotona) bread and water suffice. Horace (12), Xenophon and other
   eminent Greeks (13), the Essenes and the Brahmans (14), as well as
   philosophers like Diogenes, testify to the value of abstinence. The Old
   Testament stories (15) of Esau's pottage, of the lusting of Israel for
   the flesh-pots of Egypt, and those in the New Testament of Anna,
   Cornelius, &c., commend abstinence. If some heretics inculcate fasting
   (16) in such a way as to despise the gifts of God, and weak Christians
   are not to be judged for their use of flesh, those who seek the higher
   life (17) will find a help in abstinence.

   III. (c. 18-34). The fourth proposition of Jovinianus, that all who are
   saved will have equal reward, is refuted (19) by the various yields of
   thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold in the parable of the sower, by (20)
   the "stars differing in glory" of 1 Cor. xv. 41. It is strange (21) to
   find the advocate of self-indulgence now claiming equality to the
   saints. But (22) as there were differences in Ezekiel between cattle
   and cattle, so in St. Paul between those who built gold or stubble on
   the one foundation. The differences of gifts (23), of punishments (24),
   of guilt (25), as in Pilate and the Chief Priests, of the produce of
   the good seed (26), of the mansions promised in heaven (27-29), of the
   judgment upon sins both in the church and in Scripture (30-31), of
   those called at different times to the vineyard (32) are arguments for
   the diversity of rewards. The parable of the talents (33) holds out as
   rewards differences of station, and so does the church (34) in its
   different orders.

   Jerome now recapitulates (35) and appeals (36)against the licentious
   views of Jovinianus, which have already induced many virgins to break
   their vows; and which, as the new Roman heresy (37), he calls upon the
   Imperial City (38) to reject.

   1. The second proposition of Jovinianus is that the baptized cannot be
   tempted [4652] by the devil. And to escape the imputation of folly in
   saying this, he adds: "But if any are tempted, it only shows that they
   were baptized with water, not with the Spirit, as we read was the case
   with Simon Magus." Hence it is that John says, [4653] "Whosoever is
   begotten of God doeth no sin, because his seed abideth in him: and he
   cannot sin, because he is begotten of God. In this the children of God
   are manifest, and the children of the Devil." And at the end of the
   Epistle, [4654] "Whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not; but his
   being begotten of God keepeth him, and the evil one toucheth him not."

   2. This would be a real difficulty and one for ever incapable of
   solution were it not solved by the witness of John himself, who
   immediately goes on to say, [4655] "My little children, guard
   yourselves from idols." If everyone that is born of God sinneth not,
   and cannot be tempted by the devil, how is it that he bids them beware
   of temptation? Again in the same Epistle we read: [4656] "If we say
   that we have no sins, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
   If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
   and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not
   sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us." I suppose that
   John was baptized and was writing to the baptized: I imagine too that
   all sin is of the devil. Now John confesses himself a sinner, and hopes
   for forgiveness of sins after baptism. My friend Jovinianus says,
   [4657] "Touch me not, for I am clean." What then? Does the Apostle
   contradict himself? By no means. In the same passage he gives his
   reason for thus speaking: [4658] "My little children, these things
   write I unto you, that ye may not sin. But if any man sin, we have an
   advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the
   propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
   whole world. And hereby know we that we know him, if we keep his
   commandments. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his
   commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth
   his word, in him verily hath the love of God been perfected. Hereby
   know we that we are in him: he that saith he abideth in him ought
   himself also to walk even as he walked." My reason for telling you,
   little children, that everyone who is born of God sinneth not, is that
   you may not sin, and that you may know that so long as you sin not you
   abide in the birth which God has given you. Yea, they who abide in that
   birth cannot sin. [4659] "For what communion hath light with darkness?
   Or Christ with Belial?" As day is distinct from night, so righteousness
   and unrighteousness, sin and good works, Christ and Antichrist cannot
   blend. If we give Christ a lodging-place in our hearts, we banish the
   devil from thence. If we sin and the devil enter through the gate of
   sin, Christ will immediately withdraw. Hence David after sinning says:
   [4660] "Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation," that is, the joy
   which he had lost by sinning. [4661] "He who saith, I know him, and
   keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him."
   Christ is called the truth: [4662] "I am the way, the truth, and the
   life." In vain do we make our boast in him whose commandments we keep
   not. To him that knoweth what is good, and doeth it not, it is sin.
   [4663] "As the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so faith apart
   from works is dead." And we must not think it a great matter to know
   the only God, when even devils believe and tremble. "He that saith he
   abideth in him ought himself also to walk even as he walked." Our
   opponent may choose whichever of the two he likes; we give him his
   choice. Does he abide in Christ, or not? If he abide, let him then walk
   as Christ walked. But if there is [4664] rashness in professing to copy
   the virtues of our Lord, he does not abide in Christ, for he does not
   walk as did Christ. [4665] "He did not sin, neither was guile found in
   his mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled not again, and as a lamb is
   dumb before its shearer, so opened he not his mouth." To Him came the
   prince of this world, and found nothing in Him: although He had done no
   sin, God made Him sin for us. But we, according to the Epistle of
   James, [4666] "all stumble in many things," and [4667] "no one is pure
   from sin, no not if his life be but a day long." [4668] For who will
   boast "that he has a clean heart? or who will be sure that he is pure
   from sin?" And we are held guilty after the similitude of Adam's
   transgression. Hence David says, [4669] "Behold, I was shapen in
   iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me." And the blessed Job,
   [4670] "Though I be righteous my mouth will speak wickedness, and
   though I be perfect, I shall be found perverse. If I wash myself with
   snow water and make my hands never so clean, yet wilt thou plunge me in
   the ditch and mine own clothes shall abhor me." But that we may not
   utterly despair and think that if we sin after baptism we cannot be
   saved, he immediately checks the tendency: [4671] "And if any man sin,
   we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
   is the propitiation for our sins. And not for ours only, but also for
   the whole world." He addresses this to baptized believers, and he
   promises them the Lord as an advocate for their offences. He does not
   say: If you fall into sin, you have an advocate with the Father,
   Christ, and He is the propitiation for your sins: you might then say
   that he was addressing those whose baptism had been destitute of the
   true faith: but what he says is this, "We have an advocate with the
   Father, Jesus Christ, and he is the propitiation for our sins." And not
   only for the sins of John and his contemporaries, but for those of the
   whole world. Now in "the whole world" are included apostles and all the
   faithful, and a clear proof is established that sin after baptism is
   possible. It is useless for us to have an advocate Jesus Christ, if sin
   be impossible.

   3. The apostle Peter, to whom it was said, [4672] "He that is bathed
   needeth not to wash again," and [4673] "Thou art Peter, and upon this
   rock I will build my Church," through fear of a maid-servant denied
   Him. Our Lord himself says, [4674] "Simon, Simon, behold Satan asked to
   have you, that he might sift you as wheat. But I made supplication for
   thee, that thy faith fail not." And in the same place, "Watch and pray,
   that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but
   the flesh is weak." If you reply that this was said before the Passion,
   we certainly say after the Passion, in the Lord's prayer, [4675]
   "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors; and lead us not
   into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one." If we do not sin
   after baptism, why do we ask that we may be forgiven our sins, which
   were already forgiven in baptism? Why do we pray that we may not enter
   into temptation, and that we may be delivered from the evil one, if the
   devil cannot tempt those who are baptized? The case is different if
   this prayer belongs to the Catechumens, and is not adapted to faithful
   Christians. Paul, the chosen vessel, [4676] chastised his body, and
   brought it into subjection, lest after preaching to others he himself
   should be found a reprobate, and [4677] he tells that there was given
   to him "a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet" him. And
   to the Corinthians he writes: [4678] "I fear, lest by any means, as the
   serpent beguiled Eve in his craftiness, your minds should be corrupted
   from the simplicity that is toward Christ." And elsewhere: [4679] "But
   to whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also: for what I also have
   forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, for your sakes have I forgiven
   it in the person of Christ: that no advantage may be gained over us by
   Satan: for we are not ignorant of his devices." And again: [4680]
   "There hath no temptation taken you, but such as man can bear; but God
   is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
   able; but will with the temptation make also the way of escape, that ye
   may be able to endure it." And, [4681] "Let him that thinketh he
   standeth, take heed lest he fall." And to the Galatians: [4682] "Ye
   were running well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the
   truth?" And elsewhere: [4683] "We would fain have come unto you, I Paul
   once and again; and Satan hindered us." And to the married he says:
   [4684] "Be together again, that Satan tempt you not because of your
   incontinency." And again: [4685] "But I say, walk by the Spirit and ye
   shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against
   the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary
   the one to the other: that ye may not do the things that ye would." We
   are a compound of the two, and must endure the strife of the two
   substances. And to the Ephesians: [4686] "Our wrestling is not against
   flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers,
   against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts
   of wickedness in the heavenly places." Does any one think that we are
   safe, and that it is right to fall asleep when once we have been
   baptized? And so, too, in the epistle to the Hebrews: [4687] "For as
   touching those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly
   gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good
   word of God, and the powers of the age to come, and then fell away, it
   is impossible to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify
   to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame."
   Surely we cannot deny that they have been baptized who have been
   illuminated, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have been made
   partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God. But
   if the baptized cannot sin, how is it now that the Apostle says, "And
   have fallen away"? [4688] Montanus and [4689] Novatus would smile at
   this, for they contend that it is impossible to renew again through
   repentance those who have crucified to themselves the Son of God, and
   put Him to an open shame. He therefore corrects this mistake by saying:
   [4690] "But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things
   that accompany salvation, though we thus speak; for God is not
   unrighteous to forget your work and the love which ye shewed towards
   his name, in that ye ministered unto the Saints, and still do
   minister." And truly the unrighteousness of God would be great, if He
   merely punished sin, and did not welcome good works. I have so spoken,
   says the Apostle, to withdraw you from your sins, and to make you more
   careful through fear of despair. But, beloved, I am persuaded better
   things of you, and things that accompany salvation. For it is not
   accordant with the righteousness of God to forget good works, and the
   fact that you have ministered and do minister to the Saints for His
   name's sake, and to remember sins only. The Apostle James also, knowing
   that the baptized can be tempted, and fall of their own free choice,
   says: [4691] "Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he
   hath been approved, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
   promised to them that love him." And that we may not think that we are
   tempted by God, as we read in Genesis Abraham was, he adds: "Let no man
   say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted
   with evil, and He Himself tempteth no man. But each man is tempted when
   he is drawn away by his own lust and enticed. Then the lust, when it
   hath conceived, beareth sin: and the sin, when it is full grown,
   bringeth forth death." God created us with free will, and we are not
   forced by necessity either to virtue or to vice. Otherwise, if there be
   necessity, there is no crown. As in good works it is God who brings
   them to perfection, for it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
   runneth, but of God that pitieth and gives us help that we may be able
   to reach the goal: so in things wicked and sinful, the seeds within us
   give the impulse, and these are brought to maturity by the devil. When
   he sees that we are building upon the foundation of Christ, hay, wood,
   stubble, then he applies the match. Let us then build gold, silver,
   costly stones, and he will not venture to tempt us: although even thus
   there is not sure and safe possession. For the lion lurks in ambush to
   slay the innocent. [4692] "Potters' vessels are proved by the furnace,
   and just men by the trial of tribulation." And in another place it is
   written: [4693] "My son, when thou comest to serve the Lord, prepare
   thyself for temptation." Again, the same James says: [4694] "Be ye
   doers of the word, and not hearers only. For if any one is a hearer of
   the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural
   face in a mirror: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth away, and
   straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was." It was useless to
   warn them to add works to faith, if they could not sin after baptism.
   He tells us that [4695] "whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
   stumble in one point, he is become guilty of all." Which of us is
   without sin? [4696] "God hath shut up all unto disobedience, that he
   might have mercy upon all." Peter also says: [4697] "The Lord knows how
   to deliver the godly out of temptation." And concerning false teachers:
   [4698] "These are springs without water, and mists driven by a storm;
   for whom the blackness of darkness hath been reserved. For, uttering
   proud words of vanity, they entice in the lusts of the flesh, by
   lasciviousness, those who had just escaped, and have turned back to
   error." Does not the Apostle in these words seem to you to have
   depicted the new party of ignorance? For, as it were, they open the
   fountains of knowledge and yet have no water: they promise a shower of
   doctrine like prophetic clouds which have been visited by the truth of
   God, and are driven by the storms of devils and vices. They speak great
   things, and their talk is nothing but pride: [4699] "But every one is
   unclean with God who is lifted up in his own heart." Like those who had
   just escaped from their sins, they return to their own error, and
   persuade men to luxury, and to the delights of eating and the
   gratification of the flesh. For who is not glad to hear them say: "Let
   us eat and drink, and reign for ever"? The wise and prudent they call
   corrupt, but pay more attention to the honey-tongued. John the apostle,
   or rather the Saviour in the person of John, writes thus to the angel
   of the Church of Ephesus: [4700] "I know thy works and thy toil and
   patience, and that thou didst bear for my name's sake, and hast not
   grown weary. But I have this against thee, that thou didst leave thy
   first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
   and do the first works; or else I will come to thee, and will move thy
   candlestick out of its place, except thou repent." Similarly He urges
   the other churches, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia,
   Laodicea, to repentance, and threatens them unless they return to the
   former works. And in Sardis He says He has a few who have not defiled
   their garments, and they shall walk with Him in white, for they are
   worthy. But they to whom He says: "Remember from whence thou art
   fallen"; and, "Behold the devil is about to cast some of you into
   prison, that ye may be tried"; and, "I know where thou dwellest, even
   where Satan's throne is"; and, "Remember how thou hast received, and
   didst hear, and keep it, and repent," and so on, were of course
   believers, and baptized, who once stood, but fell through sin.

   4. I delayed for a little while the production of proofs from the Old
   Testament, because, wherever the Old Testament is against them they are
   accustomed to cry out that [4701] the Law and the Prophets were until
   John. But who does not know that under the other dispensation of God
   all the saints of past times were of equal merit with Christians at the
   present day? As Abraham in days gone by pleased God in wedlock, so
   virgins now please him in perpetual virginity. He served the Law and
   his own times; let us now serve the Gospel and our times, [4702] upon
   whom the ends of the ages have come. David the chosen one, the man
   after God's own heart, who had performed all His pleasure, and who in a
   certain psalm had said, [4703] "Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in
   mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord and shall not slide.
   Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart," even he
   was afterwards tempted by the devil; and repenting of his sin said,
   [4704] "Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness."
   He would have a great sin blotted out by great loving-kindness.
   Solomon, beloved of the Lord, and to whom God had twice revealed
   Himself, because he loved women forsook the love of God. It is related
   in the [4705] Book of Days that Manasses the wicked king was restored
   after the Babylonish captivity to his former rank. And Josiah, a holy
   man, [4706] was slain by the king of Egypt on the plain of Megiddo.
   [4707] Joshua also, the son of Josedech and high-priest, although he
   was a type of our Saviour Who bore our sins, and united to Himself a
   church of alien birth from among the Gentiles, is nevertheless,
   according to the letter of Scripture, represented in filthy garments
   after he attained to the priesthood, and with the devil standing at his
   right hand; and white raiment is afterwards restored to him. It is
   needless to tell how Moses and Aaron [4708] offended God at the water
   of strife, and did not enter the land of promise. For the blessed Job
   relates that even the angels and every creature can sin. [4709] "Shall
   mortal man," he says, "be just before God? Shall a man be spotless in
   his works? If he putteth no trust in his servants, and chargeth his
   angels with folly, how much more them that dwell in houses of clay,"
   amongst whom are we, and made of the same clay too. [4710] "The life of
   man is a warfare upon earth." [4711] Lucifer fell who was sending to
   all nations, and he who was nurtured in a paradise of delight as one of
   the twelve precious stones, was wounded and went down to hell from the
   mount of God. Hence the Saviour says in the Gospel: [4712] "I beheld
   Satan falling as lightning from heaven." If he fell who stood on so
   sublime a height, who may not fall? If there are falls in heaven, how
   much more on earth! And yet though Lucifer be fallen (the old serpent
   after his fall), [4713] "his strength is in his loins, and his force is
   in the muscles of his belly. The great trees are overshadowed by him,
   and he sleepeth beside the reed, the rush, and the sedge." [4714] He is
   king over all things that are in the waters--that is to say in the seat
   of pleasure and luxury, of propagation of children, and of the
   fertilisation of the marriage bed. [4715] "For who can strip off his
   outer garment? Who can open the doors of his face? Nations fatten upon
   him, and the tribes of Phenicia divide him." And lest haply the reader
   in his secret thought might imagine that those tribes of Phenicia and
   peoples of Ethiopia only are meant by those to whom the dragon was
   given for food, we immediately find a reference to those who are
   crossing the sea of this world, and are hastening to reach the haven of
   salvation: [4716] "His head stands in the ships of the fishermen like
   an anvil that cannot be wearied: [4717] he counteth iron as straw, and
   brass as rotten wood. And all the gold of the sea under him is as mire.
   He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he values the sea like a pot of
   ointment, and the blackness of the deep as a captive. He beholdeth
   everything that is high." And my friend Jovinianus thinks he can gain
   an easy mastery over him. Why speak of holy men and angels, who, being
   creatures of God, are of course capable of sin? He dared to tempt the
   Son of God, and though smitten through and through with our Lord's
   first and second answer, nevertheless raised his head, and when thrice
   wounded, withdrew only for a time, and deferred rather than removed the
   temptation. And we flatter ourselves on the ground of our baptism,
   which though it put away the sins of the past, cannot keep us for the
   time to come, unless the baptized keep their hearts with all diligence.

   5. At length we have arrived at the question of food, and are
   confronted by our third difficulty. "All things were created to serve
   for the use of mortal men." And as man, a rational animal, in a sense
   the owner and tenant of the world, is subject to God, and worships his
   Creator, so all things living were created either for the food of men,
   or for clothing, or for tilling the earth, or conveying the fruits
   thereof, or to be the companions of man, and hence, because they are
   man's [4718] helpers, they have their name jumenta. [4719] What is
   man,' says David, that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man,
   that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him but little lower than
   the angels, and crownest him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to
   have dominion over the works of thine hands; thou hast put all things
   under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field:
   the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, whatsoever passeth
   through the paths of the seas.' Granted, he says, that the ox was
   created for ploughing, the horse for riding, the dog for watching,
   goats for their milk, sheep for their fleeces. What is the use of swine
   if we may not eat their flesh? of roes, stags, fallow-deer, boars,
   hares, and such like game? of geese, wild and tame? of wild ducks and
   [4720] fig-peckers? of woodcocks? of coots? of thrushes? Why do hens
   run about our houses? If they are not eaten, all these creatures were
   created by God for nothing. But what need is there of argument when
   Scripture clearly teaches that every moving creature, like herbs and
   vegetables, were given to us for food, and the Apostle cries aloud
   [4721] All things are clean to the clean, and nothing is to be
   rejected, if it be received with thanksgiving,' and [4722] tells us
   that men will come in the last days, forbidding to marry, and to eat
   meats, which God created for use? The Lord himself was called by the
   Pharisees a wine-bibber and a glutton, the friend of publicans and
   sinners, because he did not decline the invitation of Zacchæus to
   dinner, and went to the marriage-feast. But it is a different matter
   if, as you may foolishly contend, he went to the dinner intending to
   fast, and after the manner of deceivers said, I eat this, not that; I
   do not drink the wine which I created out of water. He did not make
   water, but wine, the type of his blood. After the resurrection he ate a
   fish and part of a honey-comb, not sesame nuts and service-berries. The
   apostle, Peter, did not wait like a Jew for the stars to peep, but went
   upon the house-top to dine at the sixth hour. Paul in the ship broke
   bread, not dried figs. When Timothy's stomach was out of order, he
   advised him to drink wine, not perry. In abstaining from meats they
   please their own fancy: as though superstitious Gentiles did not
   observe the [4723] rites of abstinence connected with the Mother of the
   Gods and with Isis."

   6. I will follow in detail the views now expounded, and before I come
   to Scripture and show by it that fasting is pleasing to God, and
   chastity accepted by him, I will meet philosophic argument with
   argument, and will prove that we are not followers of Empedocles and
   Pythagoras, who on account of their doctrine of the transmigration of
   souls think nothing which lives and moves should be eaten, and look
   upon him who fells a fir-tree or an oak as equally guilty with the
   parricide or the poisoner: but that we worship our Creator Who made all
   things for the use of man. And as the ox was created for ploughing, the
   horse for riding, dogs for watching, goats for milk, sheep for their
   wool: so it was with swine and stags, and roes and hares, and other
   animals: but the immediate purpose of their creation was not that they
   might serve for food, but for other uses of men. For if everything that
   moves and lives was made for food, and prepared for the stomach, let my
   opponents tell me why elephants, lions, leopards, and wolves were
   created; why vipers, scorpions, bugs, lice, and fleas; why the vulture,
   the eagle, the crow, the hawk; why whales, dolphins, seals, and small
   snails were created. Which of us ever eats the flesh of a lion, a
   viper, a vulture, a stork, a kite, or the worms that crawl upon our
   shores? As then these have their proper uses, so may we say that other
   beasts, fishes, birds, were created not for eating, but for medicine.
   In short, to how many uses the flesh of vipers, from which we make our
   antidotes against poison, may be applied, physicians know well. Ivory
   dust is an ingredient in many remedies. Hyena's gall restores
   brightness to the eyes, and its dung and that of dogs cures gangrenous
   wounds. And (it may seem strange to the reader) Galen asserts in his
   treatise on Simples, that human dung is of service in a multitude of
   cases. Naturalists say that snake-skin, boiled in oil, gives wonderful
   relief in ear-ache. What to the uninitiated seems so useless as a bug?
   Yet, suppose a leech to have fastened on the throat, as soon as the
   odour of a bug is inhaled the leech is vomited out, and difficulty in
   urinating is relieved by the same application. As for the fat of pigs,
   geese, fowls, and pheasants, how useful they are is told in all medical
   works, and if you read these books you will see there that the vulture
   has as many curative properties as it has limbs. Peacock's dung allays
   the inflammation of gout. Cranes, storks, eagle's gall, hawk's blood,
   the ostrich, frogs, chameleons, swallow's dung and flesh--in what
   diseases these are suitable remedies, I could tell if it were my
   purpose to discuss bodily ailments and their cure. If you think proper
   you may read Aristotle and [4724] Theophrastus in prose, or [4725]
   Marcellus of Side, and our [4726] Flavius, who discourse on these
   subjects in hexameter verse; the [4727] second Pliny also, and [4728]
   Dioscorides, and others, both naturalists and physicians, who assign to
   every herb, every stone, every animal whether reptile, bird, or fish,
   its own use in the art of which they treat. So then when you ask me why
   the pig was created, I immediately reply, as if two boys were
   disputing, by asking you why were vipers and scorpions? You must not
   judge that anything from the hand of God is superfluous, because there
   are many beasts and birds which your palate rejects. But this may
   perhaps look more like contentiousness and pugnacity than truth. Let me
   tell you therefore that pigs and wild-boars, and stags, and the rest of
   living creatures were created, that soldiers, athletes, sailors,
   rhetoricians, miners, and other slaves of hard toil, who need physical
   strength, might have food: and also those who carry arms and
   provisions, who wear themselves out with the work of hand or foot, who
   ply the oar, who need good lungs to shout and speak, who level
   mountains and sleep out rain or fair. But our religion does not train
   boxers, athletes, sailors, soldiers, or ditchers, but followers of
   wisdom, who devote themselves to the worship of God, and know why they
   were created and are in the world from which they are impatient to
   depart. Hence also the Apostle says: [4729] "When I am weak, then am I
   strong." And [4730] "Though our outward man is decaying, yet our inward
   man is renewed day by day." And [4731] "I have the desire to depart and
   be with Christ." And, [4732] "Make not provision for the flesh to
   fulfil the lusts thereof." Are all commanded [4733] not to have two
   coats, nor food in their scrip, money in their purse, a staff in the
   hand, shoes on the feet? or to sell all they possess and give to the
   poor, and follow Jesus? Of course not: but the command is for those who
   wish to be perfect. On the contrary John the Baptist lays down one rule
   for the soldiers, another for the publicans. But the Lord says in the
   Gospel to him who had boasted of having kept the whole law: [4734] "If
   thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all that thou hast, and give to the
   poor, and come, follow me." That He might not seem to lay a heavy
   burden on unwilling shoulders, He sent His hearer away with full power
   to please himself, saying "If thou wilt be perfect." And so I too say
   to you: If you wish to be perfect, it is good not to drink wine, and
   eat flesh. If you wish to be perfect, it is better to enrich the mind
   than to stuff the body. But if you are an infant and fond of the cooks
   and their preparations, no one will snatch the dainties out of your
   mouth. Eat and drink, and, if you like, with Israel rise up and play,
   and sing [4735] "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die." Let
   him eat and drink, who looks for death when he has feasted, and who
   says with Epicurus, "There is nothing after death, and death itself is
   nothing." We believe Paul when he says in tones of thunder: [4736]
   "Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats. But God will destroy
   both them and it."

   7. I have quoted these few passages of Scripture to show that we are at
   one with the philosophers. But who does not know that no universal law
   of nature regulates the food of all nations, and that each eats those
   things of which it has abundance? For instance, the Arabians and
   Saracens, and all the wild tribes of the desert live on camel's milk
   and flesh: for the camel, to suit the climate and barren soil of those
   regions, is easily bred and reared. They think it wicked to eat the
   flesh of swine. Why? Because pigs which fatten on acorns, chestnuts,
   roots of ferns, and barley, are seldom or never found among them: and
   if they were found, they would not afford the nourishment of which we
   spoke just now. The exact opposite is the case with the northern
   peoples. If you were to force them to eat the flesh of asses and
   camels, they would think it the same as though they were compelled to
   devour a wolf or a crow. In Pontus and Phrygia a pater-familias pays a
   good price for fat white worms with blackish heads, which breed in
   decayed wood. And as with us the woodcock and fig-pecker, the mullet
   and scar, are reputed delicacies, so with them it is a luxury to eat
   the [4737] xylophagus. Again, because throughout the glowing wastes of
   the desert clouds of locusts are found, it is customary with the
   peoples of the East and of Libya to feed on locusts. John the Baptist
   proves the truth of this. Compel a Phrygian or a native of Pontus to
   eat a locust, and he will think it scandalous. Force a Syrian, an
   African, or Arabian to swallow worms, he will have the same contempt
   for them as for flies, millepedes, and lizards, although the Syrians
   are accustomed to eat land-crocodiles, and the Africans even green
   lizards. In Egypt and Palestine, owing to the scarcity of cattle no one
   eats beef, or makes the flesh of bulls or oxen, or calves, a portion of
   their food. Moreover, in my province [4738] it is considered a crime to
   eat veal. Accordingly the Emperor Valens recently promulgated a law
   throughout the East, prohibiting the killing and eating of calves. He
   had in view the interests of agriculture, and wished to check the bad
   practice of the commoner sort of the people who imitated the Jews in
   devouring the flesh of calves, instead of fowls and sucking pigs. The
   Nomad tribes, and the [4739] Troglodytes, and Scythians, and the
   barbarous [4740] Huns with whom we have recently become acquainted, eat
   flesh half raw. Moreover the Icthyophagi, a wandering race on the
   shores of the Red Sea, broil fish on the stones made hot by the sun,
   and subsist on this poor food. The [4741] Sarmatians, the [4742]
   Chuadi, the [4743] Vandals, and countless other races, delight in the
   flesh of horses and wolves. Why should I speak of other nations when I
   myself, a youth on a visit to Gaul, heard that the Atticoti, a British
   tribe, eat human flesh, and that although they find herds of swine, and
   droves of large or small cattle in the woods, it is their custom to cut
   off the buttocks of the shepherds and the breasts of their women, and
   to regard them as the greatest delicacies? The Scots have no wives of
   their own; as though they read Plato's Republic and took Cato for their
   leader, no man among them has his own wife, but like beasts they
   indulge their lust to their hearts' content. The Persians, Medes,
   Indians, and Ethiopians, peoples on a par with Rome itself, have
   intercourse with mothers and grandmothers, with daughters and
   granddaughters. The [4744] Massagetæ and [4745] Derbices think those
   persons most unhappy who die of sickness--and when parents, kindred, or
   friends reach old age, they are murdered and devoured. It is thought
   better that they should be eaten by the people themselves than by the
   worms. The [4746] Tibareni crucify those whom they have loved before
   when they have grown old. The [4747] Hyrcani throw them out half alive
   to the birds and dogs: the Caspians leave them dead for the same
   beasts. The Scythians bury alive with the remains of the dead those who
   were beloved of the deceased. The Bactrians throw their old men to dogs
   which they rear for the very purpose, and when Stasanor, Alexander's
   general, wished to correct the practice, he almost lost his province.
   Force an Egyptian to drink sheep's milk: drive, if you can, a Pelusiote
   to eat an onion. Almost every city in Egypt venerates its own beasts
   and monsters, and whatever be the object of worship, that they think
   inviolable and sacred. Hence it is that their towns also are named
   after animals Leonto, Cyno, Lyco, Busyris, Thmuis, which is, being
   interpreted, a he-goat. And to make us understand what sort of gods
   Egypt always welcomed, one of their cities was recently called [4748]
   Antinous after Hadrian's favourite. You see clearly then that not only
   in eating, but also in burial, in wedlock, and in every department of
   life, each race follows its own practice and peculiar usages, and takes
   that for the law of nature which is most familiar to it. But suppose
   all nations alike ate flesh, and let that be everywhere lawful which
   the place produces. How does it concern us whose conversation is in
   heaven? who, as well as Pythagoras and Empedocles and all lovers of
   wisdom, are not bound to the circumstances of our birth, but of our new
   birth: who by abstinence subjugate our refractory flesh, eager to
   follow the allurements of lust? The eating of flesh, and drinking of
   wine, and fulness of stomach, is the seed-plot of lust. And so the
   comic poet says, [4749] "Venus shivers unless Ceres and Bacchus be with
   her."

   8. Through the five senses, as through open windows, vice has access to
   the soul. The metropolis and citadel of the mind cannot be taken unless
   the enemy have previously entered by its doors. The soul is distressed
   by the disorder they produce, and is led captive by sight, hearing,
   smell, taste, and touch. If any one delights in the sports of the
   circus, or the struggles of athletes, the versatility of actors, the
   figure of women, in splendid jewels, dress, silver and gold, and other
   things of the kind, the liberty of the soul is lost through the windows
   of the eyes, and the prophet's words are fulfilled: [4750] "Death is
   come up into our windows." Again, our sense of hearing is flattered by
   the tones of various instruments and the modulations of the voice; and
   whatever enters the ear by the songs of poets and comedians, by the
   pleasantries and verses of pantomimic actors, weakens the manly fibre
   of the mind. Then, again, no one but a profligate denies that the
   profligate and licentious find a delight in sweet odours, different
   sorts of incense, fragrant balsam, [4751] kuphi, [4752] oenanthe, and
   musk, which is nothing but the skin of a foreign rat. And who does not
   know that gluttony is the mother of avarice, and, as it were, fetters
   the heart and keeps it pressed down upon the earth? For the sake of a
   temporary gratification of the appetite, land and sea are ransacked,
   and we toil and sweat our lives through, that we may send down our
   throats honey-wine and costly food. The desire to handle other men's
   persons, and the burning lust for women, is a passion bordering on
   insanity. To gratify this sense we languish, grow angry, throw
   ourselves about with joy, indulge envy, engage in rivalry, are filled
   with anxiety, and when we have terminated the pleasure with more or
   less repentance, we once more take fire, and want to do that which we
   again regret doing. Where, then, that which we may call the thin edge
   of disturbance, has entered the citadel of the mind through these
   doors, what will become of its liberty, its endurance, its thought of
   God, particularly since the sense of touch can picture to itself even
   bygone pleasures, and through the recollection of vice forces the soul
   to take part in them, and after a manner to practice what it does not
   actually commit?

   9. At the call of reasoning such as this, many philosophers have
   forsaken the crowded cities, and their pleasure gardens in the suburbs
   with well-watered grounds, shady trees, twittering birds, crystal
   fountains, murmuring brooks, and many charms for eye and ear, lest
   through luxury and abundance of riches, the firmness of the mind should
   be enfeebled, and its purity debauched. For there is no good in
   frequently seeing objects which may one day lead to your captivity, or
   in making trial of things which you would find it hard to do without.
   Even the Pythagoreans shunned company of this kind and were wont to
   dwell in solitary places in the desert. The Platonists also and Stoics
   lived in the groves and porticos of temples, that, admonished by the
   sanctity of their restricted abode, they might think of nothing but
   virtue. Plato, moreover, himself, when [4753] Diogenes trampled on his
   couches with muddy feet (he being a rich man), chose a house called
   [4754] Academia at some distance from the city, in a spot not only
   lonely but unhealthy, so that he might have leisure for philosophy. His
   object was that by constant anxiety about sickness the assaults of lust
   might be defeated, and that his disciples might experience no pleasure
   but that afforded by the things they learned. We have read of some who
   took out their own eyes lest through sight they might lose the
   contemplation of philosophy. Hence it was that [4755] Crates the famous
   Theban, after throwing into the sea a considerable weight of gold,
   exclaimed, "Go to the bottom, ye evil lusts: I will drown you that you
   may not drown me." But if anyone thinks to enjoy keenly meat and drink
   in excess, and at the same time to devote himself to philosophy, that
   is to say, to live in luxury and yet not to be hampered by the vices
   attendant on luxury, he deceives himself. For if it be the case that
   even when far distant from them we are frequently caught in the snares
   of nature, and are compelled to desire those things of which we have a
   scant supply: what folly it is to think we are free when we are
   surrounded by the nets of pleasure! We think of what we see, hear,
   smell, taste, handle, and are led to desire the thing which affords us
   pleasure. That the mind sees and hears, and that we can neither hear
   nor see anything unless our senses are fixed upon the objects of sight
   and hearing, is an old saw. It is difficult, or rather impossible, when
   we are swimming in luxury and pleasure not to think of what we are
   doing: and it is an idle pretence which some men put forward [4756]
   that they can take their fill of pleasure with their faith and purity
   and mental uprightness unimpaired. It is a violation of nature to revel
   in pleasure, and the Apostle gives a caution against this very thing
   when he says, [4757] "She that giveth herself to pleasure is dead while
   she liveth."

   10. The bodily senses are like horses madly racing, but the soul like a
   charioteer holds the reins. And as horses without a driver go at
   break-neck speed, so the body if it be not governed by the reasonable
   soul rushes to its own destruction. The philosophers make use of
   another illustration of the relations between soul and body; [4758]
   they say the body is a boy, the soul his tutor. Hence the [4759]
   historian tells us "that our soul directs, our body serves. The one we
   have in common with the gods, the other with the beasts." So then
   unless the vices of youth and boyhood are regulated by the wisdom of
   the tutor, every effort and every impulse sets strongly in the
   direction of wantonness. We might lose four of the senses and yet
   live,--that is we could do without sight, hearing, smell, and the
   pleasures of touch. But a human being cannot subsist without tasting
   food. It follows that reason must be present, that we may take food of
   such a kind and in such quantities as will not burden the body, or
   hinder the free movement of the soul: for it is the way with us that we
   eat, and walk, and sleep, and digest our food, and afterwards in the
   fulness of blood have to bear the spur of lust. [4760] "Wine is a
   mocker, strong drink a brawler." Whosoever has much to do with these is
   not wise. And we should not take such food as is difficult of
   digestion, or such as when eaten will give us reason to complain that
   we got it and lost it with much effort. The preparation of vegetables,
   fruit, and pulse is easy, and does not require the skill of expensive
   cooks: our bodies are nourished by them with little trouble on our
   part; and, if taken in moderation, such food is easier to digest, and
   at less cost, because it does not stimulate the appetite, and therefore
   is not devoured with avidity. No one has his stomach inflated or
   overloaded if he eats only one or two dishes, and those inexpensive
   ones: such a condition comes of pampering the taste with a variety of
   meats. The smells of the kitchen may induce us to eat, but when hunger
   is satisfied, they make us their slaves. Hence gorging gives rise to
   disease: and many persons find relief for the discomfort of gluttony in
   emetics,--what they disgraced themselves by putting in, they with still
   greater disgrace put out.

   11. [4761] Hippocrates in his Aphorisms teaches that stout persons of a
   coarse habit of body, when once they have attained their full growth,
   unless the plethora be quickly relieved by blood-letting, develop
   tendencies to paralysis and the worst forms of disease: they must
   therefore be bled, that there may be room for fresh growth. For it is
   not the nature of our bodies to continue in one stay, but go on either
   to increase or decrease, and no animal can live which is incapable of
   growth. Whence [4762] Galen, a very learned man and the commentator on
   Hippocrates, says in his exhortation to the practice of medicine that
   athletes whose whole life and art consists in stuffing cannot live
   long, nor be healthy: and that their souls enveloped with superfluous
   blood and fat, and as it were covered with mud, have no refined or
   heavenly thoughts, but are always intent upon gluttonous and voracious
   feasting. Diogenes maintains that tyrants do not bring about
   revolutions in cities, and foment wars civil or foreign for the sake of
   a simple diet of vegetables and fruits, but for costly meats and the
   delicacies of the table. And, strange to say, Epicurus, the defender of
   pleasure, in all his books speaks of nothing but vegetables and fruits;
   and he says that we ought to live on cheap food because the preparation
   of sumptuous banquets of flesh involves great care and suffering, and
   greater pains attend the search for such delicacies than pleasures the
   consumption of them. Our bodies need only something to eat and drink.
   Where there is bread and water, and the like, nature is satisfied.
   Whatever more there may be does not go to meet the wants of life, but
   are ministers to vicious pleasure. Eating and drinking does not quench
   the longing for luxuries, but appeases hunger and thirst. Persons who
   feed on flesh want also gratifications not found in flesh. But they who
   adopt a simple diet do not look for flesh. Further, we cannot devote
   ourselves to wisdom if our thoughts are running on a well-laden table,
   the supply of which requires an excess of work and anxiety. The wants
   of nature are soon satisfied: cold and hunger can be banished with
   simple food and clothing. Hence the Apostle says: "Having food and
   clothing let us be therewith content." Delicacies and the various
   dishes of the feast are the nurses of avarice. The soul greatly exults
   when you are content with little: you have the world beneath your feet,
   and can exchange all its power, its feasts, and its lusts, the objects
   for which men rake money together, for common food, and make up for
   them all with a sack-cloth shirt. Take away the luxurious feasting and
   the gratification of lust, and no one will want riches to be used
   either in the belly, or beneath it. The invalid only regains his health
   by diminishing and carefully selecting his food, i.e., in medical
   phrase, by adopting a "slender diet." The same food that recovers
   health, can preserve it, for no one can imagine vegetables to be the
   cause of disease. And if vegetables do not give the strength of Milo of
   Crotona--a strength supplied and nourished by meat--what need has a
   wise man and a Christian philosopher of such strength as is required by
   athletes and soldiers, and which, if he had it, would only stimulate to
   vice? Let those persons deem meat accordant with health who wish to
   gratify their lust, and who, sunk in filthy pleasure, are always at
   heat. What a Christian wants is health, but not superfluous strength.
   And it ought not to disturb us if we find but few supporters; for the
   pure and temperate are as rare as good and faithful friends, and virtue
   is always scarce. Study the temperance of [4763] Fabricius, or the
   poverty of [4764] Curius, and in a great city you will find few worthy
   of your imitation. You need not fear that if you do not eat flesh,
   fowlers and hunters will have learnt their craft in vain.

   12. We have read that some who suffered with disease of the joints and
   with gouty humours recovered their health by proscribing delicacies,
   and coming down to a simple board and mean food. For they were then
   free from the worry of managing a house and from unlimited feasting.
   Horace [4765] makes fun of the longing for food which when eaten leaves
   nothing but regret.

   "Scorn pleasure; she but hurts when bought with pain."

   And when, in the delightful retirement of the country, by way of
   satirizing voluptuous men, he described himself as plump and fat, his
   sportive verse ran thus:

   "Pay me a visit if you want to laugh,

   You'll find me fat and sleek with well-dress'd hide,

   Like any pig from Epicurus' sty."

   But even if our food be the commonest, we must avoid repletion. For
   nothing is so destructive to the mind as a full belly, fermenting like
   a wine vat and giving forth its gases on all sides. What sort of
   fasting is it, or what refreshment is there after fasting, when we are
   blown out with yesterday's dinner, and our [4766] stomach is made a
   factory for the closet? We wish to get credit for protracted
   abstinence, and all the while we devour so much that a day and a night
   can scarcely digest it. The proper name to give it is not fasting, but
   rather debauch and rank indigestion.

   13. [4767] Dicæarchus in his book of Antiquities, describing Greece,
   relates that under Saturn, that is in the Golden Age, when the ground
   brought forth all things abundantly, no one ate flesh, but every one
   lived on field produce and fruits which the earth bore of itself.
   Xenophon in eight books narrates the life of Cyrus, King of the
   Persians, and asserts that they supported life on barley, cress, salt,
   and black bread. Both the aforesaid Xenophon, Theophrastus, and almost
   all the Greek writers testify to the frugal diet of the Spartans.
   [4768] Chæremon the Stoic, a man of great eloquence, has a treatise on
   the life of the ancient priests of Egypt, who, he says, laid aside all
   worldly business and cares, and were ever in the temple, studying
   nature and the regulating causes of the heavenly bodies; they never had
   intercourse with women; they never from the time they began to devote
   themselves to the divine service set eyes on their kindred and
   relations, nor even saw their children; they always abstained from
   flesh and wine, on account of the light-headedness and dizziness which
   a small quantity of food caused, and especially to avoid the
   stimulation of the lustful appetite engendered by this meat and drink.
   They seldom ate bread, that they might not load the stomach. And
   whenever they ate it, they mixed pounded hyssop with all that they
   took, so that the action of its warmth might diminish the weight of the
   heavier food. They used no oil except with vegetables, and then only in
   small quantities, to mitigate the unpalatable taste. What need, he
   says, to speak of birds, when they avoided even eggs and milk as flesh.
   The one, they said, was liquid flesh, the other was blood with the
   colour changed? Their bed was made of palm-leaves, called by them baiæ:
   a sloping footstool laid upon the ground served for a pillow, and they
   could go without food for two or three days. The humours of the body
   which arise from sedentary habits were dried up by reducing their diet
   to an extreme point.

   14. [4769] Josephus in the second book of the history of the Jewish
   captivity, and in the eighteenth book of the Antiquities, and the two
   treatises against Apion, describes three sects of the Jews, the
   Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenes. On the last of these he bestows
   wondrous praise because they practised perpetual abstinence from wives,
   wine, and flesh, and made a second nature of their daily fast. [4770]
   Philo, too, a man of great learning, published a treatise of his own on
   their mode of life. [4771] Neanthes of Cizycus, and [4772] Asclepiades
   of Cyprus, at the time when Pygmalion ruled over the East, relate that
   the eating of flesh was unknown. Eubulus, also, who wrote the history
   of [4773] Mithras in many volumes, relates that among the Persians
   there are three kinds of Magi, the first of whom, those of greatest
   learning and eloquence, take no food except meal and vegetables. At
   Eleusis it is customary to abstain from fowls and fish and certain
   fruits. [4774] Bardesanes, a Babylonian, divides the Gymnosophists of
   India into two classes, the one called Brahmans, the other Samaneans,
   who are so rigidly self-restrained that they support themselves either
   with the fruit of trees which grow on the banks of the Ganges, or with
   common food of rice or flour, and when the king visits them, he is wont
   to adore them, and thinks the peace of his country depends upon their
   prayers. Euripides relates that the prophets of Jupiter in Crete
   abstained not only from flesh, but also from cooked food. [4775]
   Xenocrates the philosopher writes that at Athens out of all the laws of
   [4776] Triptolemus only three precepts remain in the temple of Ceres:
   respect to parents, reverence for the gods, and abstinence from flesh.
   [4777] Orpheus in his song utterly denounces the eating of flesh. I
   might speak of the frugality of Pythagoras, Socrates, and [4778]
   Antisthenes to our confusion: but it would be tedious, and would
   require a work to itself. At all events this is the Antisthenes who,
   after teaching rhetoric with renown, on hearing Socrates, is related to
   have said to his disciples, "Go, and seek a master, for I have now
   found one." He immediately, sold what he had, divided the proceeds
   among the people, and kept nothing for himself but a small cloak. Of
   his poverty and toil Xenophon in the Symposium is a witness, and so are
   his countless treatises, some philosophical, some rhetorical. His most
   famous follower was the great Diogenes, who was mightier than King
   Alexander in that he conquered human nature. For Antisthenes would not
   take a single pupil, and when he could not get rid of the persistent
   Diogenes he threatened him with a stick if he did not depart. The
   latter is said to have laid down his head and said, "No stick will be
   hard enough to prevent me from following you." [4779] Satyrus, the
   biographer of illustrious men, relates that Diogenes to guard himself
   against the cold, folded his cloak double: his scrip was his pantry:
   and when aged he carried a stick to support his feeble frame, and was
   commonly called "Old Hand-to-mouth," because to that very hour he
   begged and received food from any one. His home was the gateways and
   city arcades. And when he wriggled into his tub, he would joke about
   his movable house that adapted itself to the seasons. For when the
   weather was cold he used to turn the mouth of the tub towards the
   south: in summer towards the north; and whatever the direction of the
   sun might be, that way the palace of Diogenes was turned. He had a
   wooden dish for drinking; but on one occasion seeing a boy drinking
   with the hollow of his hand he is related to have dashed the cup to the
   ground, saying that he did not know nature provided a cup. His virtue
   and self-restraint were proved even by his death. It is said that, now
   an old man, he was on his way to the Olympic games, which used to be
   attended by a great concourse of people from all parts of Greece, when
   he was overtaken by fever and lay down upon the bank by the road-side.
   And when his friends wished to place him on a beast or in a conveyance,
   he did not assent, but crossing to the shade of a tree said, "Go your
   way, I pray you, and see the games: this night will prove me either
   conquered or conqueror. If I conquer the fever, I shall go to the
   games: if the fever conquers me, I shall enter the unseen world." There
   through the night he lay gasping for breath and did not, as we are
   told, so much die as banish the fever by death. I have cited the
   example of only one philosopher, so that our fine, erect, muscular
   athletes, who hardly make a shadow of a footmark in their swift
   passage, whose words are in their fists and their reasoning in their
   heels, who either know nothing of apostolic poverty and the hardness of
   the cross, or despise it, may at least imitate Gentile moderation.

   15. So far I have dealt with the arguments and examples of
   philosophers. Now I will pass on to the beginning of the human race,
   that is, to the sphere which belongs to us. I will first point out that
   Adam received a command in paradise to abstain from one tree though he
   might eat the other fruit. The blessedness of paradise could not be
   consecrated without abstinence from food. So long as he fasted, he
   remained in paradise; he ate, and was cast out; he was no sooner cast
   out than he married a wife. While he fasted in paradise he continued a
   virgin: when he filled himself with food in the earth, he bound himself
   with the tie of marriage. And yet though cast out he did not
   immediately receive permission to eat flesh; but only the fruits of
   trees and the produce of the crops, and herbs and vegetables were given
   him for food, that even when an exile from paradise he might feed not
   upon flesh which was not to be found in paradise, but upon grain and
   fruit like that of paradise. But afterwards when [4780] God saw that
   the heart of man from his youth was set on wickedness continually, and
   that His Spirit could not remain in them because they were flesh, He by
   the deluge passed sentence on the works of the flesh, and, taking note
   of the extreme greediness of men, [4781] gave them liberty to eat
   flesh: so that while understanding that all things were lawful for
   them, they might not greatly desire that which was allowed, lest they
   should turn a commandment into a cause of transgression. And yet even
   then, fasting was in part commanded. For, seeing that some animals are
   called clean, some unclean, and the unclean animals were taken into
   Noah's ark by pairs, the clean in uneven numbers (and of course the
   eating of the unclean was forbidden, otherwise the term unclean would
   be unmeaning), fasting was in part consecrated: restraint in the use of
   all was taught by the prohibition of some. Why did Esau lose his
   birthright? Was it not on account of food? and he could not atone with
   tears for the impatience of his appetite. The people of Israel cast out
   from Egypt and on their way to the land of promise, the land flowing
   with milk and honey, longed for the flesh of Egypt, and the melons and
   garlic, saying: [4782] "Would that we had died by the hand of the Lord
   in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots." And again, [4783]
   "Who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the fish which we did eat
   in Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and
   the onions, and the garlic: but now our soul is dried away: we have
   nought save this manna to look to."

   They despised angels' food, and sighed for the flesh of Egypt. Moses
   for forty days and forty nights fasted on Mount Sinai, and showed even
   then that man does not live on bread alone, but on every word of God.
   He says to the Lord, "the people is full and maketh idols." Moses with
   empty stomach received the law written with the finger of God. The
   people that ate and drank and rose up to play fashioned a golden calf,
   and preferred an Egyptian ox to the majesty of the Lord. The toil of so
   many days perished through the fulness of a single hour. Moses boldly
   broke the tables: for he knew that drunkards cannot hear the word of
   God. [4784] "The beloved grew thick, waxed fat, and became sleek: he
   kicked and forsook the Lord which made him, and departed from the God
   of his salvation." Hence also it is enjoined in the same Book of
   Deuteronomy: [4785] "Beware, lest when thou hast eaten and drunk, and
   hast built goodly houses, and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply,
   and thy silver and gold is multiplied, then thine heart be lifted up,
   and thou forget the Lord thy God." In short the people ate and their
   heart grew thick, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with
   their ears, and understand with their heart: so the people well fed and
   fat-fleshed could not bear the countenance of Moses who fasted, for, to
   correctly render the Hebrew, it was [4786] furnished with horns through
   his converse with God. And it was not, as some think, to show that
   there is no difference between virginity and marriage, but to assert
   his sympathy with severe fasting, that our Lord and Saviour when he was
   transfigured on the Mount revealed Moses and Elias with Himself in
   glory. Although Moses and Elias were properly types of the Law and the
   Prophets, as is clearly witnessed by the Gospel: [4787] "They spake of
   his departure which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem." For the
   passion of our Lord is declared not by virginity or marriage, but by
   the Law and the Prophets. If, however, any persons contentiously
   maintain that by Moses is signified marriage, by Elias virginity, let
   me tell them briefly that Moses died and was buried, but Elias was
   carried off in a chariot of fire and entered on immortality before he
   approached death. But the second writing of the tables could not be
   effected without fasting. What was lost by drunkenness was regained by
   abstinence, a proof that by fasting we can return to paradise, whence,
   though fulness, we have been expelled. In [4788] Exodus we read that
   the battle was fought against Amalek while Moses prayed, and the whole
   people fasted until the evening. [4789] Joshua, the son of Nun, bade
   sun and moon stand still, and the victorious army prolonged its fast
   for more than a day. [4790] Saul, as it is written in the first book of
   Kings, pronounced a curse on him who ate bread before the evening, and
   until he had avenged himself upon his enemies. So none of his people
   tasted any food. And all they of the land took food. And so binding was
   a solemn fast once it was proclaimed to the Lord, that Jonathan, to
   whom the victory was due, was taken by lot, and [4791] could not escape
   the charge of sinning in ignorance, and his father's hand was raised
   against him, and the prayers of the people scarce availed to save him.
   [4792] Elijah after the preparation of a forty days fast saw God on
   Mount Horeb, and heard from Him the words, "What doest thou here,
   Elijah?" There is much more familiarity in this than in the "Where art
   thou, Adam?" of Genesis. The latter was intended to excite the fears of
   one who had fed and was lost; the former was affectionately addressed
   to a fasting servant. [4793] When the people were assembled in Mizpeh,
   Samuel proclaimed a fast, and so strengthened them, and thus made them
   prevail against the enemy. [4794] The attack of the Assyrians was
   repulsed, and the might of Sennacherib utterly crushed, by the tears
   and sackcloth of King Hezekiah, and by his humbling himself with
   fasting. So also the city of Nineveh by fasting excited compassion and
   turned aside the threatening wrath of the Lord. And [4795] Sodom and
   Gomorrha might have appeased it, had they been willing to repent, and
   through the aid of fasting gain for themselves tears of repentance.
   [4796] Ahab, the most impious of kings, by fasting and wearing
   sackcloth, succeeded in escaping the sentence of God, and in deferring
   the overthrow of his house to the days of his posterity. [4797] Hannah,
   the wife of Elkanah, by fasting won the gift of a son. [4798] At
   Babylon the magicians came into peril, every interpreter of dreams,
   soothsayer, and diviner was slain. Daniel and the three youths gained a
   good report by fasting, and although they were fed on pulse, they were
   fairer and wiser than they who ate the flesh from the king's table.
   Then it is written that Daniel fasted for three weeks; he ate no
   pleasant bread; flesh and wine entered not his mouth; he was not
   anointed with oil; and the angel came to him saying, [4799] "Daniel,
   thou art worthy of compassion." He who in the eyes of God was worthy of
   compassion, afterwards was an object of terror to the lions in their
   den. How fair a thing is that which propitiates God, tames lions,
   terrifies demons! Habakkuk (although we do not find this in the Hebrew
   Scriptures [4800] ) was sent to him with the reaper's meal, for by a
   week's abstinence he had merited so distinguished a server. David, when
   his son was in danger after his adultery, made confession in ashes and
   with fasting. [4801] He tells us that he ate ashes like bread, and
   mingled his drink with weeping. [4802] And that his knees became weak
   through fasting. Yet he had certainly heard from Nathan the words,
   [4803] "The Lord also hath put away thy sin." Samson and Samuel drank
   neither wine nor strong drink, for they were children of promise, and
   conceived in abstinence and fasting. [4804] Aaron and the other priests
   when about to enter the temple, refrained from all intoxicating drink
   for fear they should die. Whence we learn that they die who minister in
   the Church without sobriety. And hence it is a reproach against Israel:
   [4805] "Ye gave my Nazarites wine to drink." Jonadab, the son of
   Rechab, commanded his sons to drink no wine for ever. And when Jeremiah
   offered them wine to drink, and they of their own accord refused it,
   the Lord spake by the prophet, saying: [4806] "Because ye have obeyed
   the commandment of Jonadab your father, Jonadab the son of Rechab shall
   not want a man to stand before me for ever." On the [4807] threshold of
   the Gospel appears Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, the wife of one
   husband, and a woman who was always fasting. Long-continued chastity
   and persistent fasting welcomed a Virgin Lord. His forerunner and
   herald, John, fed on locusts and wild honey, not on flesh; and the
   hermits of the desert and the monks in their cells, at first used the
   same sustenance. But the Lord Himself consecrated His baptism by a
   forty days' fast, and He taught us that the more violent devils [4808]
   cannot be overcome, except by prayer and fasting. [4809] Cornelius the
   centurion was found worthy through alms-giving and frequent fasts to
   receive the gift of the Holy Spirit before baptism. [4810] The Apostle
   Paul, after speaking of hunger and thirst, and his other labours,
   perils from robbers, shipwrecks, loneliness, enumerates frequent fasts.
   And he [4811] advises his disciple Timothy, who had a weak stomach, and
   was subject to many infirmities, to drink wine in moderation: "Drink no
   longer water," he says. The fact that he bids him no longer drink water
   shows that he had previously drunk water. The apostle would not have
   allowed this had not frequent infirmities and bodily pain demanded the
   concession.

   16. The Apostle does indeed [4812] blame those who forbade marriage,
   and commanded to abstain from food, which God created for use with
   thanksgiving. But he has in view Marcion, and Tatian, and other
   heretics, who inculcate perpetual abstinence, to destroy, and express
   their hatred and contempt for, the works of the Creator. But we praise
   every creature of God, and yet prefer leanness to corpulence,
   abstinence to luxury, fasting to fulness. [4813] "He that laboureth
   laboureth for himself, and he is eager to his own destruction." And,
   [4814] "From the days of John the Baptist (who fasted and was a virgin)
   until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and men of violence
   take it by force." For we are afraid lest at the coming of the eternal
   judge we be caught, as in the days of the flood, and at the overthrow
   of Sodom and Gomorrha, eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in
   marriage. For both the flood and the fire from heaven found fulness as
   well as marriage ready for destruction. Nor need we wonder if the
   Apostle commands that everything sold in the market be bought and
   eaten, since with idolaters, and with those who still ate in the
   temples of the idols meats offered to idols as such, it passed for the
   highest abstinence to abstain only from food eaten by the Gentiles. And
   if he says to the Romans: [4815] "Let not him that eateth set at nought
   him that eateth not: and let not him that eateth not judge him that
   eateth," he does not make fasting and fulness of equal merit, but he is
   speaking against those believers in Christ who were still judaizing:
   and he warns Gentile believers, not to offend those by their food who
   were still too weak in faith. In brief this is clear enough in the
   sequel: [4816] "I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing
   is unclean of itself: save that to him who accounteth anything to be
   unclean, to him it is unclean. For if because of meat thy brother is
   grieved, thou walkest no longer in love. Destroy not with thy meat him
   for whom Christ died. Let not then your good be evil spoken of: for the
   Kingdom of God is not eating and drinking." And that no one may suppose
   he is referring to fasting and not to Jewish superstition, he
   immediately explains, [4817] "One man hath faith to eat all things: but
   he that is weak eateth herbs." And again, [4818] "One man esteemeth one
   day above another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let each man be
   fully assured in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
   unto the Lord: and he that eateth, eateth unto the Lord, for he giveth
   God thanks; and he that eateth not, unto the Lord he eateth not, and
   giveth God thanks." For they who were still weak in faith and thought
   some meats clean, some unclean: and supposed there was a difference
   between one day and another, for example, that the Sabbath, and the New
   Moons, and the Feast of Tabernacles were holier than other days, were
   commanded to eat herbs which are indifferently partaken of by all. But
   such as were of stronger faith believed all meats and all days to be
   alike.

   17. My opponent has dared to maintain that our Lord was called by the
   Pharisees a wine-bibber and a glutton: and from the fact of His going
   to marriage feasts and from His not despising the banquets of sinners,
   I am to infer His wishes respecting ourselves. That Lord, so you
   suppose, is a glutton who fasted forty days to hallow Christian
   fasting; [4819] who calls them blessed that hunger and thirst; [4820]
   who says that He has food, not that which the disciples surmised, but
   such as would not perish for ever; [4821] who forbids us to think of
   the morrow; who, though He is said to have hungered and thirsted, and
   to have gone frequently to various meals, except in celebrating the
   mystery whereby He represented His passion, or [4822] in proving the
   reality of His body is nowhere described as ministering to His
   appetite; [4823] who tells of purple-clad Dives in hell for his
   feasting, and says that poor Lazarus for his abstinence was in
   Abraham's bosom; who, when we fast, [4824] bids us anoint our head and
   wash our face, that we fast not to gain glory from men, but praise from
   the Lord; who did indeed [4825] after His resurrection eat part of a
   broiled fish and of a honey-comb, not to allay hunger and to gratify
   His palate, but to show the reality of His own body. For whenever He
   raised anyone from the dead He [4826] ordered that food should be given
   him to eat, lest the resurrection should be thought a delusion. And
   this is why Lazarus after his resurrection is [4827] described as being
   at the feast with our Lord. We do not deny that fish and other kinds of
   flesh, if we choose, may be taken as food; but as we prefer virginity
   to marriage, so do we esteem fasting and spirituality above meats and
   full-bloodedness. And if Peter [4828] before dinner went to the supper
   chamber at the sixth hour, a chance fit of hunger does not prejudice
   fasting. For, if this were so, because our Lord [4829] at the sixth
   hour sat weary on the well of Samaria and wished to drink, all must of
   necessity, whether they so desire or not, drink at that time. Possibly
   it was the Sabbath, or the Lord's day, and he hungered at the sixth
   hour after two or three days' fasting; for I could never believe that
   the Apostle, if he had eaten a dinner only one day previous and had
   been blown out with a great meal, would have been hungry by noon next
   day. But if he did dine the day previous, and was hungry next day
   before luncheon, I do not think that a man who was so soon hungry ate
   until he was satisfied. Again, God by the mouth of Isaiah says what
   fast He did not choose: [4830] "In the day of your fast ye find
   pleasure, and afflict the lowly: ye fast for strife and debate, and to
   smite with the fist of wickedness. It is not such a fast that I have
   chosen, saith the Lord." What kind He has chosen He thus teaches: "Deal
   thy bread to the hungry, and bring the houseless poor into thy house.
   When thou seest the naked cover him, and hide not thyself from thine
   own flesh." He did not therefore reject fasting, but showed what He
   would have it to be: for that bodily hunger is not pleasing to God
   which is made null and void by strife, and plunder, and lust. If God
   does not desire fasting, how is it that in [4831] Leviticus He commands
   the whole people in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month,
   to fast until the evening, and threatens that he who does not afflict
   his soul shall die and be cut off from his people? How is it that the
   [4832] graves of lust where the people fell in their devotion to flesh
   remain even to this day in the wilderness? Do we not read that the
   stupid people gorged themselves with quails until the wrath of God came
   upon them? Why was the man of God at whose prophecy the hand of King
   Jeroboam withered, and who ate contrary to the command of God, [4833]
   immediately smitten? Strange that the lion which left the ass safe and
   sound should not spare the prophet just risen from his meal! He who,
   while he was fasting, had wrought miracles, no sooner ate a meal than
   he paid the penalty for the gratification. Joel also cries aloud:
   [4834] "Sanctify a fast, proclaim a time of healing," that it might
   appear that a fast is sanctified by other works, and that a holy fast
   avails for the cure of sin. Moreover, just as true virginity is not
   prejudiced by the counterfeit professions of the virgins of the devil,
   so neither is true fasting by the periodic fast and perpetual
   abstinence from certain kinds of food on the part of the worshippers of
   Isis and Cybele, particularly when a fast from bread is made up for by
   feasting on flesh. And just as the signs of Moses were imitated by the
   signs of the Egyptians which were in reality no signs at all, for the
   rod of Moses swallowed up the rods of the magicians: so when the devil
   tries to be the rival of God this does not prove that our religion is
   superstitious, but that we are negligent, since we refuse to do what
   even men of the world see clearly to be good.

   18. His fourth and last contention is that there are two classes, the
   sheep and the goats, the just and the unjust: that the just stand on
   the right hand, the other on the left: and that to the just the words
   are spoken: [4835] "Come, ye blessed of my Father, and inherit the
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." But that
   sinners are thus addressed: [4836] "Depart from me, ye cursed, into the
   eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels." That a
   good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit.
   Hence it is that the Saviour says to the Jews: [4837] "Ye are of your
   father the devil, and the lusts of your father it is your will to do."
   He quotes the parable of the ten virgins, the wise and the foolish, and
   shows that the five who had no oil remained outside, but that the other
   five who had gotten for themselves the light of good works went into
   the marriage with the bridegroom. He goes back to the flood, and tells
   us that they who were righteous like Noah were saved, but that the
   sinners perished all together. We are informed that among the men of
   Sodom and Gomorrha no difference is made except between the two classes
   of the good and the bad. The righteous are delivered, the sinners are
   consumed by the same fire. There is one salvation for those who are
   released, one destruction for those who stay behind. Lot's wife is a
   clear warning that we must not deviate a hair's breadth from right. If,
   however, he says, you object and ask me why the righteous toils in time
   of peace, or in the midst of persecution, if he is to gain nothing nor
   have a greater reward, I would assert that he does this, not that he
   may gain a further reward but that he may not lose what he has already
   received. In Egypt also the ten plagues fell with equal violence upon
   all that sinned, and the same darkness hung over master and slave,
   noble and ignoble, the king and the people. Again at the Red Sea the
   righteous all passed over, the sinners were all overwhelmed. Six
   hundred thousand men, besides those who were unfit for war through age
   or sex, all alike fell in the desert, and two who were alike in
   righteousness are alike delivered. For forty years all Israel toiled
   and died alike. As regards food, an homer of manna was the measure for
   all ages: the clothes of all alike did not wear out: the hair of all
   alike did not grow, nor the beard increase: the shoes of all lasted the
   same time. Their feet grew not hard: the food in the mouths of all had
   the same taste. They went on their way to one resting place with equal
   toil and equal reward. All Hebrews had the same Passover, the same
   Feast of Tabernacles, the same Sabbath, the same New Moons. In the
   seventh, the Sabbatical Year, all prisoners were released without
   distinction of persons, and in the year of Jubilee all debts were
   forgiven to all debtors, and he who had sold land returned to the
   inheritance of his fathers.

   19. Then, again, as regards the parable of the sower in the Gospel, we
   read that the good ground brought forth fruit, some a hundred fold,
   some sixty fold, and some thirty fold; and, on the other hand, that the
   bad ground admitted of three degrees of sterility: but Jovinianus makes
   only two classes, the good soil and the bad. [4838] And as in one
   Gospel our Lord promises the Apostles a hundred fold, in another seven
   fold, for leaving children and wives, and in the world to come life
   eternal; and the seven and the hundred mean the same thing: so, too, in
   the passage before us, the numbers describing the fertility of the soil
   need not create any difficulty, particularly when the Evangelist Mark
   gives the inverse order, thirty, sixty, and a hundred. The Lord says,
   [4839] "He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me,
   and I in him." As, then, there are not varying degrees of Christ's
   presence in us, so neither are there degrees of our abiding in Christ.
   [4840] "Every one that loveth me will keep my word: and my Father will
   love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him." He
   that is righteous, loves Christ: and if a man thus loves, the Father
   and the Son come to him, and make their abode with him. Now I suppose
   that when the guest is such as this the host cannot possibly lack
   anything. And if our Lord says, [4841] "In my Father's house are many
   mansions," His meaning is not that there are different mansions in the
   kingdom of heaven, but He indicates the number of Churches in the whole
   world, for though the Church be seven-fold she is but one. "I go," He
   says, "to prepare a place for you," not places. If this promise is
   peculiar to the twelve apostles, then Paul is shut out from that place,
   and the chosen vessel will be thought superfluous and unworthy. John
   and James, because they asked more than the others, did not obtain it;
   and yet their dignity is not diminished, because they were equal to the
   rest of the apostles. [4842] "Know ye not that your bodies are a temple
   of the Holy Ghost?" A temple, He says, not temples, in order to show
   that God dwells in all alike. [4843] "Neither for these only do I pray,
   but for them also that believe on me through their word; as thou,
   Father, in me, and I in thee, are one, so they may be all one in us.
   And the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them. I have
   loved them, as thou hast loved me. And as we are Father, Son, and Holy
   Ghost, one God, so may they be one people in themselves, that is, like
   dear children, partakers of the divine nature." Call the Church what
   you will, bride, sister, mother, her assembly is but one and never
   lacks husband, brother, or son. Her faith is one, and she is not
   defiled by variety of doctrine, nor divided by heresies. She continues
   a virgin. Whithersoever the Lamb goeth, she follows Him: she alone
   knows the Song of Christ.

   20. "If you tell me," says he, "that one star differeth from another
   star in glory, I reply, that one star does differ from another star;
   that is, spiritual persons differ from carnal. We love all the members
   alike, and do not prefer the eye to the finger, nor the finger to the
   ear: but the loss of any one is attended by the sorrow of all the rest.
   We all alike come into this world, and we all alike depart from it.
   There is one Adam of the earth, and another from heaven. The earthly
   Adam is on the left hand, and will perish: the heavenly Adam is on the
   right hand, and will be saved. He who says to his brother, thou fool,'
   and raca,' will be in danger of Gehenna. And the murderer and the
   adulterer will likewise be sent into Gehenna. In times of persecution
   some are burnt, some strangled, some beheaded, some flee, or die within
   the walls of a prison: the struggle varies in kind, but the victors'
   crown is one. No difference was made between the son who had never left
   his father, and his brother who was welcomed as a returning penitent.
   To the labourers of the first hour, the third, the sixth, the ninth,
   and the eleventh, the same reward of a penny was given, and what may
   perhaps seem still more strange to you, the first to receive the reward
   were they who had toiled least in the vineyard."

   21. Who is there even of God's elect that would not be disturbed at
   these and similar passages of Holy Scripture which our crafty opponent,
   with a perverse ingenuity, twists to the support of his own views? The
   Apostle John says that many Antichrists had come, and to make no
   difference between John himself and the lowest penitent is the
   preaching of a real Antichrist. At the same time, I am amazed at the
   portentous forms which Jovinianus, as slippery as a snake and like
   another Proteus, so rapidly assumes. In sexual intercourse and full
   feeding he is an Epicurean; in the distribution of rewards and
   punishments he all at once becomes a Stoic, He exchanges Jerusalem for
   [4844] Citium, Judæa for Cyprus, Christ for Zeno. If we may not depart
   a hair's breadth from virtue, and all sins are equal, and a man who in
   a fit of hunger steals a piece of bread is no less guilty than he who
   slays a man: you must, in your turn, be held guilty of the greatest
   crimes. The case is different if you say that you have no sin, not even
   the least, and if, although all apostles and prophets and all the
   saints (as I have maintained in dealing with [4845] his second
   proposition) bewail their sinfulness, you alone boast of your
   righteousness. But a minute ago you were barefooted: now you not only
   wear shoes, but decorated ones. Just now you wore a rough coat and a
   dirty shirt, you were grimy, and haggard, and your hand was horny with
   toil: now you are clad in linen and silks, and strut like an exquisite
   in the fashions of the Atrebates and the Laodiceans. Your cheeks are
   ruddy, your skin sleek, your hair smoothed down in front and behind,
   your belly protrudes, your shoulders are little mountains, your neck
   full and so loaded with fat that the half-smothered words can scarce
   make their escape. Surely in such extremes of dress and mode of life
   there must be sin on the one side or the other. I will not assert that
   the sin lies in the food or clothing, but that such fickleness and
   changing for the worse is almost censurable in itself. And what we
   censure, is far removed from virtue; and what is far from virtue
   becomes the property of vice; and what is proved to be vicious is one
   with sin. Now sin, according to you, is placed on the left hand, and
   corresponds to the goats. You must, therefore, return to your old
   habits if you are to be a sheep on the right hand; or, if you
   perversely repent of your former views and change them for others,
   whether you like it or not, and although you shave off your beard, you
   will be reckoned among the goats.

   22. But what is the good of calling a [4846] one-eyed man Old One-eye,
   and of showing the inconsistency of an assailant, when we have to
   refute a whole series of statements? That the sheep and the goats on
   the right hand and on the left are the two classes of the righteous and
   the wicked, I do not deny. That a good tree does not bring forth evil
   fruit, nor an evil one good fruit, no one doubts. The ten virgins also,
   wise and foolish, we divide into good and bad. We are not ignorant that
   at the deluge the righteous were delivered, and sinners overwhelmed
   with the waters. That at Sodom and Gomorrha the just man was rescued,
   while the sinners were consumed by fire, is clear to everyone. We are
   also aware that Egypt was stricken with the ten plagues, and that
   Israel was saved. Even little children in our schools sing how the
   righteous passed through the Red Sea, and Pharaoh with his host was
   drowned. That six hundred thousand fell in the desert because they were
   unbelieving, and that two only entered the land of promise, is taught
   by Scripture; and so is the rest of your description of the two
   classes, good and bad, down to the labourers in the vineyard. But what
   are we to think of your assertion, that because there is a division
   into good and bad, the good, or the bad it may be, are not
   distinguished one from another, and that it makes no difference whether
   one is a ram in the flock or a poor little sheep? whether the sheep
   have the first or the second fleece? whether the flock is diseased and
   covered with the scab, or full of life and vigour? [4847] especially
   when by the authoritative utterances of His own prophet Ezekiel God
   clearly points out the difference between flock and flock of His
   rational sheep, saying, "Behold I judge between cattle and cattle, and
   between the rams and the he-goats, and between the fat cattle and the
   lean. Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
   all the diseased with your horns, until they were scattered abroad."
   And that we might know what the cattle were, He immediately added:
   [4848] "Ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men." Will Paul and
   that penitent who had lain with his father's wife be on an equality,
   because the latter repented and was received into the Church: and shall
   the offender because he is with him on the right hand shine with the
   same glory as the Apostle? How is it then that tares and wheat grow
   side by side in the same field until the harvest, that is the end of
   the world? What is the significance of good and bad fish being
   contained in the Gospel net? Why, in Noah's ark, the type of the
   Church, are there different animals with different abodes according to
   their rank? Why standeth the queen upon the Lord's right hand, in
   raiment of wrought gold, in a vesture of gold? Why had Joseph,
   representing Christ, a coat of many colours? Why does the Apostle say
   to the Romans: [4849] "According as God had dealt to each man a measure
   of faith. For even as we have many members in one body, and all the
   members have not the same office: so we, who are many, are one body in
   Christ, and severally members one of another. And having gifts
   differing according to the grace that was given to us, whether
   prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith; or
   ministry, let us give ourselves to our ministry; or he that teacheth,
   to his teaching; or he that exhorteth, to his exhorting: he that
   giveth, let him do it with liberality; he that ruleth, with diligence,"
   and so on. And elsewhere: [4850] "One man esteemeth one day above
   another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully
   persuaded in his own mind." To the Corinthians he says: [4851] "I have
   planted, Apollos watered: but God gave the increase. So then, neither
   is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth: but God that
   giveth the increase. Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one:
   and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.
   For we are labourers together with God, ye are God's husbandry, ye are
   God's building." And again elsewhere: [4852] "According to the grace of
   God which is given unto me, as a wise master-builder I laid a
   foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let each man take heed
   how he buildeth thereupon. For other foundation can no man lay, than
   that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But if any man buildeth on
   the foundation, gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, stubble: each
   man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall reveal it, because
   it is revealed in fire: and the fire itself shall prove each man's work
   of what sort it is. If any man's work shall abide which he built
   thereon, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burned,
   he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as through
   fire." If the man whose work is burnt and is to suffer the loss of his
   labour, while he himself is saved, yet not without proof of fire: it
   follows that if a man's work remains which he has built upon the
   foundation, he will be saved without probation by fire, and
   consequently a difference is established between one degree of
   salvation and another. Again in another place he says: [4853] "Let a
   man so account of us, as of ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
   mysteries of God. Here, moreover, it is required in stewards, that a
   man be found faithful." Would you be assured that between one steward
   and another there is a great difference (I am not speaking of bad and
   good, but of the good themselves who stand on the right hand)? then
   listen to the sequel: [4854] "Know ye not that they which minister
   about the sacrifices, eat of the sacrifices, and they which wait upon
   the altar have their portion with the altar? Even so did the Lord
   ordain that they which proclaim the gospel should live of the gospel.
   But I have used none of these things: and I wrote not these things that
   it may be so done in my case: for it were good for me rather to die,
   than that any man should make my glorying void. For if I preach the
   gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon me; for
   woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel. For if I do this of mine own
   will, I have a reward: but if not of mine own will, I have a
   steward-ship intrusted to me. What then is my reward? That, when I
   preach the gospel, I may make the gospel without charge, so as not to
   use to the full my right in the gospel. For though I was free from all
   men, I brought myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the
   more." You surely cannot say that men commit sin by living by the
   Gospel, and partaking of the sacrifices. Of course not. The Lord
   himself made the rule that they who preach the Gospel, should live by
   the Gospel. But an Apostle who does not abuse this freedom, but labours
   with his hands that he may not be a burden to anyone, and toils night
   and day and ministers to his companions of course does this, that for
   his greater toil he may receive a greater reward.

   23. Let us hasten to what remains. [4855] "There are diversities of
   gifts, but the same Spirit. And there are diversities of ministrations,
   and the same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but the
   same God who worketh all things in all. But to each one is given the
   manifestation of the Spirit to profit withal." And again: [4856] "As
   the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the
   body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ." But he precludes
   you from saying that the different members of the one body have the
   same rank; for he immediately describes the orders of the Church, and
   says: [4857] "And God hath set some in the Church, first, apostles;
   secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miracles, then gifts of
   healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues. Are all
   apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of
   miracles? have all gifts of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all
   interpret? But desire earnestly the greater gifts. And a still more
   excellent way shew I unto you." And after discoursing more in detail of
   the graces of charity, he added: [4858] "Whether there be prophecies,
   they shall be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease;
   whether there be knowledge, it shall be done away. For we know in part,
   and we prophesy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, then
   that which is in part shall be done away." And afterwards we read:
   [4859] "But now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; and the
   greatest of these is love. Follow after love; yet desire earnestly
   spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy." And again: [4860] "I
   would have you all speak with tongues, but rather that ye should
   prophesy: and greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
   tongues." And again: [4861] "I thank God, I speak with tongues more
   than you all." Where there are different gifts, and one man is greater,
   another less, and all are called spiritual, they are all certainly
   sheep, and they stand on the right hand; but there is a difference
   between one sheep and another. It is humility that leads the Apostle
   Paul to say: [4862] "I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet
   to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. But by
   the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which was bestowed upon
   me was not found vain: but I laboured more abundantly than they all:
   yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me." But the very fact
   of his thus humbling himself shows the possibility of there being
   apostles of higher or lower rank, and God is not unjust that He will
   forget the work of him who is called the chosen vessel of election, and
   who laboured more abundantly than they all, or assign equal rewards to
   unequal deserts. Afterwards we read, [4863] "As in Adam all die, so
   also in Christ shall all be now alive. But each in his own order." If
   each is to rise in his own order, it follows that those who rise are of
   different degrees of merit. [4864] "All flesh is not the same flesh;
   but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another
   flesh of birds, and another of fishes. There are also celestial bodies,
   and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the
   glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and
   another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star
   differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of
   the dead." Like a learned commentator, you have explained this passage
   by saying that the spiritual differ from the carnal. It follows that in
   heaven there will be both spiritual and carnal persons, and not only
   will the sheep climb thither, but your goats also. "One star," he says,
   "differeth from another star in glory": this is not the distinction of
   sheep and goat, but of sheep and sheep, star and star. Lastly, he says,
   "there is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon." But for
   this, you might maintain that the phrase one star from another star
   covers the whole human race; but he introduces the sun and moon, and
   you cannot possibly reckon them among the goats. "So," says he, "is
   also the resurrection of the dead"--the just will shine with the
   brightness of the sun, and those of the next rank will glow with the
   splendour of the moon, so that one will be a Lucifer, another an
   Arcturus, a third an Orion, another Mazzaroth, or some other of the
   stars whose names are hollowed in the book of Job. [4865] [4866] "For
   we all," he says, "must be made manifest before the judgment-seat of
   Christ; that each one may receive the things done in the body,
   according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad." And you
   cannot say that the mode of our manifestation before the judgment-seat
   of Christ is such that the good receive good things, the bad evil
   things; for he [4867] teaches us in the same epistle that he who soweth
   sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he that soweth bountifully
   shall reap also bountifully. Surely he who sows more and he who sows
   less are both on the right side. And although they belong to the same
   class, that of the sower, yet they differ in respect of measure and
   number. The same Paul, writing to the Ephesians, says: [4868] "to the
   intent that now unto the principalities and the powers in the heavenly
   places might be made known through the church the manifold wisdom of
   God." You observe that it is a varied and manifold wisdom of God which
   is spoken of as existing in the different ranks of the church. And in
   the same epistle we read, [4869] "Unto each one of us was the grace
   given according to the measure of the grace of Christ": not that
   Christ's measure varies, but only that so much of His grace is poured
   out as we can receive.

   24. In vain, therefore, do you multiply instances of sheep and goats,
   of the five wise and five foolish virgins, of Egyptians and Israelites,
   and so forth, because retribution is not in the present, but will be in
   the future. Hence we find that the day of judgment is promised at the
   end of all things, because the judgment is not now. For it would be
   absurd to call the last day the day of judgment, if God were judging at
   the present time. Now we sail the ship, wrestle, and fight, that at
   last we may reach the haven, be crowned, and triumph. But you, with no
   less adroitness than perversity, make the life of this world illustrate
   that of the world to come, although we know full well that here
   unrighteousness prevails, there, righteousness: [4870] "until we go
   into the sanctuary of God, and understand the end of those men." The
   saint does not die one way, the sinner another. Those who sail the same
   sea have the same calm and storm. A violent death is not one thing to
   the robber, another to the martyr. Children are not born one way of
   adultery and prostitution, in another of pure marriage. Certainly our
   Lord and the robbers incurred the same penalty of crucifixion. If the
   judgment of this world and of that which is to come be the same, it
   follows that they who were here crucified side by side, will also be
   esteemed of equal rank hereafter. Paul and they who bound him, sailed
   together, endured the same storm, escaped together to the shore when
   the ship was broken with the waves. You cannot deny that the prisoner
   and the keepers were of unequal merit. And what were the circumstances
   of that same shipwreck of the Apostle and the soldiers? The Apostle
   Paul afterwards [4871] related a vision, and said that they who were
   with him in the ship had been given to him by the Lord. Are we to
   suppose that he to whom they were given, and they who were given to
   him, were of one degree of merit? Ten righteous men can save a sinful
   city. Lot together with his daughters was delivered from the fire: his
   sons-in-law would also have been saved, had they been willing to leave
   the city. Now there was surely a great difference between Lot and his
   sons-in-law. One city out of the five, [4872] Zoar, was saved, and a
   place which lay under the same sentence as Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah, and
   Zeboiim, was preserved by the prayers of a holy man. Lot and Zoar were
   of different merit, but both of them escaped the fire. [4873] The
   robbers who in the absence of David had laid waste Ziklag, and made a
   prey of the wives and children of the inhabitants were slain on the
   third day in the plain, but forty men mounted on camels fled. Will you
   maintain that there was some difference between those who were slain
   and those who made good their escape? We read in the [4874] Gospel that
   the tower of Siloam fell upon eighteen men who perished in the ruins.
   Certainly our Saviour did not regard them as the only sinners: but they
   were punished to terrify the rest: it was like scourging a pestilent
   fellow to teach fools wisdom. If all sinners are punished alike, it is
   unjust for one to be slain while another is admonished by his comrade's
   death.

   25. You raise the objection that all Israelites had the same measure of
   manna, an homer, and were alike in respect of dress, and hair, and
   beard, and shoes; as though we did not all alike partake of the body of
   Christ. In the Christian mysteries there is one means of sanctification
   for the master and the servant, the noble and the low-born, for the
   king and his soldiers, and yet, that which is one varies according to
   the merits of those who receive it. [4875] "Whosoever shall eat or
   drink unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord."
   Does it follow that because Judas drank of the same cup as the rest of
   the apostles, that he and they are of equal merit? But suppose that we
   do not choose to receive the sacrament, at all events we all have the
   same life, breathe the same air, have the same blood in our veins, are
   fed on the same food. Moreover, if our viands are improved by culinary
   skill and are made more palatable for the consumer, food of this kind
   does not satisfy nature, but tickles the appetite. We are all alike
   subject to hunger, all alike suffer with cold: we alike are shrivelled
   with the frost, or melted with the broiling heat. The sun and the moon,
   and all the company of the stars, the showers, the whole world run
   their course for us all alike, and, as the Gospel tells us, the same
   refreshing rain falls upon all, good and bad, just and unjust. If the
   present is a picture of the future, then the Sun of Righteousness will
   rise upon sinners as well as upon the righteous, upon the wicked and
   the holy, upon the heathen as well as upon Jews and Christians, though
   the Scripture says, [4876] "Unto you that fear the Lord shall the Sun
   of Righteousness arise." If He will rise to those that fear, He will
   set to the despisers and the false prophets. The sheep which stand on
   the right hand will be brought into the kingdom of heaven, the goats
   will be thrust down to hell. The parable does not contrast the sheep
   one with another, or on the other hand the goats, but merely makes a
   difference between sheep and goats. The whole truth is not taught in a
   single passage: we must always bear in mind the exact point of an
   illustration. For instance, the ten virgins are not examples of the
   whole human race, but of the careful and the slothful: the former are
   ever anticipating the advent of our Lord, the latter abandon themselves
   to idle slumber without a thought of future judgment. And so at the end
   of the parable it is said, [4877] "Watch, for ye know not the day, nor
   the hour." If at the deluge Noah was delivered, and the whole world
   perished, all men were flesh, and therefore were destroyed. You must
   either say that the sons of Noah and Noah for whose sake they were
   delivered were of unequal merit, or you must place the accursed Ham in
   the same rank as his father because he was delivered with him from the
   flood. At the passion of Christ all wavered, all were unprofitable
   together: there was none that did good, no not one. Will you therefore
   dare to say that Peter and the rest of the Apostles who fled denied the
   Saviour in the same sense as Caiaphas and the Pharisees and the people
   who cried out, [4878] "Crucify him, crucify him"? And, to say no more
   about the Apostles, do you think Annas and Caiaphas, and Judas the
   traitor guilty of no greater crime than Pilate who was compelled
   against his will to give sentence against our Lord? The guilt of Judas
   is proportioned to his former merit, and the greater the guilt, the
   greater the penalty too. [4879] "For the mighty shall mightily suffer
   torment." An evil tree does not bear good fruit, nor a good tree evil
   fruit. If this be so, tell me how it was that Paul though he was an
   evil tree and persecuted the Church of Christ, afterwards bore good
   fruit? And Judas, though he was a good tree and wrought miracles like
   the other Apostles, afterwards turned traitor and brought forth evil
   fruit? The truth is that a good tree does not bear evil fruit, nor an
   evil tree good fruit, so long as they continue in their goodness, or
   badness. And if we read that every Hebrew keeps the same Passover, and
   that in [4880] the seventh year every prisoner is set free, and that at
   Jubilee, that is the fiftieth year, [4881] every possession returns to
   its owner, all this refers not to the present, but to the future; for
   being in bondage during the six days of this world, on the seventh day,
   the true and eternal Sabbath, we shall be free, at any rate if we wish
   to be free while still in bondage in the world. If, however, we do not
   desire it, our ear will be bored in token of our disobedience, and
   together with our wives and children, whom we preferred to liberty,
   that is, with the flesh and its works, we shall be in perpetual
   slavery.

   26. As for the parable of the sower which makes both good and bad
   ground bear a triple crop, and the passage from the apostle in which
   upon Christ as the foundation one man builds gold, silver, costly
   stones, another wood, hay, stubble, the meaning is perfectly clear. We
   know that in a great house there are different vessels, and to wish to
   contradict so plain a truth would be sheer impudence. Yet that
   Jovinianus may not triumph in a lie and quote the instance of the
   apostles by way of discrediting the hundred fold, sixty fold, and
   thirty fold, let me inform him that in [4882] Matthew and Mark a
   hundred fold is promised to the apostles who had left all. And I would
   tell him further, that in the Gospel of Luke we find much more, that is
   polu pleiona, and that there is absolutely no instance in the Gospels
   of a hundred standing for seven; and that he is convicted either of
   forgery, or of ignorance; and that our cause is not prejudiced by the
   fact that in one Gospel the enumeration begins at a hundred, in another
   at thirty, since it is a rule with all Scripture, and especially with
   the older writings, to put the lowest number first and so ascend by
   degrees to the higher. For instance, suppose one to say that so-and-so
   lived five and seventy and a hundred years, it does not follow that
   five and seventy are more than a hundred because they were first
   mentioned. If you do not on the side of good admit the difference
   between a hundred, sixty, and thirty, neither will you do so on the
   side of evil, and the seed which fell by the wayside, upon the rock,
   and among thorns, will be equally faulty. But if the former three, or
   the latter three, on the side of good, or on the side of evil
   respectively, are one and the same, it was foolish instead of speaking
   of two things to enumerate six kinds, and all the more because
   according to the account of the parable in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, the
   Saviour always added: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." Where
   there is no deep inner meaning, it is useless to draw our attention to
   the mystic sense.

   27. You give it as your opinion that, since the Father and the Son make
   their abode with the faithful, and since Christ is their guest, nothing
   is lacking. I suppose, however, that Christ's abiding with the
   Corinthians was one thing, with the Ephesians another: it was one
   thing, I say, for Him to abide with those whom Paul blamed for many
   sins, another for Him to dwell with those to whom the apostle revealed
   mysteries hidden from the beginning of the world; one thing for Him to
   be in Titus and Timothy, another in Paul. Certainly amongst them that
   have been born of women, there has not arisen a greater than John the
   Baptist. But the term greater implies others who are less. And [4883]
   "he who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he." You see
   then that in heaven one is greatest and another is least, and that
   among the angels and the invisible creation there is a manifold and
   infinite diversity. Why do the apostles say: [4884] "Lord, increase our
   faith," if there is one measure for all? And why did our Lord rebuke
   His disciple, saying: [4885] "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst
   thou doubt?" In Jeremiah also we read concerning the future kingdom:
   [4886] "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new
   covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah not
   according to the covenant that I made with their fathers." And so on
   after: [4887] "I will put my law in their inward parts, and in their
   heart will I write it; and I will be their God and they shall be my
   people: and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
   man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me,
   from the least of them unto the greatest of them." The context of this
   passage clearly shows that the prophet is describing the future
   kingdom, and how can there possibly be in it a least or greatest, if
   all are to be equal? The secret is disclosed in the Gospel: [4888]
   "Whosoever shall do and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom
   of heaven: but whosoever shall teach, and not do, shall be least."
   [4889] The Saviour taught us at a feast to take the lowest place, lest,
   when one greater than us came, we should be thrust with disgrace from
   the higher place. If we cannot fall, but only raise ourselves by
   penitence, what is the meaning of the ladder at Bethel, on which the
   angels come from heaven to earth and descend as well as ascend? Surely
   while on that ladder they are reckoned among the sheep and stand on the
   right hand. There are angels who descend from heaven; but Jovinianus is
   sure that they retain their inheritance.

   28. But when Jovinianus supposes that the many mansions in our Father's
   house are churches scattered throughout the world, who can refrain from
   laughing; since Scripture plainly teaches in John's Gospel that our
   Lord was discoursing not of the number of the churches, but of the
   heavenly mansions, and the eternal tabernacles for which the prophet
   longed? [4890] "In my Father's house," He says, "are many mansions: if
   it were not so, I would have told you; for I go to prepare a place for
   you. And if I go and prepare a place for you I will come again, and
   will receive you unto myself, that where I am, there ye may be also."
   The place and the mansions which Christ says He would prepare for the
   apostles are of course in the Father's house, that is, in the kingdom
   of heaven, not on earth, where for the present He was leading the
   apostles. And at the same time regard must be had to the sense of
   Scripture: "I might tell you," He says, "that I go to prepare a place
   for you, if there were not many mansions in my Father's house, that is
   to say, if each individual did not prepare for himself a mansion
   through his own works rather than receive it through the bounty of God.
   The preparation is therefore not mine, but yours." This view is
   supported by the fact that it profited Judas nothing to have a place
   prepared, since he lost it by his own fault. And we must interpret in
   the same way what our Lord says to the sons of Zebedee, one of whom
   wished to sit on His left hand, the other on His right: [4891] "My cup
   indeed ye shall drink: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left
   hand, is not mine to give, but it is for them for whom it hath been
   prepared of my Father." It is not the Son's to give; how then is it the
   Father's to prepare? There are, He says, prepared in heaven, many
   different mansions, destined for many different virtues, and they will
   be awarded not to persons, but to persons' works. In vain therefore do
   you ask of me what rests with yourselves, a reward which my Father has
   prepared for those whose virtues will entitle them to rise to such
   dignity. Again when He says: [4892] "I will come again, and will
   receive you unto myself: that where I am, there ye may be also," He is
   speaking especially to the apostles, concerning whom it is elsewhere
   written, "That as I and thou, Father, are one, so they also may be one
   in us," inasmuch as they have believed, have been perfected, and can
   say, [4893] "the Lord is my portion." If, however, there are not many
   mansions, how is it taught in the Old Testament correspondingly with
   the New, that the chief priest has one rank, the priests another, the
   Levites another, the door-keepers another, the sacristans another? How
   is it that in the [4894] book of Ezekiel, where a description is given
   of the future Church and of the heavenly Jerusalem, the priests who
   have sinned are degraded to the rank of sacristans and doorkeepers, and
   although they are in the temple of God, that is on the right hand, they
   are not among the rams, but among the poorest of the sheep? How again
   is it that in the river which flows from the temple, and replenishes
   the salt sea, and gives new life to everything, we read there are many
   kinds of fish? Why do we read that in the kingdom of heaven there are
   Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, Cherubim and Seraphim,
   and every name which is named, not only in this present world, but also
   that which is to come? A difference of name is meaningless where there
   is not a difference of rank. An Archangel is of course an Archangel to
   other inferior angels, and Powers, and Dominions have other spheres
   over which they exercise authority. This is what we find in heaven and
   in the administration of God. You must not therefore smile and sneer at
   us, as is your wont, for making a graduated series of emperors,
   præfects and counts, tribunes and centurions, companies, and all the
   other steps in the service.

   29. It is mere trifling to quote the passage: [4895] "Know ye not that
   your bodies are a temple of the Holy Ghost," for it is customary in
   Holy Scripture to speak of a single object as though it were many, and
   of many as though they were one. And Jovinianus himself should know
   that even in a temple there are many divisions--the outer and the inner
   courts, the vestibules, the holy place, and the Holy of Holies. There
   are also in a temple kitchens, pantries, oil-cellars, and cupboards for
   the vessels. And so in the temple of our body there are different
   degrees of merit. God does not dwell in all alike, nor does He impart
   Himself to all in the same degree. A portion of the spirit of Moses was
   taken and given to the seventy elders. I suppose there is a difference
   between the abundance of the river, and that of the rivulets. [4896]
   Elijah's spirit was given in double measure to Elisha, and thus double
   grace wrought greater miracles. Elijah while living restored a dead man
   to life; Elisha after death did the same. Elijah invoked famine on the
   people; Elisha in a single day put the enemy's forces in the power of
   the city which they besieged. No doubt the words, "Know ye not that
   your bodies are a temple of the Holy Ghost," refer to the whole
   assembly of the faithful, who, joined together, make up the one body of
   Christ. But the question now is, who in the body is worthy to be the
   feet of Christ, and who the head? who is His eye, and who His hand?--a
   distinction indicated by the [4897] two women in the Gospel, the
   penitent and the holy woman, one of whom held His feet, the other His
   head. Some authorities, however, think there was only one woman, and
   that she who began at His feet gradually advanced to His head.
   Jovinianus further urges against us our Lord's words, [4898] "I pray
   not for these only, but also for those who shall believe on me through
   their word: that as I, Father, in thee and thou in me are one, so they
   all may be one in us," and reminds us that the whole Christian people
   is one in God, and, as His well-beloved sons, are [4899] "partakers of
   the divine nature." We have already said, and the truth must now be
   inculcated more in detail, that we are not one in the Father and the
   Son according to nature, but according to grace. For the essence of the
   human soul and the essence of God are not the same, as the Manichæans
   constantly assert. But, says our Lord: [4900] "Thou hast loved them as
   thou hast loved me." You see, then, that we are privileged to partake
   of His essence, not in the realm of nature, but of grace, and the
   reason why we are beloved of the Father is that He has loved the Son;
   and the members are loved, those namely of the body. [4901] "For as
   many as received Christ, to them gave He power to become sons of God,
   even to them that believe on His name: which were born not of blood,
   nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." The
   Word was made flesh that we might pass from the flesh into the Word.
   The Word did not cease to be what He had been; nor did the human nature
   lose that which it was by birth. The glory was increased, the nature
   was not changed. Do you ask how we are made one body with Christ? Your
   creator shall be your instructor: [4902] "He that eateth my flesh and
   drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him. As the living Father
   sent me, and I live because of the Father, so he that eateth me, he
   also shall live because of me. This is the bread which came down out of
   heaven." But the Evangelist John, who had drunk in wisdom from the
   breast of Christ, agrees herewith, and says: [4903] "Hereby know we
   that we abide in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his
   Spirit. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
   abideth in him, and he in God." If you believe in Christ, as the
   apostles believed, you shall be made one body with them in Christ. But,
   if it is rash for you to claim for yourself a faith and works like
   theirs when you have not the same faith and works, you cannot have the
   same place.

   30. You repeat the words bride, sister, mother, and affirm that all
   these are titles of the one Church and names applied to all believers.
   The fact goes against you. For if the Church admits but one rank, and
   has not many members in one body, what necessity is there for calling
   her bride, sister, mother? It must be that she is the bride of some,
   the sister of others, the mother of others. All indeed stand on the
   right hand, but one stands as a bridegroom, another as a brother, a
   third as a son. [4904] "My little children" says the Apostle, "of whom
   I am again in travail until Christ be formed in you." Do you think that
   the children who are being born and the apostle who is in travail are
   of equal rank? And the folly of your contention that we love all the
   members alike, and do not prefer the eye to the finger, nor the hand to
   the ear, but that if one be lost all mourn, is proved by the lesson
   which the apostle teaches the Corinthians: [4905] "Some members are
   more honourable, others excite the sense of shame: and those parts to
   which shame attaches are clothed with more abundant honour; whereas our
   comely parts have no need of our care." Do you think that the mouth and
   the belly, the eyes and the outlets of the body are to be classed
   together as of equal merit? [4906] "The lamp of thy body," he says, "is
   thine eye. If thine eye be blinded, thy whole body is in darkness." If
   you cut off a finger, or the tip of the ear, there is indeed pain, but
   the loss is not so great, nor is the disfigurement attended by so much
   pain as it would be were you to take out the eyes, mutilate the nose,
   or saw through a bone. Some members we can dispense with and yet live:
   without others life is an impossibility. Some offences are light, some
   heavy. It is one thing to owe ten thousand talents, another to owe a
   farthing. We shall have to give account of the idle word no less than
   of adultery; but it is not the same thing to be put to the blush, and
   to be put upon the rack, to grow red in the face and to ensure lasting
   torment. Do you think I am merely expressing my own views? Hear what
   the Apostle John says: [4907] "He who knows that his brother sinneth a
   sin not unto death, let him ask, and he shall give him life, even to
   him that sinneth not unto death. But he that hath sinned unto death,
   who shall pray for him?" You observe that if we entreat for smaller
   offences, we obtain pardon: if for greater ones, it is difficult to
   obtain our request: and that there is a great difference between sins.
   And so with respect to the people of Israel who had sinned a sin unto
   death, it is said to Jeremiah: [4908] "Pray not thou for this people,
   neither entreat for them, and do not withstand me, for I will not hear
   thee." Moreover, if it be true that we all alike enter the world and
   all alike leave it, and this is a precedent for the world to come, it
   follows that whether righteous or sinners we shall all be equally
   esteemed by God, because the conditions of our birth and death are now
   the same. And if you contend that there are two Adams, the one of the
   earth, the other from heaven; and that they who were in the earthly
   Adam stand on the left hand, those who were in the heavenly are on the
   right hand, before we go further, let me ask you a question concerning
   two brothers: Was Esau in the earthly Adam, or in the heavenly? No one
   doubts that you will reply, he was in the earthly. In which was Jacob?
   Without hesitation you will say, in the heavenly. How then was he in
   the heavenly when Christ had not yet come in the flesh--Christ who is
   called the second Adam from heaven? You must either reckon all before
   the incarnation of Christ in the old Adam, and even the just in the man
   from the earth, and then they will be on the left among your goats; or,
   if it be impious to give Isaac the same place as Ishmael, Jacob as
   Esau, the saints as sinners, the last Adam will date from the time when
   Christ was born of a Virgin, and your argument from the two Adams will
   not benefit your sheep and goats, because we have proved that in the
   first Adam there were both sheep and goats, and that of those who were
   in one and the same man, some stood on the right hand of God, others on
   the left: [4909] "For from Adam even until Moses death reigned over
   all, even over them that had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's
   transgression."

   31. As regards your attempt to show that railing and murder, the use of
   the expression raca and adultery, the idle word and godlessness, are
   rewarded with the same punishment, I have already given you my reply,
   and will now briefly repeat it. You must either deny that you are a
   sinner if you are not to be in danger of Gehenna: or, if you are a
   sinner you will be sent to hell for even a light offence: [4910] "The
   mouth that lieth," says one, "kills the soul." I suspect that you, like
   other men, have occasionally told a lie: [4911] for all men are liars,
   that God alone may be true, [4912] and that He may be justified in His
   words, and may prevail when He judges. It follows either that you will
   not be a man lest you be found a liar: or if you are a man and are
   consequently a liar, you will be punished with parricides and
   adulterers. For you admit no difference between sins, and the gratitude
   of those whom you raise from the mire and set on high will not equal
   the rage against you of those whom for the trifling offences of daily
   life you have thrust into utter darkness. And if it be so that in a
   persecution one is stifled, another beheaded, another flees, or the
   fourth dies within the walls of a prison, and one crown of victory
   awaits various kinds of struggle, the fact tells in our favour. For in
   martyrdom it is the will, which gives occasion to the death, that is
   crowned. My duty is to resist the frenzy of the heathen, and not deny
   the Lord. It rests with them either to behead, or to burn, or to shut
   up in prison, or enforce various other penalties. But if I escape, and
   die in solitude, there will not at my death be the same crown for me as
   for them, because the confession of Christ will not have been to me as
   to them the cause of death. As for your remark that absolutely no
   difference was made between the brother who had always been with his
   father, and him who was afterwards welcomed as a penitent, I am willing
   to add, if you like, that the one drachma which was lost and was found
   was put with the others, and that the one sheep which the good
   shepherd, leaving the ninety and nine, sought and brought back, made up
   the full tale of a hundred. But it is one thing to be a penitent, and
   with tears sue for pardon, another to be always with the father. And so
   both the shepherd and the father say by the mouth of Ezekiel to the
   sheep that was carried back, and to the son that was lost, [4913] "And
   I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that I am
   the Lord: that thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open
   thy mouth ever more, because of thy shame, when I have forgiven thee
   all that thou hast done." That penitents may have their due it is
   enough for them to feel shame instead of all other punishment. Hence in
   another place it is said to them, [4914] "Then shall ye remember your
   evil ways, and all the crimes wherewith ye were defiled, and ye shall
   loathe yourselves in your own sight for all the wickedness that ye have
   done; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have done you
   good for my name's sake, and not according to your evil ways, nor
   according to your evil doings." The son, moreover, was reproved by his
   father for envying his brother's deliverance, and for being tormented
   by jealousy while the angels in heaven were rejoicing. The parallel,
   however, is not to be drawn between the merits of the two sons (one of
   whom was temperate, the other a prodigal) and those of the whole human
   race, but the characters depicted are either Jews and Christians, or
   saints and penitents. In the lifetime of Bishop Damasus I dedicated to
   him a small treatise upon this parable. [4915]

   32. And if a penny was given to all the labourers, those of the first,
   the third, the sixth, the ninth, and the eleventh hours, and they came
   first for the reward who were the last to work in the vineyard, even
   here the persons described do not belong to one time or one age, but
   from the beginning of the world to the end of it there are different
   calls and a special meaning attaches to each. Abel and Seth were called
   at the first hour: Enoch and Noah at the third: Abraham, Isaac, and
   Jacob at the sixth: Moses and the prophets at the ninth: at the
   eleventh the Gentiles, to whom the recompense was first given because
   they believed on the crucified Lord, and inasmuch as it was hard for
   them to believe they earned a great reward. Many kings and prophets
   have desired to see the things that we see, and have not seen them. But
   the one penny does not represent one reward, but one life, and one
   deliverance from Gehenna. And as by the favour of the sovereign those
   guilty of various crimes are released from prison, and each one,
   according to his toil and exertions, is in this or that condition of
   life, so too the penny, as it were by the favour of our Sovereign, is
   the discharge from prison of us all by baptism. Now our work is,
   according to our different virtues, to prepare for ourselves a
   different future.

   33. So far I have replied to the separate portions of his argument; I
   shall now address myself to the general question. Our Lord says to his
   disciples, [4916] "Whosoever would become great among you, let him be
   least of all." If we are all to be equal in heaven, in vain do we
   humble ourselves here that we may be greater there. Of the two debtors
   who owed, one five hundred pence, the other fifty, he to whom most was
   forgiven loved most. And so the Saviour says, [4917] "I say to you, her
   sins which are many are forgiven her, for she hath loved much. But to
   whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." He who loves little,
   and has little forgiven, he will of course be of inferior rank. [4918]
   The householder when he set out delivered to his servants his goods, to
   one five talents, to another two, to another one, to each according to
   his ability. Just as in another Gospel it is written that a nobleman
   setting out for a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and
   return, called the servants, and gave them each a sum of money, with
   which one gained ten pounds, another five, and they, each according to
   his ability and the gain he had made, received ten or five cities. But
   one who had received a talent, or a pound, buried it in the ground, or
   tied it up in a napkin, and kept it until his master's return. Our
   first thought is that if, according to the modern Zeno, the righteous
   do not toil in hope of reward, but to avoid the loss of what they
   already have, he who buried his pound or talent that he might not lose
   it, did no wrong, and the caution of him who kept his money is worthy
   of more praise than the fruitless toil of those who wore themselves out
   and yet received no reward for their labour. Then observe that the very
   talent which was taken from the timid or negligent servant, was not
   given to him who had the smaller profit, but to him who had gained the
   most, that is, to him who had been placed over ten cities. If
   difference of rank is not constituted by the difference in number, why
   did our Lord say, "He gave to everyone according to his ability"? If
   the gain of five talents and ten talents is the same, why were not ten
   cities given to him who gained the least, and five to him who gained
   the most? But that our Lord is not satisfied with what we have, but
   always desires more, He himself shows by saying, "Wherefore didst thou
   not give my money to the money-changers, that so when I came I might
   have received it with usury?" The Apostle Paul understood this, and
   [4919] forgetting those things which were behind, reached forward to
   those things which were in front, that is, he made daily progress, and
   did not keep the grace given to him carefully wrapped up in a napkin,
   but his spirit, like the capital of a keen man of business, was renewed
   from day to day, and if he were not always growing larger, he thought
   himself growing less. Six cities of refuge are mentioned in the law,
   provided for fugitives who were involuntary homicides, and the cities
   themselves belonged to the priests. I should like to ask whether you
   would put those fugitives among your goats, or among our sheep. If they
   were goats, they would be slain like other homicides, and would not
   enter the cities of God's ministers. If you say they were sheep, they
   will not possibly be such sheep as can enjoy full liberty and feed
   without fear of wolves. And it will be plain to you that sheep indeed
   they are, but wandering sheep: that they are on the right hand, but do
   not stand there: they flee until the High Priest dies and descending
   into hell liberates their souls. The Gibeonites met the children of
   Israel, and although other nations were slaughtered, they were kept
   [4920] for hewers of wood and drawers of water. [4921] And of such
   value were they in God's eyes, that the family of Saul was destroyed
   for the wrong done to them. Where would you put them? Among the goats?
   But they were not slain, and they were avenged by the determination of
   God. Among the sheep? But holy Scripture says they were not of the same
   merit as the Israelites. You see then that they do indeed stand on the
   right hand, but are of a far inferior grade. Jonathan came between
   David, the holy man, and Saul, the worst of kings, and we can neither
   place him among the kids because he was worthy of a prophet's love, nor
   amongst the rams lest we make him equal to David, and particularly when
   we know that he was slain. He will, therefore, be among the sheep, but
   low down. And just as in the case of David and Jonathan, you will be
   bound to recognize differences between sheep and sheep. [4922] "That
   servant, which knew his lord's will, and made not ready, nor did
   according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that
   knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
   stripes. And to whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
   required: and to whom they commit much, of him will they ask the more."
   Lo! more or less is committed to different servants, and according to
   the nature of the trust, as well as of the sin, is the number of
   stripes inflicted.

   34. The whole account of the land of Judah and of the tribes is typical
   of the church in heaven. Let us read Joshua the son of Nun, or the
   concluding portions of Ezekiel, and we shall see that the historical
   division of the land as related by the one finds a counterpart in the
   spiritual and heavenly promises of the other. What is the meaning of
   the seven and eight steps in the description of the temple? or again,
   what significance attaches to the fact that in the Psalter, after being
   taught the mystic alphabet by the [4923] one hundred and eighteenth
   psalm we arrive by fifteen steps at the point where we can sing: [4924]
   "Behold, now bless the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord: ye who stand
   in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God." Why
   did [4925] two tribes and a half dwell on the other side of Jordan, a
   district abounding in cattle, while the remaining nine tribes and a
   half either drove out the old inhabitants from their possessions, or
   dwelt with them? Why did the tribe of Levi [4926] receive no portion in
   the land, but have the Lord for their portion? And how is it that of
   the priests and Levites, themselves, the [4927] high priest alone
   entered the Holy of Holies where were the cherubim and the mercy-seat?
   Why did the other priests wear [4928] linen raiment only, and not have
   their clothing of wrought gold, blue, scarlet, purple, and fine cloth?
   The priests and [4929] Levites of the lower order took care of the oxen
   and wains: those of the higher order carried the ark of the Lord on
   their shoulders. If you do away with the gradations of the tabernacle,
   the temple, the Church, if, to use a common military phrase, all upon
   the right hand are to be "up to the same standard," bishops are to no
   purpose, priests in vain, deacons useless. Why do virgins persevere?
   widows toil? Why do married women practise continence? Let us all sin,
   and when once we have repented, we shall be on the same footing as the
   apostles.

   35. But now we have just sighted land: the foaming billows have been
   rolling mountain-high: our ship has been borne aloft, or has rushed
   headlong into the depths beneath: little by little the haven opens to
   the view of the weary and exhausted sailors. We have discussed the
   married, widows, and virgins. We have preferred virginity to widowhood,
   widowhood to marriage. The passage of the apostle, in which he treats
   questions of this kind, has been expounded, and particular objections
   have been met. We also took a survey of secular literature, and
   inquired what was thought of virgins, and what of those who had one
   husband; and by way of contrast we pointed out the cares which
   sometimes attend wedlock. Then we passed to the second division, in
   which our opponent denies the possibility of sinning to those who have
   been baptized with complete faith. And we showed that God alone is
   faultless, and every creature is at fault, not because all have sinned,
   but because all may sin, and those who stand have cause to fear when
   they see the fall of men like themselves. In the third place we came to
   fasting, and inasmuch as our opponent's argument fell under two heads,
   and he appealed either to philosophy, or to Holy Scripture, we also
   furnished a several reply. In the fourth, that is the last section, the
   sheep and goats on the right hand and the left, the righteous and the
   wicked, were distributed into two classes, the intention being to show
   that there is no difference between one just man and another, or
   between one sinner and another. To prove the point Jovinianus had
   accumulated countless instances from Scripture which apparently
   favoured his view, and this contention we rebutted both by arguments
   and illustrations from Scripture, and pulverized Zeno's old opinion no
   less with common sense than with the words of inspiration.

   36. I must in conclusion say a few words to our modern Epicurus
   wantoning in his gardens with his favourites of both sexes. On your
   side are the fat and the sleek in their festal attire. If I may mock
   like Socrates, add if you please, all swine and dogs, and, since you
   like flesh so well, vultures too, eagles, hawks, and owls. We shall
   never be afraid of the host of [4930] Aristippus. If ever I see a fine
   fellow, or a man who is no stranger to the curling-irons, with his hair
   nicely done and his cheeks all aglow, he belongs to your herd, or
   rather grunts in concert with your pigs. To our flock belong the sad,
   the pale, the meanly clad, who, like strangers in this world, though
   their tongues are silent, yet speak by their dress and bearing. [4931]
   "Woe is me," say they, "that my sojourning is prolonged! that I dwell
   among the tents of Kedar!" that is to say, in the darkness of this
   world, for the light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness
   comprehended it not. Boast not of having many disciples. The Son of God
   taught in Judæa, and only twelve apostles followed Him. [4932] "I have
   trodden the wine-press alone," He says, "and of the peoples there was
   no man with me." At the passion He was left alone, and even Peter's
   fidelity to Him wavered: on the other hand all the people applauded the
   doctrine of the Pharisees, saying, [4933] "Crucify him, crucify him. We
   have no king but Cæsar," that is in effect, we follow vice, not virtue;
   Epicurus, not Christ; Jovinianus, not the Apostle Paul. If many assent
   to your views, that only indicates voluptuousness; for they do not so
   much approve your utterances, as favour their own vices. In our crowded
   thoroughfares a false prophet may be seen any day stick in hand
   belabouring the fools about him, and knocking out the teeth of those
   who offend him, and yet he never lacks constant followers. And do you
   regard it as a mark of great wisdom if you have a following of many
   pigs, whom you are feeding to make pork for hell? Since you published
   your views, and set the mark of your approval on baths in which the
   sexes bathe together, the impatience which once threw over burning lust
   the semblance of a robe of modesty has been laid bare and exposed. What
   was once hidden is now open to the gaze of all. You have revealed your
   disciples, such as they are, not made them. One result of your teaching
   is that sin is no longer even repented of. Your virgins whom, with a
   depth of wisdom never found before in speech or writing, you have
   taught the apostle's maxim that it is better to marry than to burn,
   have turned secret adulterers into acknowledged husbands. [4934] It was
   not the apostle, the chosen vessel, who gave this advice; it was
   Virgil's widow:

   [4935] "She calls it wedlock; thus she veils her fault."

   37. About four hundred years have passed since the preaching of Christ
   flashed upon the world, and during that time in which His robe has been
   torn by countless heresies, almost the whole body of error has been
   derived from the Chaldæan, Syriac, and Greek languages. Basilides, the
   master of licentiousness and the grossest sensuality, after the lapse
   of so many years, and like a second [4936] Euphorbus, was changed by
   transmigration into Jovinian, so that the Latin tongue might have a
   heresy of its own. Was there no other province in the whole world to
   receive the gospel of pleasure, and into which the serpent might
   insinuate itself, except that which was founded by the teaching of
   Peter, upon the rock Christ? Idol temples had fallen before the
   standard of the Cross and the severity of the Gospel: now on the
   contrary lust and gluttony endeavour to overthrow the solid structure
   of the Cross. And so God says by Isaiah, [4937] "O my people, they
   which bless you cause you to err, and trouble the paths of your feet."
   Also by Jeremiah, [4938] "Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and save
   every man his life, and believe not the false prophets which say,
   Peace, peace, and there is no peace;" who are always repeating, [4939]
   "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord." "Thy prophets have
   seen for thee false and foolish things; they have not laid bare thine
   iniquity that they might call thee to repentance: who devour God's
   people like bread: they have not called upon God." Jeremiah announced
   the captivity and was stoned by the people. [4940] Hananiah, the son of
   Azzur, broke the bars of wood for the present, but was preparing bars
   of iron for the future. False prophets always promise pleasant things,
   and please for a time. Truth is bitter, and they who preach it are
   filled with bitterness. For with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
   truth the Lord's passover is kept, and it is eaten with bitter herbs.
   Admirable are your utterances and worthy of the ears of the bride of
   Christ standing in the midst of her virgins, and widows, and celibates!
   (their very name is [4941] derived from the fact that they who abstain
   from intercourse are fit for heaven). This is what you say: "Fast
   seldom, marry often. You cannot do the work of marriage unless you take
   mead, and flesh, and solid food. For lust strength is required. Flesh
   is soon spent and enervated. You need not be afraid of fornication. He
   who has been once baptized into Christ cannot fall, for he has the
   consolation of marriage to slake his lust. And if you do fall,
   repentance will restore you, and you who were hypocrites at baptism may
   have a firm faith in your repentance. Be not disturbed by the thought
   of a difference between the righteous and the penitent, and do not
   imagine that pardon even gives a lower place; rather believe that it
   takes away your crown. For there is one reward: he who stands on the
   right hand shall enter into the kingdom of heaven." Through counsels
   such as these your swine-herds are richer than our shepherds, and the
   he-goats draw after them many of the other sex: [4942] "They were as
   fed horses: they were mad after women": they no sooner see a woman than
   they neigh after her, and, shame to say! find scriptural authority for
   the consolation of their incontinence. But the very women, unhappy
   creatures! though they deserve no pity, who chant the words of their
   instructor (for what does God require of them but to become mothers?),
   have lost not only their chastity, but all sense of shame, and defend
   their licentious practices with an access of impudence. You have,
   moreover, in your army many subalterns, you have your guardsmen and
   your skirmishers at the outposts, the round-bellied, the well-dressed,
   the exquisites, and noisy orators, to defend you with tooth and nail.
   The noble make way for you, the wealthy print kisses on your face. For
   unless you had come, the drunkard and the glutton could not have
   entered paradise. All honor to your virtue, or rather to your vices!
   You have in your camp, even amazons with uncovered breasts, bare arms
   and knees, who challenge the men who come against them to a battle of
   lust. Your household is a large one, and so in your aviaries not only
   turtle-doves, but hoopoes are fed, which may wing their flight over the
   whole field of rank debauchery. Pull me to pieces and scatter me to the
   winds: tax me with what offences you please: accuse me of luxurious and
   delicate living: you would like me better if I were guilty, for I
   should belong to your herd.

   38. But I will now address myself to you, great Rome, who with the
   confession of Christ have blotted out the blasphemy written on your
   forehead. Mighty city, mistress-city of the world, city of the
   Apostle's praises, shew the meaning of your name. Rome is either
   strength in Greek, or height in Hebrew. Lose not the excellence your
   name implies: let virtue lift you up on high, let not voluptuousness
   bring you low. By repentance, as the history of Nineveh proves, you may
   escape the curse wherewith the Saviour threatened you in the
   Apocalypse. Beware of the name of Jovinianus. It is derived from that
   of an idol. [4943] The Capitol is in ruins: the temples of Jove with
   their ceremonies have perished. Why should his name and vices flourish
   now in the midst of you, when even in the time of Numa Pompilius, even
   under the sway of kings, your ancestors gave a heartier welcome to the
   self-restraint of Pythagoras than they did under the consuls to the
   debauchery of Epicurus?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4652] This, according to i. 3, is "cannot be overthrown."

   [4653] 1 John iii. 9, 10.

   [4654] 1 John v. 18.

   [4655] 1 John v. 21.

   [4656] 1 John i. 8 sq.

   [4657] Is. lxv. 5. Quoted from memory. The LXX and Vulg. have like A.V.
   and Rev., "Come not near me."

   [4658] 1 John ii. 1.

   [4659] 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.

   [4660] Ps. li. 12.

   [4661] 1 John ii. 4.

   [4662] 1 John xiv. 6.

   [4663] James ii. 26.

   [4664] Jerome is perhaps hinting at the opinions of Jovinianus, that
   there was no other distinction between men than the grand division into
   righteous and wicked, and drawing from this the inference that whoever
   had been truly baptized had nothing further to gain by progress in the
   Christian life.

   [4665] 1 Peter ii. 22.

   [4666] James iii. 2.

   [4667] Job xiv. 4, 5, Sept.

   [4668] Prov. xx. 9.

   [4669] Ps. li. 5.

   [4670] Job ix. 20, 30. Sept.

   [4671] 1 John ii. 1, 2.

   [4672] S. John xiii. 10.

   [4673] S. Matt. xvi. 18.

   [4674] S. Luke xxi. 31.

   [4675] S. Matt. vi. 12.

   [4676] 1 Cor. ix. 27.

   [4677] 2 Cor. xii. 7.

   [4678] 2 Cor. xi. 3.

   [4679] 2 Cor. ii. 10, 11.

   [4680] 1 Cor. x. 13.

   [4681] 1 Cor. x. 12.

   [4682] Gal. v. 7.

   [4683] 1 Thess. ii. 18.

   [4684] 1 Cor. vii. 5.

   [4685] Gal. v. 16, 17.

   [4686] Eph. vi. 12.

   [4687] Heb. vi. 4 sq.

   [4688] Various dates, ranging between a.d. 126 and a.d. 173, are
   assigned to the origin of Montanism. In addition to the tenet, that the
   church has no power to remit sin after baptism (though the power was
   claimed for the Montanistic prophets) and that some sins exclude for
   ever from the communion of the saints on earth, although the mercy of
   God may be extended to them hereafter, Montanus held second marriages
   to be no better than adultery, proscribed military service and secular
   life in general, denounced profane learning and amusements of every
   kind, advocated extreme simplicity of female dress, practised frequent
   and severe fasting, and inculcated the most rigorous asceticism. The
   sect produced a great effect on the church and lasted until the sixth
   century. As is well known, Tertullian in middle life lapsed into
   Montanism, and he was the most distinguished of its champions.
   Montanism has been described as an anticipation of the mediaeval system
   of Rome.

   [4689] The founder of the schism which afterwards bore the name of
   Novatian was Novatus, a presbyter of Carthage who went to Rome (about
   a.d. 250) and there co-operated with Novatianus, one of the most
   distinguished of the clergy of that city. The Novatianists, whose
   doctrines were near akin in many respects to those of Montanists,
   assumed the name of Cathari, or Puritans.

   [4690] Heb. vi. 9.

   [4691] James i. 12 sq.

   [4692] Ecclus. xxvii. 5.

   [4693] Ecclus. ii. 1.

   [4694] James i. 22 sq.

   [4695] James ii. 10.

   [4696] Rom. xi. 32.

   [4697] 2 Pet. ii. 9.

   [4698] 2 Pet. ii. 17, 18.

   [4699] Prov. xvi. 5. Sept.

   [4700] Apoc. ii. 2 sq.

   [4701] Matt. xi. 13.

   [4702] 1 Cor. x. 11.

   [4703] Ps. xxvi. 1, 2.

   [4704] Ps. li. 1.

   [4705] 2 Chron. xxxiii. 12, 13.

   [4706] 2 Kings xxiii. 29 sq. 2 Chron. xxxv. 20 sq.

   [4707] Zech. iii. 1 sq.

   [4708] Numb. xx. 13; Ps. cvi. 32.

   [4709] Job v. 17.

   [4710] Job vii. 1.

   [4711] Jerome blends two passages, Is. xiv. 12 (in which the Sept.
   reading is "that sendest to;" R.V. "didst lay low") and Ezek. xxviii.
   13 sq. In the passage from Isaiah the king of Babylon is compared to
   Lucifer, i.e. the shining one, the morning star, whose movements the
   Babylonians had been the first to record. See Sayce, Fresh Light from
   the Ancient Monuments, p. 178, and Cheyne's Isaiah. The subject of
   Ezekiel's prophecy is the Prince of Tyre.

   [4712] S. Luke x. 18.

   [4713] Job xl. 16, 21. R.V. "He lieth under the lotus trees, in the
   covert of the reed and the fen."

   [4714] Job xli. 34. Sept. R.V. "King over the sons of pride."

   [4715] Job xli. 13 sq. R.V. for the latter part of the verse has "Round
   about his teeth is terror, his strong scales are his pride." Jerome's
   words are not found in the existing Septuagint.

   [4716] The Septuagint omits much in this portion of the Book of Job.

   [4717] xli. 27.

   [4718] That is, deriving jumenta from juvo. The derivation, however, is
   from jungo.

   [4719] Ps. viii. 5 sq.

   [4720] The Italian beccafico.

   [4721] Rom. xiv. 20; 1 Tim. iv. 5.

   [4722] 1 Tim. iv. 3.

   [4723] Castum. Another reading is Cossum i.e. wood-worms, which were
   considered a delicacy in Pontus and Phrygia. The reading Castum is
   supported by Tert., De Iejun. cap. 16: In nostris xerophagiis
   blasphemias ingerens. Casto Isidis et Cybeles eos adæquas. Compare
   Arnob. Bk. V., and Jerome's Letter cvii. ad Lætam c. 10, and below c.
   7.

   [4724] See note on p. 383.

   [4725] That is, of Side in Pamphylia. He lived in the reigns of Hadrian
   and Antoninus Pius, a.d. 117-161. Only two fragments remain of his
   Greek poem in forty-two books.

   [4726] He appears to be Flavius the Grammarian to whom reference is
   made in the Book on Illustrious Men, chap. 80:--Firmianus, qui et
   Lactantius, Arnobii discipulus, sub Diocletiano principe accitus cum
   Flavio grammatico, cujus de Medicinalibus versu compositi exstant
   libri, etc.

   [4727] Born a.d. 23. His Historia Naturalis embraces astronomy,
   meteorology, geography, mineralogy, zoölogy, and botany, and comprises
   according to the author's own account 20,000 matters of importance
   drawn from 2,000 volumes.

   [4728] A native of Cilicia, who probably lived in the second century of
   the Christian era. He was a Greek physician and wrote a treatise on
   Materia Medica, in 5 books, which is still extant.

   [4729] 2 Cor. xii. 14.

   [4730] 2 Cor. iv. 16.

   [4731] Phil. i. 23.

   [4732] Rom. xiii. 14.

   [4733] Matt. x. 9, xix. 21; Mark vi. 8.

   [4734] Matt. xix. 21.

   [4735] 1 Cor. xv. 85.

   [4736] 1 Cor. vi. 13.

   [4737] That is, the wood-worm just referred to.

   [4738] Pannonia, of which Valens also was a native.

   [4739] This name, which signifies dwellers in caves, was applied by
   Greek geographers to various peoples, but especially to the uncivilized
   inhabitants of the west coast of the Red Sea, along the shores of Upper
   Egypt and Æthiopia. The whole coast was called Troglodytice.

   [4740] In 376 the Goths were driven out of their country by the Huns.
   They were allowed by Valens to cross the Danube, but war soon broke out
   and the emperor was defeated with great slaughter on Aug. 9, 378.

   [4741] The Sarmatians dwelt on the N. E. of the Sea of Azov, E. of the
   river Don.

   [4742] They were located in the S. E. of Germany.

   [4743] The name given to the great confederacy of German peoples who in
   a.d. 409 traversed Germany and Gaul, and invaded Spain. In 429 they
   conquered all the Roman dominions in Africa, and in 455 they plundered
   Rome. Their kingdom was destroyed by Belisarius in 535.

   [4744] A people of Central Asia. Cyrus the Great was slain in an
   expedition against them.

   [4745] On the Oxus near its entrance into the Caspian Sea.

   [4746] An agricultural people on the W. coast of Pontus.

   [4747] Hyrcania was a province of the Persian Empire, on the S. and S.
   E. shores of the Caspian or Hyrcanian Sea. Jerome draws many of these
   details from the treatise of Porphyry Peri apoches empsuchion.

   [4748] Antinous was drowned in the Nile. a.d. 122. The emperor's grief
   was so great that he enrolled his favourite amongst the gods, caused a
   temple to be erected to his honour at Mantinea, and founded the city of
   Antinoopolis.

   [4749] Ter. Eunuch. iv. 5, 6.

   [4750] Jer. ix. 21.

   [4751] An Egyptian perfuming powder.

   [4752] Probably an ointment made from the grape of the wild vine.

   [4753] The celebrated Cynic philosopher. He died at Corinth, at the age
   of nearly 90, b.c. 323.

   [4754] Academia was a piece of land on the Cephisus about
   three-quarters of a mile from Athens, originally belonging to the hero
   Academus. Here was a Gymnasium with plane and olive plantations, etc.
   Plato had a piece of land in the neighbourhood; here he taught, and
   after him his followers, who were hence called Academici. Cicero called
   his villa Academia.

   [4755] Flourished about b.c. 320. Though heir to a large fortune he
   renounced it all, and lived and died as a true Cynic. He was called the
   "door-opener," because it was his practice to visit every house at
   Athens and rebuke its inmates.

   [4756] A common form of Gnostic error revived many centuries afterwards
   by the Anabaptists.

   [4757] 1 Tim. v. 6.

   [4758] See Cicero, Repub. Bk. III.

   [4759] Sallust. In Cat. ch. 1.

   [4760] Prov. xx. 1.

   [4761] The most celebrated physician of antiquity. Born about b.c. 460,
   died about 357.

   [4762] Born at Pergamum a.d. 130, died probably in the year 200. His
   writings are considered to have had a more extensive influence on
   medical science than even those of Hippocrates.

   [4763] Fabricius was censor in b.c. 275, and devoted himself to
   repressing the prevalent taste for luxury. The story of his expelling
   from the Senate P. Cornelius Rufinus because he possessed ten pounds'
   weight of silver-plate is well-known.

   [4764] Curius Dentatus, Consul b.c. 290 with P. Cornelius Rufinus to
   whom allusion has just been made, was no less distinguished for
   simplicity of life than was Fabricius. He was censor b.c. 272.

   [4765] Ep. Lib. I. ep. 2.

   [4766] Or, "an ante-room to the closet"--Meditatorium. Comp.
   Tertullian, Treatise on Fasting, ch. 6.

   [4767] The Peripatetic philosopher, geographer, and historian, a
   disciple of Aristotle and the friend of Theophrastus.

   [4768] Chæremon was chief librarian of the Alexandrian library. He
   afterwards became one of Nero's tutors.

   [4769] Wars, Book II., ch. viii. 2 sq.; Antiquities, Bk. xviii. I. 2
   sq. Josephus nowhere says that the Essenes abstained from flesh and
   wine, or fasted daily. Philo commends them for so doing. Jerome here,
   as above, borrows from Porphyry. The "Wars of the Jews or History of
   the Destruction of Jerusalem," are here called the "History of the
   Jewish Captivity."

   [4770] Philo the Jew. His exact date cannot be given; but he was
   advanced in years when he went to Rome (a.d. 40) on his famous embassy
   in behalf of his countrymen.

   [4771] Neanthes lived about b.c. 241. He was a voluminous writer,
   chiefly on historical subjects.

   [4772] There were many physicians of this name.

   [4773] The sun-god of the Persians.

   [4774] Supposed to be the same as the Bardesanes born at Edessa in
   Mesopotamia, who flourished in the latter half of the second century.
   Jerome again refers to him in the book on Illustrious Men, c. 33.

   [4775] Xenocrates was born b.c. 396, died b.c. 314.

   [4776] Triptolemus was the legendary inventor of the plough and of
   agriculture.

   [4777] Poems ascribed to the mythical Orpheus are quoted by Plato. The
   extant poems which bear his name are forgeries of Christian grammarians
   and philosophers of the Alexandrine school; but some fragments of the
   old Orphic poetry are said to be remaining.

   [4778] Antisthenes was the founder of the Cynic philosophy. He was a
   devoted disciple of Socrates and flourished about b.c. 366.

   [4779] The distinguished Peripatetic philosopher and historian. He
   lived, probably, about the time of Ptolemy Philopator (b.c. 222-205).

   [4780] Gen. vi. 3, 5.

   [4781] Gen. viii. 21; ix. 3.

   [4782] Ex. xvi. 3.

   [4783] Numb. xi. 4-6.

   [4784] Deut. xxxii. 15. "Beloved" (dilectus). Correctly Jeshurun, that
   is, the Upright, a name of Israel.

   [4785] Deut. viii. 12-14.

   [4786] The curious custom of representing Moses with horns arose from a
   mistake in the Vulgate rendering. The Hebrew verb qvl, to emit rays, is
   derived from a word which, meaning mostly a horn, has in the dual the
   signification rays of light. See Hab. iii. 4.

   [4787] Luke ix. 31.

   [4788] Ex. xvii. 8.

   [4789] Josh. x. 13.

   [4790] 1 Sam. xiv. 24. Heb. "entered into the wood." The English
   version follows the Hebrew. The Sept. erhista (Jerome's prandebat) is
   perhaps only a repetition of the preceding thought. Another rendering
   inserts the negative, ouk erista.

   [4791] 1 Sam. xiv. 24.

   [4792] 1 Kings xix. 8-11.

   [4793] 1 Sam. vii. 7.

   [4794] 2 Kings xviii.

   [4795] Gen. xviii. 23 sq.

   [4796] 1 Kings xxi. 27-29.

   [4797] 1 Sam. i. 15, 17.

   [4798] Dan. i and ii.

   [4799] Dan. ix. 23. Heb. A man of desires. A.V. greatly beloved.

   [4800] The story is in the apocryphal part of the book of Daniel.

   [4801] Ps. cii. 9.

   [4802] Ps. cix. 24.

   [4803] 2 Sam. xii. 13.

   [4804] Lev. x. 9.

   [4805] Amos ii. 12.

   [4806] Jer. xxxv. 18.

   [4807] S. Luke ii. 36.

   [4808] S. Jerome is in accord with the Vulgate, Peshito, and certain
   manuscripts, but the R.V. omits S. Matt. xvii. 21 (Howbeit this kind
   goeth not out but by prayer and fasting) and in S. Mark ix. 29 omits
   the words respecting fasting. S. Luke does not refer to our Lord's
   supposed remark.

   [4809] Acts x. 4.

   [4810] 2 Cor. xi. 27.

   [4811] 1 Tim. v. 23.

   [4812] 1 Tim. iv. 3.

   [4813] Prov. xvi. 26. Sept.

   [4814] S. Matt. xi. 12.

   [4815] Rom. xiv. 3.

   [4816] Rom. xiv. 14 sq.

   [4817] Rom. xiv. 2.

   [4818] Rom. xiv. 5 sq.

   [4819] S. Matt. v. 6.

   [4820] S. John iv. 32.

   [4821] S. Matt. v. 34. (Rather, not to be anxious about it.)

   [4822] S. Luke xxiv. 42; S. John xxi. 13.

   [4823] S. Luke xv. 19-31.

   [4824] S. Matt. xvi. 17, 18.

   [4825] See above.

   [4826] S. Mark v. 43: S. Luke viii. 55. Our Lord is not related to have
   given the command in the case of the son of the widow of Nain, or in
   that of Lazarus.

   [4827] S. John xii. 2.

   [4828] Acts x. 10. In our version "the housetop."

   [4829] S. John iv. 6.

   [4830] Isa. lviii. 5 sq.

   [4831] xvi. 29.

   [4832] Numb. xi. 34. Tertullian also speaks of the graves remaining.

   [4833] 1 Kings xiii. 24.

   [4834] Joel i. 14; ii. 15. Jerome agrees with the Sept. Therapeia. The
   Heb. root signifies to close or bind; hence the meaning healing. But
   others translate Therapeia by worship, or service. The correct
   rendering appears to be a solemn assembly as in A.V.

   [4835] S. Matt. xxv. 34.

   [4836] S. Matt. xxv. 41.

   [4837] S. John viii. 44.

   [4838] S. Matt. xix. 29; S. Mark x. 29, 30; S. Luke xviii. 29, 30.

   [4839] S. John vi. 56.

   [4840] S. John xiv. 23.

   [4841] S. John xiv. 2.

   [4842] 1 Cor. iii. 16; vi. 19.

   [4843] S. John xvii. 20-23.

   [4844] In Cyprus, where Zeno the founder of the Stoic school was born.

   [4845] i.e., Jovinianus. Jerome for the moment addresses the reader.

   [4846] Persius I. 128, Conington's translation.

   [4847] Ezek. xxxiv. 17, 20, 21.

   [4848] Ezek. xxxiv. 31.

   [4849] Rom. xii. 3 sq.

   [4850] Rom. xiv. 5.

   [4851] 1 Cor. iii. 6 sq.

   [4852] 1 Cor. iii. 10 sq.

   [4853] 1 Cor. iv. 1, 2.

   [4854] 1 Cor. ix. 13 sq.

   [4855] 1 Cor. xii. 4.

   [4856] 1 Cor. xii. 12.

   [4857] 1 Cor. xii. 28 sq.

   [4858] 1 Cor. xiii. 8, 9, 10.

   [4859] 1 Cor. xiii. 18; xiv. 1.

   [4860] 1 Cor. xiv. 5.

   [4861] 1 Cor. xiv. 18.

   [4862] 1 Cor. xv. 9, 10.

   [4863] 1 Cor. xv. 22.

   [4864] 1 Cor. xv. 39.

   [4865] Job ix. 9; xxxviii. 32.

   [4866] 2 Cor. v. 10.

   [4867] 2 Cor. ix. 6.

   [4868] Eph. iii. 10.

   [4869] Eph. iv. 7.

   [4870] Ps. lxxiii. 17.

   [4871] See Acts xxvii. 23 and the context.

   [4872] Gen. xix. 18-21.

   [4873] 1 Sam. xxx. 1 sq.

   [4874] S. Luke xiii. 4.

   [4875] 1 Cor. xi. 27.

   [4876] Mal. iv. 2.

   [4877] S. Matt. xxv. 13.

   [4878] S. John xix. 6.

   [4879] Wisd. vi. 7.

   [4880] Ex. xxi. 2.

   [4881] Lev. xxv. 13.

   [4882] S. Matt. xix. 29; S. Mark x. 30; S. Luke xviii. 30. In S.
   Matthew some authorities agree with S. Luke in reading "manifold."

   [4883] Matt. xi. 11.

   [4884] S. Luke xvii. 5.

   [4885] Matt. xiv. 31.

   [4886] Jer. xxxi. 31.

   [4887] Jer. xxxi. 33, 34.

   [4888] S. Matt. v. 19.

   [4889] S. Luke xiv. 9.

   [4890] S. John xiv. 2, 3.

   [4891] S. Matt. xx. 23.

   [4892] S. John xiv. 3.

   [4893] Ps. lxxiii. 26.

   [4894] Ez. xliv. 10.

   [4895] 1 Cor. vi. 19.

   [4896] Correctly, a portion of two, i.e., the portion of a first-born.
   Deut. xxi. 17.

   [4897] S. Luke vii., S. Matt. xxvi., S. Mark xiv., S. John xii.

   [4898] S. John xvii. 20, 21.

   [4899] 2 Pet. i. 4.

   [4900] S. John xvii. 23.

   [4901] S. John i. 12, 13.

   [4902] S. John vi. 57 sq.

   [4903] 1 John iv. 13, 15.

   [4904] Gal. iv. 19.

   [4905] 1 Cor. xii. 22-24.

   [4906] S. Luke xi. 34.

   [4907] 1 John v. 16.

   [4908] Jer. vii. 16.

   [4909] Rom. v. 14.

   [4910] Wisd. i. 11.

   [4911] Ps. cxvi. 11; Rom. iii. 4.

   [4912] Ps. li. 4.

   [4913] Ezek. xvi. 62, 63.

   [4914] Ezek. xxxvi. 31, 32.

   [4915] Letter XXI.

   [4916] S. Matt. xx. 26.

   [4917] S. Luke vii. 47.

   [4918] S. Matt. xxv. 15 sq.

   [4919] Phil. iii. 13.

   [4920] Josh. ix. 27.

   [4921] 2 Sam. xxi. 1.

   [4922] S. Luke xii. 47, 48.

   [4923] Ps. cxix. in our arrangement of the Psalter. The psalm is
   divided into twenty-two portions, which begin with the successive
   letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The following fifteen psalms are called
   in our Authorized Version, Songs of Degrees (Vulgate, graduum, steps).
   For the origin of the title, Wordsworth, or Neal and Littledale on Ps.
   cxx. may be consulted.

   [4924] Ps. cxxxiv. 1.

   [4925] Numb. xxxiv. 15; Josh. xiv. 3.

   [4926] Numb. xviii. 20.

   [4927] Lev. xvi. 2; Heb. ix. 7.

   [4928] Ex. xxviii. etc.

   [4929] Numb. vii. 5.

   [4930] Aristippus though the disciple of Socrates, taught that pleasure
   was the highest good.

   [4931] Ps. cxx. 5.

   [4932] Is. lxiii. 3.

   [4933] S. John xix. 6, 15.

   [4934] Jovinianus's doctrine is said to have influenced some who had
   taken a vow of virginity, to marry.

   [4935] Virgil Æn. iv. 172.

   [4936] Pythagoras asserted that he had once been the Trojan Euphorbus.

   [4937] Is. iii. 16.

   [4938] Jer. li. 6; vi. 14.

   [4939] Jer. vii. 4; Ps. xiv. 4; liii. 4.

   [4940] Jer. xxviii. 13.

   [4941] That is, cælebs from cælum.

   [4942] Jer. v. 8.

   [4943] That is, Jove.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
