# source: St. Ambrose 'On the Mysteries' and the Treatise, On the Sacraments, by an Unknown Author, tr. T. Thompson, ed. J.H. Srawley (London: SPCK, 1919)
# series: SPCK Translations of Christian Literature (Series III: Liturgical Texts)
# father: Ambrose
# work: Concerning the Sacraments
# clavis: CPL-154
# extracted: 2026-09-24
# note: Public-domain 1919 SPCK English translation.
CONCERNING THE SACRAMENTS 

BOOK I 

CHAPTER I 

Why instruction on the sacraments was deferred. The "opening 

of the ears. " 

i. The sacraments which you have received are the 
theme of my discourse. To have given a reasoned 
account of these earlier would not have been right ; x 
for in a Christian man faith is first. Therefore, at Rome2 
the title of " faithful " is given to those who have been 
baptized ; and also our father Abraham was justified 
by faith, not by works? So you received baptism, you 
believed. For it is wrong for me to think otherwise ; 
for thou wouldst not have been called to grace,- had 
not Christ thought thee worthy of his grace. 

2. Therefore, what did we do on the Saturday? What 
but "the opening"?4 Which mysteries of "opening" 
were performed, when the priest 5 touched thine ears and 

1 Cf. de Myst. i. 2 (note). 

* The reading "Romae" is found in most MSS. But the 
obvious difficulty that the name "faithful" was not peculiar to 
Rome suggests that there may be an error. Three MSS. read 
redo nomine, and the Roman edition substitutes recte ("rightly"). 

3 A summary of Rom. iv. 2, 3, 9. 

4 Cf. de Myst. i. 3 (note). 

5 The following is the use of the titles of the ministry in this 
work. "Deacon" is not used; its place is taken by "levite." 
The word presbyter is applied to the second order of the ministry. 
The highest order is denominated alike "bishop" and "priest" 
(sacerdos). In this chapter it is clear that " bishop " and 




nostrils. It is this which our Lord Jesus Christ indicates 
in the Gospel, when a deaf and dumb 1 man was brought 
to him, and he touched his ears and his mouth : the 
ears, because he was deaf; the mouth, because he was 
dumb : and said, Ephpheta. It is a Hebrew word, which 
rendered into Latin is adaperire, that is, Be opened. The 
reason, therefore, that the priest touched thine ears was 
that thine ears might be opened to the discourse and the 
address of the priest. 

3. But thou sayest to me, "Why the nostrils?" In 
that case, because he was dumb, he touched his mouth ; 
that, since he could not speak heavenly mysteries, he 
might receive utterance from Christ. Also, in that case 
because it was a man ; in our case, because women are 
baptized, and there is not the same purity in the servant 2 
as in the Lord (for what comparison can there be, when the 
latter forgives sins, the former has his sins remitted ?), there- 
fore, on account of the grace bestowed by his act and 
office, the bishop touches not the mouth but the nostrils ; 
that thou mayest receive a sweet savour of eternal godli- 
ness, and that thou mayest say, For we are a sweet savour 
of Christ unto God,z as the holy Apostle said ; and there 
may be in thee the full fragrance of faith and devotion. 


"priest" are the same person (cf. §3); and it appears that 
throughout the book the word "priest" is applied only to the 
bishop. This was the older practice (T.). We find, however, 
occasionally in earlier times, e.g. in Tertullian, an anticipation of 
its later application to the presbyter, and this use of the term 
became generally current in the West towards the close of the 
fourth century. For the use of terms in de Myst. see note on ii. 6. 
1 Mk. vii. 32 f. a Cf. de Myst. i. 4. 

3 2 Cor. ii. 15. 




CHAPTER II 

The unction before baptism. Of the renunciations, and the dignity 
of the office of priests, who were witnesses of their baptismai 
promises. 

4. We came to the font, thou didst enter. Consider 
whom thou sawest ; consider what thou saidst, recall it 
carefully. A levite met thee, a presbyter met thee.1 
Thou wast anointed as Christ's athlete ; as about to 
wrestle in the fight of this world, thou didst profess the 
objects of thy wrestling. He who wrestles, has some- 
thing to hope for; where the contest is, there is the 
crown. Thou wrestlest in the world, but thou art 
crowned by Christ, and thou art crowned for contests 
in the world ; for, though the reward is in heaven, yet 
the earning of the reward is placed here. 

5. When he asked thee, " Dost thou renounce the 
devil and his works," what didst thou reply ? "I re- 
nounce." " Dost thou renounce the world and its 
pleasures," what didst thou reply ? "I renounce." Be 
mindful 2 of thy words, and never let the contents of thy 
bond pass from thy memory. If thou givest a man thy 
note of hand, thou art held to be under acknowledgment 
of receiving his money ; thou art held bound, and the 
lender keeps thee to it, however unwilling thou mayest 
be. If thou deniest, thou goest before the judge, and 
there thou art convicted by thy bond. 

6. Consider where thou didst promise, or to whom 

1 Cf. de My st. ii. 6. 

a This admonition is found in substance as a formula in the 
Milanese Ordo of Beroldus (Magistretti, p. 92), and the Manuale 
Ambrosianum (Magistretti, II. 467). See Thompson, Offices oj 
Baptism and Confirmation, p. 129. It is not quoted in the 
parallel passage, de Myst. ii. 5. Mr. W. -C. Bishop suggests to me 
that the words may have been introduced into the later Ambrosian 
rite from de Sacram. on the assumption that that work was com- 
posed by Ambrose and that the words describe a part of the service. 



thou didst promise. Thou sawest a levite. But he is 
the minister of Christ ; thou hast seen him ministering 
at the altar. Therefore, thy note of hand is kept, not 
on earth, but in heaven. Consider where thou receivest 
the heavenly mysteries. If the body of Christ is here, 
the angels are stationed here also. Where the body is, 
there also are the eagles,1 hast thou read in the Gospel. 
Where the body of Christ is, there also the eagles are 
wont to fly, that they may shun earthly things, pursue 
heavenly. 

7. Why do I say this ? Because men also are angels, 
whosoever proclaim Christ, and seem to be admitted 
into the place of angels. How ? Take the case of the 
Baptist. John was born of a man and a woman. Yet hear 
how even he is an angel : Behold, I send my angel before 
thy face, and he shall prepare thy way before thee.2 Take 
another passage of the prophet Malachi : For the priest's 
lips keep knowledge, and they seek the law at his mouth : 
for he is the angel of God Almighty? These things are 
said to extol the dignity of the priest, not to claim 
anything for personal merits.4 

8. Therefore, thou hast renounced the world, thou 
hast renounced this life. Be careful. A man who owes 
money is always considering his bond. And thou who 
owest faith to Christ, keep faith, which is much more 
precious than money ; for faith is an eternal possession, 
money a temporal. And, therefore, always remember 
what thou hast promised, and thou wilt be more cautious. 
If thou keepest thy promise, thou wilt keep also thy 
bond. 

1 Mt. xxiv. 28 ; Lk. xvii. yj. 

2 Mai. iii. 1. There is a play on the word angelus which may 
mean either "messenger" or "angel." 

3 Mai. ii. 7. Cf. de Myst. ii. 6. 4 Cf. de Myst. v. 27. 




CHAPTER III 

In the baptismal rite there zuas more than appeared to the 

outward eye. 

9. Then thou drewest near;1 thou sawest the font, 
thou sawest also the priest above the font. Nor can I 
doubt, that this may have occurred to your mind, which 
occurred to the Syrian Naaman; for, although he was 
cleansed, yet he doubted previously. Why ? I will tell ; 
listen. 

10. Thou didst enter, thou sawest the water, thou 
sawest the priest, thou sawest a levite. Let not some 
one haply say, " Is this all ? " Yes, it is all. It is truly 
all,2 where all is innocency, all is godliness, all is grace, 
all is sanctification. Thou hast seen all that thou couldst 
see with the eyes of thy body and with human vision. 
Thou hast not seen the things which are effected, because 
they cannot be seen. The things which are not seen 
are far greater than those which are seen; since the 
things which are seen are temporal, the things which are 
not seen are eternal? 


CHAPTER IV 

The sacraments of Christians are more divine, and earlier, than 
those of the Jews, The meaning of the Passover. 

11. Therefore, let us say this first (hold my words 
as a pledge, and exact full payment). We marvel at 

1 With this and the following section cf. de Myst. iii. 8.. 

* Mr. Colson suggests that, as the author in what follows con- 
tends that what is visible to the eye is not all that is involved in 
baptism, a negative answer is required. By removing the full stop 
after Immo est totum we get the sense, "No, the whole, the true 
whole, is where all is innocency." 

2 Cor. iv. 18. For the quotation cf. de Myst. iii. 8. 



the mysteries of the Jews, which were given to our 
fathers, pre-eminent first in the antiquity of their sacra- 
ments, then in their holiness. This I promise, that the 
sacraments cf Christians are more divine and older than 
those of the Jews.1 

12. What stands out so much as the fact that the 
people of the Jews passed through the sea ? 2 — to speak for 
the present of baptism. Yet the Jews who passed through 
all died in the wilderness. But he who passes through 
this font, that is from earthly to heavenly things — for 
this is the "passing over,"3 therefore, pascha, that is, 
his passover, a passing over from sin to life, from guilt 
to grace, from defilement to sanctification — he who 
passes through this font, dies not, but rises again. 


CHAPTER V 

The story of Naaman, and the baptis?7i of Christ. 

13. To resume, Naaman was a leper* A certain maid 
said to his wife, " If my lord wishes to be cleansed, let 
him go into the land of Israel, and there he will find 
him who can take the leprosy from him." She spoke 
to her mistress, the wife spoke to her husband, Naaman 
spoke to the king of Syria, who sent him as his favourite 
to the king of Israel. The king of Israel heard that a 
man had been sent to him to be cured of his leprosy, 

1 Cf. de My st. iii. 9 (int't.). 

2 1 Cor. x. 1. Cf. de Myst. iii. 12, which is here expanded. 

3 A reference to Ex. xii. n, where the Latin has "est enim 
Phase (id est transitus) domini." Cf. also Ex. xii. 27, " victima 
transitus domini est, quando transivit super domos filiorum Israel 
in Aegypto." But the passages in Exodus refer to a " passing 
over" by "sparing"; the author applies "pass-over" {transitus) 
to the "passing through" the Red Sea by the Israelites (T.). 

4 2 Kings v. 1. With this and the following section cf. de 
Myst. iii. 16-17. 



and he rent his garment. Then Elisha the prophet 
charges him : " Wherefore hast thou rent thy garment, as 
if God were not able to cleanse a leper ? Send him to 
me" He sent him, and, when he came, the prophet 
said, "Go to Jordan, dip, and thou shalt be healed." 

14. He began to reflect and to say: "Is this all? I 
have come from Syria into the land of Judah, and I am 
told, Go and descend into Jordan, dip, and thou shalt 
be healed, as if there were not better rivers in my native 
land." So his servants said to him, " My lord, why dost 
thou not carry out the word of the prophet? Do it 
rather, and make trial." Then he went to Jordan, 
dipped, and arose whole. 

15. What, then, does it mean? Thou sawest water. 
But it is not all water that heals, but that water heals 
which has the grace of Christ. The element is one 
thing, the consecration is another; the work is one 
thing, the working another. The water is the work,1 
the working is of the Holy Spirit. Water does not heal, 
unless the Spirit has descended and consecrated that 
water; as thou hast read that, when our Lord Jesus 
Christ was giving the pattern of baptism, he came to 
John ; and John said to him, " / have need to be baptized 
of thee, and comest thou to me ? " Christ answered him, 
"Suffer it now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all 
righteousness." 2 See how all righteousness is based on 
baptism. 

16. Why, then, did Christ descend, unless that that 
flesh might be cleansed, the flesh which he took of our 
nature? For the washing away of his sins was not 
necessary for Christ, who did no sin ; 3 but it was neces- 
sary for us who remain subject to sin. Therefore, if 

1 "Work" {opus) is here used, somewhat strangely, for the 
"matter" of the sacrament (T.). The sentence is omitted by 
some MSS. 

2 Mt. iii. 14, 15. 3 1 Pet. ii. 22. 

F 



baptism is for our sake, a pattern has been established 
for us, the pattern of our faith has been set forth. 

17. Christ descended, John stood by baptizing, and, 
lo, the Holy Ghost descended as a dove.1 It was not a 
dove that descended, but as a dove. Remember what 
I said, Christ took flesh, not as it were flesh ; but it 
was the reality of that flesh, real flesh, which Christ 
took. The Holy Spirit, however, descended from heaven, 
not in the reality of a dove, but in the likeness of a dove. 
Therefore, John saw and believed. 

18. Christ descended, the Holy Spirit also descended. 
Why did Christ descend first, the Holy Spirit afterwards, 
since the form and practice of baptism provides that the 
font should be consecrated first, and then the person to 
be baptized should descend ? For as soon as the priest 
enters, he makes an exorcism 2 over the element of water, 
afterwards he offers an invocation and a prayer, that the 
font may be consecrated, and the presence of the eternal 
Trinity may come down. But Christ descended first, 
the Spirit followed. For what reason ? That the Lord 
Jesus might not seem himself as it were to need the 
mystery of sanctification ; but that he might sanctify, and 
the Spirit also sanctify. 

19. Therefore Christ descended into the water, and 
the Holy Spirit descended as a dove. Also God the 
Father spake from heaven. Thou hast the presence of 
the Trinity.3 

1 Mt. iii. 16 ; Mk. i. 10; Jn. i. 32. Cf. de Myst. iv. 24, 25. 

2 On the consecration of the font see Introd. p. xxii. 

3 Cf. de Myst. v. 26. 




CHAPTER VI 

Baptism prefigured in the crossing of the Red Sea and in the story 

of the Flood. 

20. Again, that there was a figure of our baptism in 
the Red Sea x is asserted by the Apostle, when he says 
that our fathers were all baptized in the cloud and in the 
sea.2 And he added, Now all these things happened unto 
them by way of figure ; 3 to them in a figure, but to us in 
reality. Then Moses held his rod : the people of the 
Jews had been shut in; on one side the Egyptian 
pressed on with arms, and on the other side the 
Hebrews were shut in by the sea. They could neither 
cross the seas, nor return to the enemy. They began to 
murmur.4 

21. See that it tempt thee not, that they were heard. 
Although the Lord heard, yet they are not without fault 
who murmured. It is thy duty, when thou art in a strait, 
to believe that thou wilt escape, not to murmur ; to 
appeal, to entreat, not to utter complaint. 

22. Moses held his rod, and led the people of the 
Hebrews at night in a pillar of light, and in the day in 
a pillar of cloud.5 What is the light but truth, since it 
sheds a full and open brightness ? What is the pillar of 
light but Christ the Lord, who scattered the shadows 
of unbelief, and poured the light of truth and spiritual 
grace on human hearts? The pillar of cloud, on the 
other hand, is the Holy Spirit. The people was in the 
sea, and the pillar of light went on before; then the 
pillar of cloud followed, as if the shadowing of the Holy 
Spirit. Thou seest that by the Holy Spirit and by the 
water he has shown a type of baptism.- 

1 Cf. de My st. iii. 12. 

* I Cor. x. 2. 8 I Cor. x. ri. 

4 See Ex. xiv. 9f. 5 Ex. xiii. 21 f . ; xiv. 19, 20. 



2$. As early as the flood 1 there was also a figure of 
baptism, and, certainly, the mysteries of the Jews did 
not as yet exist. Therefore, if the figure of our baptism 
preceded, thou seest that the mysteries of the Christians 
are earlier than were those of the Jews. 

24. But meanwhile, in view of the weakness of our 
voice 2 and the consideration of the time at our disposal, 
let us content ourselves to-day with just having touched 
the mysteries concerning the holy font. 'To-morrow, if 
the Lord shall grant strength and ability to speak, I will 
declare them more fully. It behoves your holiness 3 to 
have your ears prepared, your mind the more ready, 
that you may be able to retain what we may gather from 
the course of the Scriptures, and shall declare unto you, 
that you may have the grace of the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit, to which Trinity belongs an everlasting 
kingdom, from all ages, both now, and always, and for 
ever and ever. 

1 See for this ii. I. 1 below. 

2 There is a similar reference to "weakness of voice" in the 
Apologia David altera (v. 29). But the work is not a genuine 
work of Ambrose, and bears (ace. to Bardenhewer, Gesch. der 
altkirchl. Litt. III. 536) much the same relation to the genuine 
Apol. David as de Sacram. bears to de Myst. 

3 "Your holiness" {sanctitas vestra) is here a title addressed to 
the congregation, not to an individual (T.). 


BOOK II 
CHAPTER I 

Further illustration from the story of the Flooa. Of the baptisms 

of heathen and Jews. 

i. Yesterday we began to expound how in the flood 
also there was a prefiguring of baptism. What is the 
flood, but that in which the righteous is saved to be 
a seed-plot of righteousness, while sin dies ? Therefore, 
when the Lord saw that the transgressions of mankind 
were multiplied, he saved the righteous one alone with 
his offspring, but he bade the water rise even above the 
mountains. And therefore, in that flood all corruption 
of the flesh perished, only the family and pattern of the 
righteous survived. Is not the flood the same thing as 
baptism, whereby all sins are washed away, only the 
mind and grace of the righteous is revived ? 1 

2. There are many kinds of baptisms: but the Apostle 
cries, one baptism} Why? There are baptisms of the 
Gentiles, but they are no baptisms.3 They are baths, 
baptisms they cannot be. The flesh is washed, but guilt 
is not washed away ; nay, it is contracted in that bath. 
There were, however, baptisms of the Jews, some super- 
fluous, others figurative. And the mere figure helps us, 
since it is the herald of reality. 

1 For this paragraph cf. I Pet. iii. 20 f., and Gen. vi. vii. (T.). 

2 Eph. iv. 5. 

3 With this cf. de Myst. iv. 23, and note. 





CHAPTER II 

The healing of the paralytic at the pool of Bethesda. 

3. What was read yesterday?1 An angel, it says, 
went down at a certain season into the pool, and, so often 
as the angel descended, the water was troubled : and 
whosoever first descended, was made whole of every disease 
whatsoever he had.2 Which signifies a figure of our Lord 
Jesus Christ who was to come. 

4. Why an angel ? Because he himself is the Angel 
of Great Counsel? At a certain season, because he was 
kept till the last hour, that he might catch the day at 
its setting, and delay its setting.4 Therefore, as often 
as the angel descended, the water was troubled. Thou 
sayest perchance : " Why is it not troubled now ? " 
Learn why. Signs for the unbelieving, faith for believers 

5. Whosoever first descended, was made whole of every 
sickness. What is the meaning of first ? 5 Does it mean 
in time, or in honour? Understand in both ways. If 
it means he who descended first in time was made whole 
first, it signifies the people of the Jews, as opposed to 
the people of the Gentiles. If it means he who descended 
first in honour, that signifies that he who had the fear of 
God, the love of righteousness, the grace of charity, 
and the desire of purity, he rather was made whole. Yet 
at that time one only was made whole ; at that time, I 
say, by way of figure he who first descended was alone 

1 Cf. de My st. iv. 22. On the system of lessons indicated in this 
book see Introd. p. xxvii. 

2 Jn. v. 4. See note de Myst. iv. 22, and Introd. p. xli. 

3 A reference to Isaiah, ix. 6, according to the LXX. 

4 For this idea cf. Ambrose, de Abraham i. 50. 

6 Reading quid est prior. Some MSS. read qui for quid. In 
that case qui is relative, not interrogative, and the meaning will 
be " He who is first, is he first in time or in honour?" 



healed. How much greater is the grace of the Church, 
wherein all are saved, whosoever descend ! 

6. But observe the mystical sense. Our Lord Jesus 
Christ came to the pool ; many sick were lying there. 
And, naturally, there were many sick lying there, where 
only one was healed. Then he saith to the sick of the 
palsy, "Descend." He saith, "I have no man."1 Con- 
sider where thou art baptized.2 What source can there 
be for baptism, save the cross of Christ, the death 
of Christ? Herein is the whole mystery, in that he 
suffered for thee. In him thou art redeemed, in him 
thou wilt be saved. 

7. " / have no man" he said : that is, since by man 
came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.3 
He could not descend, he could not be saved, who did 
not believe that our Lord Jesus had taken flesh of the 
Virgin. But this man who was looking for the mediator 
between God and men, the man Jesus Christ* waiting for 
him of whom it was said, And the Lord shall send a man 
who shall save them,5 — he said, " / have no man " ; and 
therefore he deserved to attain to health, because he 
believed in one who was to come. Yet he would have 
been better and more perfect, if he had believed that 
he whose coming he hoped for had already come. 

CHAPTER III 

The interpretation of the "captive maid" in the story of Naaman. 
Summary of types already indicated. 

8. Now look at the types one by one. We said that 
baptism was prefigured in the Jordan, when Naaman 

1 Jn. v. 7. There is nothing in the Gospel parallel to the word 
" descend." The writer is quoting from memory. 
s i. e. under what circumstances. 

3 1 Cor. xv. 20. The reading "quia per hominem " is an Old 
Latin rendering for Vulg. quoniam enim per horn. 

4 1 Tim. ii. 5. 6 Is. xix. 20, following the LXX. 



the leper was cleansed. Who is that captive maid, but 
one who had the likeness of the Church, and exhibited a 
figure of it ? * For the people of the nations was captive. 
It was captive : I do not mean a captivity under some 
hostile people ; but I mean that captivity which is worse, 
when the devil and his minions rule with cruel sway, 
and subject to themselves the captive necks of sinners. 

9. Therefore thou hast one baptism here, ^another 
in the flood; thou hast a third kind when the fathers 
were baptized in the Red Sea ; thou hast a fourth kind 
in the pool, when the water was troubled. Now I ask 
thee whether thou oughtest not to believe that thou 
hast the presence of the Trinity in this baptism which 
is administered in the Church. 


CHAPTER IV 

Our Lord's command to baptize. Further O.T. types of baptism. 

10. It is, then, the same baptism which our Lord 
Jesus Christ speaks of in his Gospel to the Apostles : 
Go, baptize all nations in the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.21 This is the word of the 
Saviour. 

11. Tell me, O man. Elijah called fire from heaven, 
and fire came down from heaven.3 Elisha called on 
the name of the Lord, and the axe-head which had sunk 
came up out 'of the water.4 Here is another kind of 
baptism. Why ? Because every man before baptism is 
weighed down like iron, and sinks : when he has been 

1 For this application see de Myst. iii. 18. 

2 Mt. xxviii. 19. 

3 1 Kings xix. 38, quoted in a different connexion in de Myst. 
ix. 52. 

4 2 Kings vL 4-6, quoted in a different connexion, de Myst. 
ix. 51. 



baptized he is no longer like iron, but now rises like 
the fruit-bearing wood, which is a lighter kind of thing.1 
Therefore in this instance there is also another figure. 
The axe was that with which wood was cut down. The 
haft fell from the axe, that is, the iron sank. The son 
of the prophet knew not what to do ; but this alone he 
knew, to ask the prophet Elisha and to demand help. 
Then he cast in wood, and the iron was raised. Dost 
thou see, therefore, how the weakness of all men is 
raised on the cross of Christ? 

12. Another example — though we are not keeping to 
our order, for who can recount all the deeds of Christ, as 
the Apostles said ? 2 When Moses came into the desert 
and the people thirsted, and came to the spring of 
Marah, and wished to drink water (because, as soon as 
they drew, they tasted the bitterness, and began to be 
unable to drink), therefore Moses cast wood into the 
spring, and the water which previously was bitter began 
to be sweet.3 

13. What does it mean, but that every creature is sub- 
ject to corruption, that water is bitter to all. Although 
it is sweet for a time, although it is pleasant for a time, 
yet it is bitter, since it cannot take away sin. When 
thou hast drunk, thou wilt thirst ; when thou hast 
imbibed the sweetness of the draught, thou wilt taste 
its bitterness. Water, therefore, is bitter. But when 
thou hast received the cross of Christ,4 and the heavenly 


1 "sed tanquam iam levior fructuosi ligni species elevatur." On 
species see note, de Myst. ix. 52. 

3 Cf. Jn. xxi. 25. 

8 Ex. xv. 23 f. For this and the following section see de Myst. 
iii. 14. 

* Probably a reference to the signing of the catechumen with the 
cross, as in de Myst. iv. 20 (see note). In" the passage of de Myst. 
(iii. 14), parallel to this section, the symbolism of the incident is 
applied to the signing of the water at the consecration of the font. 
(See note there.) 


9o THE TREATISE 

sacrament, it begins to be sweet and pleasant ; and 
rightly sweet, because guilt is thereby cancelled. There- 
fore, if baptisms by way of figure could do so much, how 
much more can baptism in reality do ? 


CHAPTER V 

The presence of the Holy Trinity in baptism is vindicated. The 
Spirit at the Baptism of Christ and on the day of Pentecost 
manifested by outward signs to convince unbelievers. 

14. Now, then, let us consider. The priest comes ; 
he says a prayer at the font ; he invokes the name of the 
Father, the presence of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ; 
he uses heavenly words.1 What heavenly words ? They 
are those of Christ, that we should baptize in the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.2 If, 
therefore, at the word of men, at the invocation of a saint, 
the presence of the Trinity came down, how much more 
does it come where the eternal word is acting ? Do you 
wish to know that the Spirit descends? Thou hast 
heard that he descended as a dove.3 Why as a dove ? 
That unbelievers might be called to belief. In the begin- 
ing there had to be a sign, later there ought to be the 
fulfilment. 

15. Take another example. After the death of our 
Lord Jesus Christ the Apostles were in one place, and 
they were praying on the day of Pentecost. And suddenly 
there came a great sound as if the Spirit were carried 
along with great violence, and there appeared divided 
tongues as of fire.* What does this mean, but the descent 

1 Cf. with this the account of the consecration of the font in 
de My st. iii. 8, 14. There is no mention of the exorcism, which 
however is found in later Milanese and in Gallican books. See 
Thompson, Offices of Baptism and Confirmation, p. 130. 

2 Mt. xxviii. 19, z Mt. iii. 16; Mk. i. 10; Jn. i. 32. 
* Acts ii. 1-3. 



of the Holy Spirit, who wished to show himself to un- 
believers in bodily form also ; that is in bodily form by a 
sign, spiritually by a sacrament? Therefore, there was 
given an evident proof of his coming. But to us is now 
offered the privilege of faith. For in the beginning 
signs were shown for unbelievers ; now in the fulness of 
the Church we must gather truth not by a sign, but by 
faith. 


CHAPTER VI 

The Fall and its consequences. The redemptive grace of baptism. 

16. Now let us examine what it is which is called 
baptism. Thou earnest to the font, thou wentest down 
in it; thou didst watch the high priest, thou didst see the 
levites and the presbyter in the font.1 What is baptism ? 

17. In the beginning our God made man, so that, if 
he did not taste sin, he would not surely die? He com- 
mitted sin, he became subject to death, he was driven 
out of Paradise. But the Lord, who wished his benefits 
to endure, who wished to destroy all the wiles of the 
serpent, and also to root out everything harmful, first 
gave sentence upon the man, Earth thou art, and, unto 
earth thou shalt go ; 3 and he made man . subject to 
death. It was a Divine sentence ; it could notjjbe paid 
by human means. A remedy was granted that man 
should die, and rise again. Why? In order that the 
thing which had been previously counted as a condem- 
nation, might be counted as a benefit. What is that 
thing but death ? Thou askest how. Because death 
intervening makes an end of sin. For when we die, we 
certainly cease to sin. Therefore, the sentence seemed 
satisfied, because man who had been made to live, on 

1 Cf. de My st. ii. 6, 8. 2 Gen. i. 1 ; ii. 17. 

3 Gen. iii. 19. 



condition that he did not sin, was beginning to die. 
But, in order that the continual goodness of God might 
endure, man died, but Christ found the resurrection, 
that is, a way to restore the heavenly benefit which had 
been lost by the serpent's guile. Each, therefore, is 
for our good, since death is the end of sins, and the 
resurrection is the refashioning of our nature.1 

1 8. Nevertheless, that the craft or guile of the devil 
might not prevail in this world, baptism was devised. 
Concerning which baptism hear what the Scripture saith, 
nay, the Son of God, that the Pharisees who would not 
be baptized with the baptism of John, rejected the counsel 
of God.2 Therefore, baptism is the counsel of God. 
How great is the grace, where there is the counsel of God. 

19. Hear, therefore. In order that the bands of the 
devil might be loosed in this world also, a means was 
found that man might die while living, and while living 
rise again. What is "living"? It is the living life of 
the body, when it came to the font, and was dipped 
into the font. What is water, but from the earth? 
Therefore, the heavenly sentence is satisfied without the 
insensibility which death brings. Thy dipping paid that 
sentence, Earth thou art, and unto earth thou shalt go ; 3 
the sentence fulfilled, there is room for the heavenly 
benefit and remedy. So then, water is from the earth ; 
Moreover the conditions of our life did not allow that we 
should be covered with earth, and rise from the earth ; 
further, it is not earth, but water, that washes. There- 
fore the font is, as it were, a burial.4 

1 The teaching of this passage on the place of death and the 
resurrection in the Divine economy shows the influence of Greek 
theology, and recalls the similar teaching of Methodius and Gregory 
of Nyssa. 

2 Lk. vii. 30. 3 Gen. iii. 19. 

4 This exposition of the significance of baptism again finds a 
close parallel in Eastern theologians, e.g. Cyril of Jerusalem, Cat. 
Myst. ii. 4. 5 ; Gregory of Nyssa, Or. Cat. 35. 




CHAPTER VII 

The threefold confession of faith and the threefold immersion in 
baptism described and explained. The unction after baptism. 

20. Thou wast asked,1 " Dost thou believe in God the 
Father Almighty?" Thou saidst, "I believe," and 
didst dip, that is, thou wast buried. Again thou wast 
asked, " Dost thou believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
in his Cross ? " Thou saidst, " I believe," and didst dip ; 
therefore, thou wast also buried with Christ;2, for he who 
is buried with Christ, rises again with Christ. A third 
time thou was asked, " Dost thou believe also in the 
Holy Ghost ? " Thou saidst, " I believe," and didst dip 
a third time, that the triple confession might absolve the 
manifold fall of thy former life. 

21. Thus (that we may give you an example), after the 
holy Apostle Peter seemed to have fallen during the 
Lord's passion by the weakness of human nature, he who 
had previously denied was afterwards thrice asked by 
Christ if he loved Christ, that he might cancel and 
annul that fall. Then he said, " Thou know est, Lord, 
that I love Thee." 3 He said it thrice, that he might be 
thrice absolved.4 

22. Therefore, the Father forgives sin, just as the 
Son forgives ; likewise also the Holy Ghost. But he 
bade us be baptized in one name, that is, in the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
Wonder not that he spoke of one name, when there is 
one Substance, one Divinity, one Majesty. This is the 

1 With this section cf. de Myst. v. 21, 28. 

2 Rom. vi. 4 ; Col. ii. 12. 

3 Jn. xxi. 15 f. 

4 There is a similar application in Ambrose, de Spir. sancto, 
ii. 10. 105. 



name of which it was said, Wherein all must be saved.1 
In this name ye have all been saved, ye have been 
restored to the grace of life.2 

23. Therefore the Apostle cries, as you have heard in 
the lesson just read, that whosoever is baptized, is bap- 
tized in the death of Jesus.z What is in the death ? It 
is that, as Christ died, so thou also shouldst taste of 
death; that, as Christ died unto sin, and liveth unto 
God,* so thou also shouldst be dead unto the former 
allurements of sins through the sacrament of baptism, 
and shouldst rise again through the grace of Christ. It 
is a death, therefore; but not a death in the reality of 
bodily death, but in the likeness. For when thou 
dippest thou takest on the likeness of death and burial, 
thou receivest the sacrament of that cross, because 
Christ hung on the cross, and his body was pierced 
with nails. Therefore, when thou art crucified, thou 
cleavest to Christ; thou cleavest to the nails of our 
Lord Jesus Christ ; let not the devil be able to tear 
thee away. Let the nail of Christ hold thee fast, seeing 
that the weakness of human nature is seeking to call 
thee back. 

24. Therefore thou didst dip, thou earnest to the 
priest.5 What did he say to thee ? " God the Father 
Almighty," he saith, " who hath regenerated thee by water 
and the Holy Ghost, and hath forgiven thee thy sins, 
himself anoint thee unto eternal life." 6 See whereunto 
thou art anointed ; " unto eternal life," he saith. Do 

1 Cf. Acts iv. 12. 2 An allusion to 1 Pet. iii. 7. 

3 Rom. vi. 3, freely quoted. * Rom. vi. 10. 

6 On the word "priest" (sacerdos), used here to denote the 
bishop see note on i. 1. 2. Cf. the parallel passage in de My si, 
vi. 29. 

6 This prayer, with slight variations, is found in the two Roman 
Sacramentaries, the Gregorian (Muratori, Lit. Rom. Vet. ii. 65 ; 
Wilson, H.B.S., p. 57), and the Gelasian (Wilson, p. 86) ; also in 
the Missale Gallicanum vetus (Muratori, ii. 741), and in the Bobbio 
Missal (Muratori, ii. 851). 



not set this life before that life. For example, if any 
foe arise, if he wishes to take away thy faith, if he 
threatens death to make some one transgress, see what 
thou choosest. Do not choose that wherein thou 
wast not anointed, but choose that wherein thou wast 
anointed, so as to prefer eternal life to temporal life, 
through Christ our Lord. — Amen. 


BOOK III 
CHAPTER I 

The significance of the unction upon the head, and the meaning of 
" regeneration." The washing of the feet of the newly -baptized 
is defended and explained. 

i. Yesterday we discoursed on the font, whose 
appearance is somewhat like that of a tomb in shape ; 1 
into which, believing in the Father and the Son and 
the Holy Ghost, we are received, and plunged, and 
emerge, that is, we are raised up. Moreover, thou 
receivest myron,2 that is, ointment upon the head. Why 
upon the head ? Because the senses of a wise man are 
in his head,3 says Solomon. For wisdom is lifeless 
without grace; but when wisdom has received grace, 
then its work begins to be perfect. This is called 
regeneration.4 

2. What is regeneration? Thou readest in the Acts 
of the Apostles that the verse which is found in the 
second Psalm, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten 
thee, appears to refer to the resurrection. For the holy 
Apostle Peter in the Acts of the Apostles interpreted it 
thus, that at the time that the Son rose from the dead, 

1 The font in early times, was sunk into the floor of the baptistery ; 
it was often square, and thus resembled one class of tombs (T.). 

2 fivpov ; oil mingled with balsam ; it is employed for the unction 
after baptism (T. ). For the quotation, cp. de Myst. vi. 29. 

3 Eccl. ii. 14. The passage is quoted more correctly in de Myst. 
vi. 30. Here the writer, as often, develops the ideas suggested by 
de Mysteriis, and connects the unction with the gift of wisdom. 

4 On the relation of the unction to baptism and confirmation see 
Introd. pp. xxv f. 




the Father's voice rang out, Thou art my Son, this day 
have I begotten thee.1 Whence he is also called the first- 
born from the dead.2 Therefore, what is resurrection, 
but when we rise from death to life ? So, therefore, 
in baptism also, since there is a likeness of death, with- 
out doubt when thou dost dip and rise again, there is 
a likeness of the resurrection. Rightly, therefore, accord- 
ing to the interpretation of the Apostle Peter, as that 
resurrection was a regeneration, so also is this resurrection 
a regeneration. 

3. But what dost thou mean by this dipping in the 
water? Is it for this reason that thou art perplexed,3 
that hesitation possesses thee? Certainly, we read, Let 
the earth bring forth from herself fruit that springs up. 
Likewise also thou hast read of the waters, Let the waters 
bring forth living creatures, and living creatures were 
born.4 And those, indeed, were in the beginning of 
creation ; but for thee it has been reserved that water 
should regenerate thee to grace, as it generated those 
others to life. Imitate the fish, which, though it has 
obtained less grace, yet should fill thee with wonder. It 
is in the sea, and above the waves ; it is in the sea, and 
swims over the billows. In the sea the storm rages, 
the winds howl ; but the fish swims, it does not sink, 
because it is wont to swim. Therefore this world is 
a sea to thee also. It has divers billows, heavy waves, 
fierce storms. And do thou be a fish, that the wave 
of the world sink thee not. Well, however, does the 
Father say to the Son, This day have I begotten thee; 
that is, when thou didst redeem the people, when thou 

1 The passage, here attributed to St. Peter, is found in St. Paul's 
speech at Antioch of Pisidia (Acts xiii. 33). 

2 Col. i. 18. 

3 peregrinaris. Cf. I Pet. iv. 12 (Vulg.), nolite peregrinari in 
fervore. 

4 See Gen. i. II, 20. Both passages are quoted inexactly. 

G 



didst call them to the kingdom of heaven, when thou 
didst fulfil my will, thou didst prove thyself to be my 
son. 

4. Thou earnest up out of the font. What followed ? 1 
Thou hast heard the lesson. The high priest was girt 
up (for though presbyters also carried it out, yet the 
ministry is begun by the high priest), the high priest, I 
say, was girt up, and washed thy feet. What is this 
sacrament ? 2 Doubtless thou hast heard that when the 
Lord had washed the feet of the other disciples, He 
cometh to Peter ; 3 and Peter saith to him, Dost thou wash 
my feet ? That is, Dost thou, the Lord, wash the feet of 
the servant? Dost thou, the spotless, wash my feet? 
Dost thou, the maker of the heavens, wash my feet? 
Thou hast this in another place also. He cometh to 
John, and John saith to him, "1 have need to be bap- 
tized of thee, and contest thou to me ? " 4 I am a sinner, 
and dost thou come to me a sinner, that thou mayest 
as it were lay down thy sins who hast done no sin ?5 See 
all righteousness,6 see the humility, see the grace, see the 
sanctification : 7 Unless I wash thy feet, he saith, thou wilt 
have no part with me.8 

5. We are not ignorant that the Roman Church has 
not this custom. Her type and form we follow in all 
things ; however she has not this custom of washing the 

1 With this section cf. de Myst. vi. 31, with note. See also 
Introd. p. xxiv. 

2 The word used is mysterium, which is here equivalent to 
"sacrament" in the wider sense (T.). 

3 Jn. xiii. 6. 4 Mt. iii. 14. 
5 1 Pet. ii. 22. 6 Mt. iii. 1 5. 

7 The clause is somewhat compressed. The meaning is : — See 
how "all righteousness" is fulfilled in both examples; see the 
humility displayed by our Lord ; see the grace and sanctifying 
virtue of this sacrament. Sanctiftcatio is used, as below in § 5> f°r 
the virtue and effect of a sacrament (T. ). 

8 Jn. xiii. 8. The form of the quotation agrees with that found 
in the parallel passage, de Myst. vi. 31. 


ON THE SACRAMENTS . 99 

feet. See then, perhaps she has declined it on account 
of the numbers.1 There are, however, some who say 
and try to urge that this ought to be done, not as a 
sacrament, not at baptism, not at the regeneration ; but 
only as we should wash the feet of a guest. The 
latter is an act of humility, the former a work of sancti- 
fkation.2 Accordingly, learn how it is a sacrament and 
a means of sanctification : Unless I wash thy feet, thou 
wilt have no part with me. This I say, not to find fault 
with others, but to recommend my own usage.3 In all 
things I desire to follow the Roman Church. Yet we 
too are not without discernment ; and what other places 
have done well to retain, we too do well to maintain. 

6. It is the Apostle Peter himself that we follow, to 
his devotion we cling. What does the Roman Church 
answer to this ? Certainly the Apostle Peter himself 
supports us in this claim, he who was priest of the 
Roman Church. Peter himself says, Lord, not my feet 
only, but also my hands and my head* Look at the 
faith. His demurring at first showed his humility; his 
offer afterwards showed his devotion and faith. 

7. Because he had said my hands and my head, the 
Lord answered him, He that hath washed needeth not to 
wash again, save to wash his feet only.5 Why is this ? 
Because in baptism all guilt is washed away.6 Guilt, 

1 If the number of candidates for baptism was very large, the 
ceremony of washing the feet would be long and laborious (T. ). 

2 Similarly, Augustine (Ep. lv. {ad Januar.) 33), maintained 
that the "feet washing" was a type of humility, but not a part of 
the sacrament of baptism. On the "feet washing" in Africa see 
Thompson, Offices of Baptism and Confir?7iation, p. 108. 

3 If vel be read for sed, we should get a good sense, "or to 
commend my own services." 

4 Jn. xiii. 9. On the text of this and the following quotation 
see Introd. p. xl. 

5 Jn. xiii. 10. 

6 Cf. with this de Myst. vi. 32 (note). The writer here modifies 
Ambrose's treatment of the question. 


ioo THE TREATISE 

therefore, vanishes. But, because Adam was tripped 
up by the devil, and poison was poured over his feet, 
therefore thou washest thy feet ; that at that point where 
the serpent made his treacherous attack a stronger re- 
inforcement of sanctification may be applied, that he may 
not be able to trip thee up afterwards. Therefore, thou 
washest thy feet, to wash off the poison of the serpent. 
It is a help towards humility also, that in a sacrament 
we should not shrink from that which we scorn in an 
act of service. 


CHAPTER II 

The " spiritual seal" and the sevenfold gifts of the Spirit. The 
effect of baptism illustrated from the healing of the blind man 
in John ix. Those who deny the need of baptism are refuted. 

8. There follows the spiritual seal,1 which you have 
heard mentioned in the lesson to-day. For after the 
font it remains for the " perfecting " 2 to take place, 
when, at the invocation of the priest, the Holy Spirit is 
bestowed, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the 
spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and 
godliness, the spirit of holy fear,3 as it were seven virtues 
of the Spirit. 

9. And, indeed, all virtues belong to the Spirit ; but 
these are as it were cardinal, as it were principal.4 For 
what is so principal, as godliness ? What is so principal, 
as the knowledge of God ? What is so principal, as 
strength ? What is so principal, as the counsel of God? 

1 Cf. de My st. vii. 41, 42. 

2 "Perfectio" is almost a technical term for the rite following 
baptism, i. e. confirmation (T.). 

3 Is. xi. 2, Cf. de My st. vii. 42 (note). 

4 The words principales virtutes recall Ambrose, de Off. i. 24. 
U5- The term cardinales virtutes is found in Ambrose, Exp. in 
Luc. v. 49. 



What is so principal, as the fear of God ? As the fear 
of the world is weakness, so the fear of God is great 
power. 

10. These are the seven virtues, when thou art 
sealed ; x for, as the holy Apostle saith, The wisdom of 
our God is manifold.2 And, as the wisdom of God is 
manifold, so is the Holy Ghost manifold, who hath 
divers and various virtues. Whence also we speak of 
the God of hosts ; 3 which can be applied to the Father, 
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. But that 
belongs to another discourse, another time. 

ii. After this what follows? Thou hast to come to 
the altar,4 whither thou hast not come before ; thou hast 
to see the things which thou didst not see before, that 
is, the mystery which thou hast read in the Gospel ; 5 
if, however, thou hast not read it, thou hast certainly 
heard it. A blind man presented himself to the Saviour 
to be healed. And he, who healed others merely by a 
word and utterance, and brought back the light of the 
eyes by a command, yet in the book of the Gospel 
which is entitled "according to John," — who truly beyond 
the others saw great mysteries, and described, and de- 
clared them : — he wished to prefigure this mystery 6 in 
that miracle. All the Evangelists, indeed, were holy, 
all the Apostles, except the traitor — all were holy ; yet 
Saint John, who wrote his Gospel last, having been 
sought and chosen by Christ to be in a sense his kins- 
man,7 uttered eternal mysteries with a louder trumpet. 
Whatever he spoke is a mystery. Another Evangelist 
told of the cure of a blind man ; Matthew did, Luke 

1 consignaris. x Eph. iii. io. 

3 Deus virtutum, as often in the Latin Psalter. 

4 Cf. de My st. 43 {init.). . * Jn. ix. I f. 

6 The word mysttriiim in this passage, as elsewhere, is used in 
various senses. It is a "sacrament," "a passage of Scripture with 
an inner meaning," and "a divine purpose" (T.). 

7 Possibly a reference to Jn. xix. 26, 27. 



did, Mark did. What does John alone say? — He took 
clay, and anointed his eyes, and said unto him, "Go to 
Siloam" And rising he went, and washed, and came 
seeing.1 

12. Consider thou also the eyes of thine heart. 
Formerly thou sawest only the things that are bodily, 
with bodily eyes ; but the things which pertain to the 
sacraments thou wast not yet able to see with the eyes 
of the heart. Therefore, when thou gaves't thy name,2 
he took clay, and anointed thine eyes. What does it 
mean? It means that thou shouldst confess thy sin, 
recognize thy guilt, repent of thy trespasses, that is, 
acknowledge the lot of human birth. For although he 
who comes to baptism does not confess his sin,3 yet he 
makes a complete confession of all sins by the very fact 
that he asks to be baptized, that he may be justified, 
that is, pass from guilt to grace. 

13. Do not think it superfluous. There are some 4 — 
I know for certain there was one who said so ; when we 
said to him, " At thy time of life thou shouldest certainly 
be baptized," he objected, "Why should I be baptized? 
I have no sin. Have I contracted sin ? " He had no 


1 Jn. ix. 6. This particular incident is not found in the other 
Evangelists, but similar cures of blind men are recorded in Mt. ix. 
27 f. ; xii. 22 ; xx. 30 f. ; Mk. viii. 22 f. ; x. 46 f. ; Lk. xviii. 

35f- 

2 z. e. as a candidate for baptism (T.). See Introd. p. xi. 

3 Ambrose, Exp. in Luc. vi. 3, speaks of a "confession of sin" 
in connexion with baptism, and some commentators see in the 
present passage a further indication that de Sacra?ne?itis is not 
the work of Ambrose, as the writer suggests that this confession 
may be omitted, and that the very fact of seeking baptism is in 
itself a " confession" of sin. But the language of Ambrose, in the 
passage cited above, is too vague and general to warrant the 
deduction drawn from it. 

4 In this passage it has been thought that the writer has in view 
the Pelagian denial of original sin. If so, the passage is a further 
indication that the work is later than Ambrose. See Cabrol, 
Diet, d"> archeologie et de lit. chrtt. I. 1386, art. " Ambrosien (rit)." 



clay, because Christ had not washed,1 that is, had not 
opened, his eyes ; for no man is without sin. 

14. Therefore, he who takes refuge in the baptism of 
Christ acknowledges himself a man. So on thee also 
he has put clay, that is, modesty, prudence, reflection 
upon thy weakness, and he has said to thee, "Go to 
Siloam." What is Siloam ? Winch is, it says, by inter- 
pretation, Sent. That is, Go to that fount 2 wherein the 
Cross of the Lord is proclaimed ; 3 go to that fount 
wherein Christ redeemed the faults of all men. 

15. Thou didst go, thou didst wash, thou earnest to 
the altar. Thou didst begin to see what thou hadst not 
seen before ; that is, through the font of the Lord and 
the preaching of the Lord's passion thine eyes were then 
opened. Thou who seemedst before to be blinded in 
heart, didst begin to see the light of the sacraments. 
Therefore, dearly beloved brethren, we have arrived at 
the altar, to a richer theme. And for the reason that 
the time is advanced, we cannot begin a fresh subject ; 
since it is a lengthier theme, let what has been said 
to-day suffice ; and to-morrow, if it please the Lord, we 
will treat of those sacraments. 

1 laverat. The Rom. edition and one MS. read liniverat. Pos- 
sibly leverat, the reading of several MSS. is correct: i.e. "had 
not anointed." 

2 The word here, font em, can mean either a "spring" or a 
baptismal font ; the writer plays on the double meaning (T. ), 

3 Cf. de My st. iii, 14 (note). 


BOOK IV 
CHAPTER I 

The symbolism of the Tabernacle applied to Christian baptism. 

i. Under the old covenant the priests used to enter 
continually into the first tabernacle; into the second 
tabernacle the high priest entered once in the year. Which 
the Apostle Paul x clearly recalling in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews, explains the tenor of the Old Testament. 
Now there was in the second tabernacle the manna ; there 
was also the rod of Aaron which withered and afterwards 
blossomed again ; there was likewise the censer.2 

2. What is the purpose of this? It is that you may 
understand what is the second tabernacle, into which the 
priest introduced you, into which the high priest was 
accustomed to enter once in the year, that is, to the 
baptistery,3 where the rod of Aaron blossomed; it was 
withered before, afterwards it blossomed again. Thou 
too wast withered, and dost begin to blossom again in 
the streaming font. Thou hadst withered through sins, 
thou hadst withered through faults and trespasses ; but 

1 For the ascription of the Ep. to the Hebrews to St. Paul see 
de Myst. viii. 45 (note). 

a In the above passage the author has in mind Heb. ix. 4-7. 
The word thymiaterium (rendered "censer") is a transliteration of 
the Greek, which has been variously rendered "censer" or "altar 
of incense." The Vulgate has turibidnm. That the writer means 
"censer" is shown by iv. 1. 4. 

2 On the baptistery as "the holy of holies" see de Myst. ii. 3. 
The parallel to "once in the year," in the author's mind, is to be 
found in the fact that Easter was the normal time for baptism. 




now thou beginnest to bear fruit, planted by the rivers 
of water.1 

3. But perhaps thou sayest, "What has this to do 
with the people, if the priest's rod had withered and 
blossomed again ? " What is the people itself but 
priestly? To whom it was said, But ye are a chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,2 as saith 
the Apostle Peter. Every one is anointed to the priest- 
hood, is anointed to the kingdom also ; but it is a 
spiritual kingdom and a spiritual priesthood. 

4. In the second tabernacle is the censer also, which 
is wont to diffuse a sweet savour. So you also are now 
a sweet savour of Christ ; 3 no longer is there in you any 
share of sins,4 any savour of ranker error. 


CHAPTER II 

The grace of innocence and "renewal of youth" resulting from 

baptism. 

5. It follows that you come to the altar. You began 
to come ; the angels watched, they saw you approaching, 
and that human nature, which before was stained with 
the murky filth of sin, suddenly shone bright in their 
sight. And accordingly they said, Who is this that 
cometh up from the wilderness made white ? 5 The angels 
then also wonder. Wilt thou know that they wonder? 
Hear then the Apostle Paul saying that those things 
have been bestowed on us which even angels long to 

1 Ps. i. 3. 2 I Pet. ii. 9. 3 2 Cor. ii. 15. 

4 sors delictorum. Some MSS. read sorties, "defilement." 

5 Cant. viii. 5. Cf. de Myst. vii. 35. Like Ambrose the author 
reads dealbata ("made white"), following LXX. The words 
"from the wilderness" are found in Heb. and Vulg., but not 
in LXX. 



see;1 and again, What eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
the things which God hath -prepared for them that love 
him.2 

6. Then recall what thou hast received. Holy David 
the prophet saw this grace in a figure, and desired it. 
Wilt thou know that he desired it? Again hear him 
saying, Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall 
be clean ; thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter 
than snow.3 Why? Because snow, although it is white, 
quickly turns black with any dirt, and is spoilt ; this 
grace which thou hast received, if thou hold fast that 
which thou hast received, will be lasting and eternal. 

7. Thou earnest thus with desire to the altar, since 
thou hadst seen such grace. Thou earnest with desire 
to the altar, to receive the sacrament ; let thy soul say, 
And I will go unto the altar of my God, unto God who 
tnaketk glad my youth* Thou hast put off the old age 
of sins, thou hast taken the youth of grace ; this the 
heavenly sacraments bestowed on thee. Therefore, 
again hear David saying, Thy youth shall be renewed as 
the eagle's.5 Thou beginnest to be a good eagle, seeking 
heaven, scorning earthly things. Good eagles are about 
the altar; for where the body is, there also are the 
eagles. 6 The altar is a type of the body,7 and the body 

1 1 Pet. i. 12. The writer, by a slip of memory, attributes the 
words to St. Paul. 

2 1 Cor. ii. 9. Cf. de Myst. viii. 44, note. 

3 Ps. Ii. 7 (1. 9, Vulg.). Cf. de Myst. vii. 34. 

4 Ps. xliii. (xlii. Vulg.), 4. Cf. de Myst. viii. 43, where the 
psalm is similarly quoted in connexion with the approach to the 
altar. But the use of this psalm, as part of the preparation in the 
Roman Mass, is of late date, and its appearance in some editions 
of the Ambrosian Missal is due to borrowing from the Roman rite 
(see Ceriani, Notitia Lit. ambros. p. 24). 

6 Ps. ciii. (cii. Vulg.), 5. 

5 Mt. xxiv. 28 ; Lk. xvii. 37. Cf. i. 2. 6. 

7 The sense of this expression is illustrated by the following 
passage from the Glossa Ordinaria (Migne, P.L., cl. 405). The 
Body of Christ "is called an altar in other places of the divine 



of Christ is on the altar ; ye are eagles, renewed by the 
washing away of sin. 


CHAPTER III 

Comparison of the Jewish and Christian sacraments. Melchizedek 

a type of Christ. 

8. Thou earnest to the altar, thou sawest the sacra- 
ments laid upon the altar, and thou didst wonder at 
those creatures ; x yet they are ordinary and familiar. 

9. Perhaps some one will say : " To the Jews God 
granted such grace, he rained down manna upon them 2 
from heaven ; what more has he given to his faithful, 
what more has he bestowed on those to whom he pro- 
mised more?" 

10. Hear what things I say, namely, that the mysteries 
of the Christians are older than those of the Jews,3 and 
the sacraments of the Christians are more divine than 
those of the Jews. How ? Hear. When did the Jews 
begin? At the earliest, with Judah, the great-grandson 
of Abraham ; or, if thou preferrest to take this view, 
with the Law, that is, when the Jews were deemed 
worthy to receive the Law. Therefore, they were called 
Jews from the great-grandson of Abraham, or since the 
time of holy Moses. And if God rained down manna 
from heaven then upon the murmuring Jews, still there 

Scriptures also, because on it, that is, on faith in it, as on an altar, 
our offered prayers and works become acceptable" (quoted by 
Westcott on Heb. xiii. 10). (T.) 

1 crcaturam. Cf. Book of Common Prayer, "these thy creatures 
of bread and wine." The writer is thinking of the placing of the 
elements upon the altar. From Ambrose (in Ps. cxviii. prol. 2) 
it appears that at Milan, as elsewhere in the West, the people 
made their offerings of bread and wine for the Eucharist, but the 
newly-baptized did not partake in this "offering" before the 
octave of Easter. 

2 Ps. lxxviii. (lxxvii. Vulg.) 24. Cf. de Myst. viii. 44. 

3 With this section cf. de Myst. viii. 45, 46. 



was for thee a yet earlier figure of these sacraments, 
when Abraham was alive, when he gathered the men 
born in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and then 
pursued the adversaries, delivering his nephew out of 
captivity ; then he came in triumph ; Melchizedek the 
■priest met him, and offered him bread and wine} Who 
had the bread and wine ? Abraham had not. But who 
had? Melchizedek. He, then, is the author of the 
sacraments. Who is Melchizedek? He who is indi- 
cated as King of righteousness, King of peace.2 Who is 
the King of righteousness ? Can any man be King of 
righteousness ? Who then is the King of righteousness, 
but the Righteousness of God, he who is the Peace of God, 
the Wisdom [of God 1 3 He who could say, My peace I 
give unto you, my peace I leave with you.4" 

ii. Therefore, first understand that these sacraments 
which thou receivest are older than are the sacraments of 
Moses, whatever they are that the Jews say they have ; 
and that the Christian people began before the people of 
the Jews — we, however, as predetermined, while they 
actually bore the name. 

12. Melchizedek, therefore, offered bread and wine. 
Who is Melchizedek? Without father, it says, without 
mother, without order of generation, having neither begin- 
ning of days nor end of life ; this is in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews.5 He is without father, it says, and without 
mother. Like unto whom ? The Son of God. The Son 
of God was born without mother in his heavenly genera- 
tion, because he was born of God the Father only. And 

1 Gen. xiv. 14 f. 2 Heb. vii. 2. 

3 Eph. ii. 14 ; 1 Cor. i. 24. 

4 Jn. xiv. 27. The variation in the order of the clauses is found 
in some Old Latin and Vulgate MSS. 

8 Heb. vii. 3. The reading generationis ordine is apparently 
peculiar to the writer ; but generationis enumeratione is found in 
Ambrose, Ep. lxiv. 49. 



again, he was born without father, when he was born of 
the Virgin ; for he was not generated of the seed of a 
man, but born of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary,1 
brought forth from a virgin womb, in all things like to 
the Son of God.2 Melchizedek was also a priest ; since 
Christ too is a priest to whom it is said, Thou art a priest 
for ever after the order of Melchizedek? 


CHAPTER IV 

The bread and wine of the Eucharist become Christ's body and 
blood in virtue of the words of consecration, which are Christ's 
own words. Illustrations from the Virgin birth and miracles 
of O. T. 

13. Who then is the author of the sacraments but the 
Lord Jesus ? From heaven those sacraments came ; for 
all counsel is from heaven. But it was truly a great and 
divine miracle that God rained down manna from heaven, 
and the people ate without toiling. 

14. Thou sayest perhaps, "My bread is4 of the usual 
kind." But that bread is bread before the words of the 
sacraments ; when consecration has been added, from 
bread it becomes the flesh of Christ. Let us therefore 
prove this. How can that which is bread be the body of 
Christ? By consecration. But in what words and in 
whose language is the consecration ? Those of the Lord 
Jesus. For all the other things which are said in the 

1 The old Roman Creed, quoted by Rufinus, similarly has the 
words qui natus est de spiritu sancto et Maria virgine ; the words 
in the text may be an echo of this (T.). 

a Heb. vii. 3. 

3 Heb. vii. 17. Cf. Ps. ex. (cix. Vulg.) 4. 

4 Some see in this a reference to the offering of bread and wine 
by the people. But at Milan (see note on iv. 3. 8) the newly- 
baptized did not ''offer" before the octave of Easter. PossiMy 
the meaning is quite general : "the bread which I see is ordinary 
bread." With this section cf, de Myst. ix. 50. 


no THE TREATISE 

earlier parts of the service are said by the priest — 
praises are offered to God, prayer is asked for the people, 
for kings, and the rest ; 1 when it comes to the consecra- 
tion of the venerable sacrament, the priest no longer 
uses his own language, but he uses the language of Christ. 
Therefore, the word of Christ consecrates this sacrament.2 
15. What is the word of Christ? That, to be sure, 
whereby all things are made. The Lord commanded, 
and the heaven was made ; the Lord commanded, and 
the earth was made ; the Lord commanded, and the seas 
were made; the Lord commanded, and every creature 
was produced. Thou seest, therefore, how effective is 
the word of Christ. If, therefore, there is such power 
in the word of the Lord Jesus, that the things which 
were not began to be, how much more is it effective, 
that things previously existing should, without ceasing to 
exist, be changed into something else?3 The heaven 

1 In this description Probst {Lit. des viert. Jahrh. p. 249) sees 
a parallel to the order of the prayers in the Roman Canon. In 
the Gelasian Sacramentary the Sanctus, which corresponds to the 
"praises," is followed by the prayers Te igitur (a prayer for the 
Church and Pope) and Memento, domine, a prayer for the congre- 
gation "who offer this sacrifice of praise." The letter of Pope 
Innocent I to Decentius (416 a.d. ) shows that at Rome in his time 
the names of offerers were recited within the Canon. But it is 
possible that the author of de Sacram. is not observing the strict 
order and that the prayers referred to are "the prayers of the 
faithful" earlier in the service. There is no prayer for kings in 
the Gelasian Canon, but such a prayer is found in the Good 
Friday prayers (Wilson, Gel. Sacram. p. 76), which are a survival 
of the "prayers of the faithful." 

2 Cf. de Myst. ix. 52 (note). 

3 " ut sint quae erant et in aliud commutentur." The words 
have also been rendered "that they should be what they were and 
be changed into something else." Thus rendered the words have 
been interpreted as an assertion by the author of the continued 
existence, after consecration, of the natures of the bread and wine. 
The passage was discussed in the Eucharistic controversies of the 
eleventh and twelfth centuries. Lanfranc and Alger of Liege 
appear to have interpreted the words in the above sense, but 
sought to evade the conclusions drawn from them by contending 
that the words refer to the outward appearances of bread and wine. 


ON THE SACRAMENTS in 

was not, the sea was not, the earth was not; but hear 
David saying, He spake, and they were made : he com- 
manded, and they were created} 

1 6. Therefore, that I may answer thee, it was not the 
body of Christ before consecration ; but after consecra- 
tion, I tell thee, it is now the body of Christ. He spake, 
and it was made : he commanded, and it was created. 
Thou thyself didst formerly exist, but thou wrast an old 
creature; after thou wast consecrated, thou didst begin 
to be a new creature. Wilt thou know how thou art a 
new creature? Everyone, it says, in Christ is a new 
creature.2 

17. Hear, then, how the word of Christ is wont to 
change every creature, and changes, at will, the ordi- 
nances of nature. In what way? thou askest. Hear; 
and, first of all, let us take an example from his genera- 
tion. It is usual that a man is not generated save from 
a man and a woman and the use of marriage ; but 


One MS. omits the words altogether. The Roman edition reads 
tit quae erant in aliud commatentur (" that the things which were 
should be changed into something else"), and the same reading 
was known to Lanfranc. The variations in reading reflect the 
controversial use made of the passage. On the other hand, the 
translation given in the text, which is supported by Cardinal 
Perronne, appears to be justified on two grounds : — 

(1) The author has in mind the parallel passage in Ambrose, de 
My st. ix. 52. "The word of Christ could make out of nothing 
that which was not ; cannot it then change the things which are 
into that which they were not ? For to give new natures to things 
is quite as wonderful as to change their natures" (see notes). 

(2) In the present passage the author is arguing that creation out 
of nothing is an even greater miracle than the conversion of existing 
things into something else. The greater implies the less. If the 
word of Christ can effect the one, it can effect the other. The 
words ut sint are not intended to lay stress on the continued exist- 
ence of bread and wine as bread and wine, but emphasize the fact 
that the change effected in them does not involve destruction or 
a new act of creation. That is probably all that is in the author's 
mind. 

1 Ps. xxxiii. (xxxii. Vulg.), 9. Cf. de Myst. ix. 52. 

2 2 Cor. v. 17 (freely quoted). 


ii2 THE TREATISE 

because the Lord willed it, because he chose this mys- 
tery,1 Christ was born of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin, 
that is, the mediator between God and men, the man Christ 
Jesus.2 Thou seest, then, that he was born contrary to 
the ordinances and course of nature, he was born as 
man from a virgin. 

1 8. Hear another example.3 The people of the 
Jews were hard pressed by the Egyptians ; they were 
shut in by the sea. At the divine command Moses 
touched the waters with his rod, and the wave divided, 
certainly not according to the use of its own nature, 
but according to the grace of the heavenly command. 
Hear another.4 The people thirsted, they came to the 
spring. The spring was bitter ; holy Moses cast wood 
into the spring, and the spring which had been bitter 
was made sweet, that is, it changed the use of its nature, 
it received the sweetness of grace. Hear also a fourth 
example.5 The axe head had fallen into the waters ; as 
iron it sank by its own use. Elisha cast wood ; straight- 
way the iron rose, and swam upon the waters, certainly 
contrary to the use of iron, for the matter of iron is 
heavier than the element of water. 

19. From all these examples, then, dost thou not 
understand how effectual is the heavenly word ? If the 
heavenly word was effectual in the earthly spring, if it 
was effectual in other things, is it not effectual in the 
heavenly sacraments? Therefore thou hast learnt that 
what was bread becomes the body of Christ,6 and that 
wine and water are put into the chalice, but become 
blood by the consecration of the heavenly word. 

1 The mystery (sacramentum) is the Incarnation. Cf. 1 Tim. 
iii. 16 (T.). For this parallel with the Incarnation see de Myst. 
ix. 53. 2 1 Tim. ii. 5. 

3 Ex. xiv. Cf. for this section de Myst. ix. 51. 

4 Ex. xv. 23-25. 5 2 Kings vi. 5-6. 

6 ex pane fit corpus CJu-isti. With this section cf. de Myst. 
ix. 52. ' 



20. But perhaps thou sayest, " I do not see the 
appearance1 of blood." But it has the likeness; for as 
thou hast taken the likeness of the death,2 so also thou 
drinkest the likeness of the precious blood, that there 
may be no shrinking from actual blood, and yet the 
price of redemption may effect its work. Thou hast 
learnt, therefore, that what thou receivest is the body of 
Christ. 


CHAPTER V 

The words with which the priest consecrates the sacrament are 
quoted, and the sacrament is shown to be a greater gift than 
that of the manna. 

2 1 . Wilt thou know that it is consecrated by heavenly 
words ? Hear what the words are. The priest speaks.3 
" Make for us," he says, "this oblation approved, ratified, 
reasonable, acceptable, seeing that it is the figure of the 
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, who4 the day 
before he suffered took bread in his holy hands, and 
looked up to heaven to thee, holy Father, almighty, ever- 
lasting God, and giving thanks, he blessed, brake, and 
having broken, delivered it to his apostles and to his 
disciples, saying, Take, and eat ye all of this; for this 
is my body, which shall be broken for many. 

22. Likewise also after supper, the day before he suf- 
fered, he took the cup, looked up to heaven to thee, holy 

1 speciem. Here, as video suggests, it denotes "appearance," as 
in de Myst. iv. 25. See de Myst. ix. 52 (note). 
* Rom. vi. 5. 

3 On the prayers which follow see Introd. pp. xxx ff., and for 
the expression "figure of the body ... of Christ," p. xxxv. 

4 The recital of the institution is a conflation of the four accounts 
in Mt. xxvi. 26 f. ; Mk. xiv. 22 f. ; Lk. -xxii. 19 f. ; I Cor. xi. 
23 f. , with additions from the accounts of the feeding of the multi- 
tude in Mk. vi. 41 ("looked up to heaven") and Mk. viii. 6 
("gave to his disciples"). Both additions are found in the Roman 
Canon and in several Eastern rites. 

H 


ii4 THE TREATISE 

Father, almighty, everlasting God, and giving thanks, 
blessed it and delivered it to his apostles and to his 
disciples, saying, Take, and drink ye all of this ; for this 
is my blood" Observe all those expressions. Those 
words are the Evangelists' up to Take, whether the body 
or the blood. After that they are the words of Christ ; 
Take, and drink ye all of this; for this is my blood. 
And observe them in detail. 

23. Who the day before he suffered, he says, in his holy 
hands took bread. Before it is consecrated, it is bread, 
but when the words of Christ have been added, it is the 
body of Christ. Therefore hear him saying : Take and 
eat ye all of this ; for this is my body. And before the 
words of Christ it is a cup full of wine and water. 
When the words of Christ have operated then and there 
it is made to be x the blood of Christ which redeemed 
the people. Therefore, see in how many ways the word 
of Christ is mighty to change all things. There the Lord 
Jesus himself testifies to us that we receive his body 
and blood. Ought we to doubt of his trustworthiness 
and testimony ? 

24. Now come back with me to the point which I 
set out to prove. It is a great and awful thing that he 
rained manna on the Jews from heaven. But distin- 
guish. What is greater, manna from heaven or the 
body of Christ? Certainly the body of Christ who is 
the maker of heaven. Then he who ate manna died. 
Whosoever eats this body shall have remission of sins 
and shall never die.2 

25. Therefore [when thou receivest] 3 it is not super- 
fluous that thou sayest Amen, already in spirit confessing 
that thou receivest the body of Christ. The priest says 

1 sanguis Christi efficitur. 

2 A ref. to Jn. vi. 49, 50. 

3 The words in brackets are omitted by some authorities. 



to thee, The body of Christ. And thou sayest, Amen, 
that4s, T 
hold fast. 


that is, True.1 What the tongue confesses let the heart 


CHAPTER VI 

The sacrament a memorial of Christ's death and a proclamation oj 

the forgiveness of sins. 

26. But that thou mayest know that this is a sacra- 
ment, it was prefigured beforehand. Then learn how 
great is the sacrament. See what he says : As often as 
ye do this, so often will ye make a memorial of me until 
I come again.2 

27. And the priest says : 3 Therefore having in remem- 
brance his most glorious passion and resurrection from 
the dead and ascension into heaven, we offer to thee 
this spotless offering, reasonable offering,4 unbloody 

1 The words "the body of Christ" are the words of the priest 
at the administration, to which the communicants respond, Amen. 
Cf. de Myst. ix. 54 (note). There is good evidence of this custom 
both in East and West. See e. g. Augustine Serm. 272 ; Cyril of 
Jerusalem, Cat. xxiii. 21. 

a The words appear to be a liturgical formula, concluding the 
recital of the institution. In that case "he says" refers to the 
priest (cf. "the priest says" in § 25). The words are based on 
1 Cor. xi. 25, 26. The attribution to our Lord ("until / come") 
is found in the Liturgy of the Apostolic Constitutions and several 
Eastern ritei, as well as in the Ambrosian Sacramentafy of Biasca, 
and it appears as an addition by a later scribe in the Stowe Missal. 
The Roman Canon has the form haec qnotiesaimque feceritis, 
in mei memoriam facie tis, and this appears to be attested about 
the middle of the fifth century in a Commentary on the Psalms 
attributed to Arnobius the younger (quoted by Dom Morin, Revue 
be'n. xxiv. (1907), pp. 404 f.). As Dom Connolly has pointed 
out to me, either the formula of de Sacram. represents a local 
variation, or the Roman form must have ousted an earlier form 
some time before Arnobius, if the passage ascribed to him is 
genuine. 

3 This prayer corresponds to the Anamnesis of the Roman 
Canon. 

4 Cf. Rom. xii. I. The word for "offering" (hoslia) is that 
used in the Latin version of Heb. xiii. 15 [hostiam latidis, "sacrifice 
of praise"). 


n6 THE TREATISE ON THE SACRAMENTS 

offering,1 this holy bread and cup of eternal life : and 
we ask and pray that thou wouldst receive this oblation 
on thy altar on high by the hands of thy angels,2 as 
thou didst vouchsafe to receive the presents of thy 
righteous servant Abel, and the sacrifice of our patriarch 
Abraham, and that which the high priest, Melchizedek 
offered to thee." 

28. Therefore as often as thou receivest — what saith 
the Apostle to thee ? — as often as we receive, we show 
the Lord's death ; if we show his death, we show remis- 
sion of sins. If, as often as blood is poured forth, it is 
poured for remission of sins, I ought always to receive 
it, that my sins may always be forgiven me. I, who am 
always sinning, ought always to have a remedy. 

29. Meanwhile, we have explained to you to-day, also, 
as much as we could. But to-morrow, Saturday, and on 
Sunday 3 we will speak of the order of prayer as we are 
able. May the Lord our God preserve to you the grace 
which he has given and may he deign to illuminate 
more fully the eyes which he has opened for you, 
through his only begotten Son, our Lord God, king and 
saviour, through whom and with whom to him is praise, 
honour, glory, majesty, power with the Holy Spirit from 
all ages, both now and ever, and world without end. — 
Amen. 

1 This expression is frequently found in early Christian writers, 
and in Eastern rites, as well as in some Gallican books. 

2 The Roman Canon has the singular "angel," possibly a refer- 
ence to the angel in Rev. viii. 3 f. Cf. Tertullian, de Orat. 16. 

3 On this see Introd. p. xx. 


BOOK V 
CHAPTER I 

The writer returns to the story of Melchizedek, and gives two reasons 
why water is mixed with wine in the chalice. 

i. Yesterday our sermon and discourse was carried 
as far as the sacraments of the holy altar. And we 
learn that those sacraments were prefigured in the times 
of Abraham, when holy Melchizedek offered sacrifice, 
having neither beginning nor end of days. Hear, O man, 
what the Apostle Paul says to the Hebrews. Where 
are those who say that the Son of God is of time ? Of 
Melchizedek 1 it was said that he had neither beginning 
nor end of days.2 If Melchizedek had not a beginning 
of days, could Christ have it? But the figure is not 
greater than the reality. Thou seest therefore that he 
himself is the first and last.3 First, because he is the 
author of all things ; last, not because he comes to an 
end, but because he concludes all things. 

2. We said, therefore, that the cup and the bread are 
set on the altar. What is poured into the cup ? Wine. 
And what else ? Water.4 But thou sayest to me : 

1 Another reading is esse de tempore Melchisedech, " that the 
Son of God is of the time of Melchizedek," which the editors 
explain as a reference to a sect mentioned by Epiphanius and 
Augustine, who held that M. was a heavenly power, superior to 
Christ. They appealed in support of their view to Heb. v. io.' 
The reading in the text seems preferable, the reference being to the 
Arian denial of the eternal Sonship. 

2 Heb. vii. 3. 3 Rev. i. 17. 

* The mixture of water with wine in the chalice is referred to by 
many early writers, beginning with Justin Martyr, and is commented 
on by Cyprian, Ep. lxiii. 



n8 THE TREATISE 

" How then did Melchizedek offer bread and wine ? 
What means the mixture of water ? Hear the reason. 

3. First of all, what does the type which was prefigured 
in the time of Moses tell us ? That when the people of 
the Jews thirsted and murmured because they could not 
find water, God bade Moses touch the rock with his 
rod. He touched the rock and the rock poured forth 
a flood of water,1 as the Apostle says, But they drank 
of that spiritual Rock that followed them ; and that Rock 
was Christ.2 It was not an immovable Rock which 
followed the people. Drink thou also, that Christ may 
follow thee. Behold the mystery. Moses, that is to 
say, a prophet ; the rod, that is the word of God. The 
priest touches the rock with the word of God, and the 
water flows and the people of God drink. Therefore 
the priest touches the cup, the water streams in the cup, 
springs up into eternal life,z and the people of God 
drink, who have obtained the grace of God. This then 
thou hast learned. 

4. Hear also another reason. At the time of the 
Lord's passion, when a great sabbath was nigh, because 
our Lord Jesus Christ was alive, or the robbers, men 
were sent to smite him ; coming they found the Lord 
Jesus Christ dead ; then one of the soldiers touched his 
side with his lance, and from his side water flowed and 
blood.4 Why water? why blood? Water to cleanse, 
blood to redeem. Why from his side ? Because whence 
the guilt, thence the grace ; guilt through woman, grace 
through the Lord Jesus Christ. 

1 Ex. xvii. 1-7 ; Numb. xx. I-I.I. 

2 I Cor. x. 4. Cf. de Myst. viii. 49. Tn. iv. 14. 
4 Jn. xix. 31-34. Cf. de Myst, viii. 48. 




CHAPTER II 

The blessings of the sacrament illustrated from Canticles. 

5. Thou hast come to the altar, the Lord Jesus calls 
thee or thy soul or the church and says, Let her kiss me 
with the kisses of her mouth.1 Wouldst thou apply it 
to Christ ? Nothing sweeter. Wouldst thou apply it to 
thy soul ? Nothing pleasanter. 

6. Let her kiss me. He sees that thou art clean from 
all sin because thy sins are purged away. Therefore 
he judges thee worthy of the heavenly sacrament and 
therefore he invites thee to a heavenly banquet. Let 
her kiss me with the kisses of her mouth. 

7. Yet on account of what follows it is thy soul or 
human nature or the Church which, seeing itself cleansed 
from all sins, and worthy to be able to approach the 
altar of Christ (for what is the altar but the type of 
the body of Christ?),2 has seen the wondrous sacraments 
and says, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, 
that is, let Christ imprint a kiss on me. 

8. Why? Because thy breasts are better than wine? 
That is, the sensations which thou suppliest are better — 
thy sacraments are better than wine : — than that wine 
which, though it hath sweetness, joy, agreeableness, yet 
therein is worldly joy, while in thee is spiritual pleasure. 
Even in those days Solomon represents the marriage of 
Christ and the Church or of the spirit and flesh and soul. 

1 Cant. i. 1. In §§ 5-7 the author interprets this in two ways. 
As the subject of osculetur ('let . . . kiss') is not expressed in 
the Latin, it may be interpreted either of Christ as the speaker, or 
of the Church (or individual soul, or mankind) as addressing Christ. 
In § 6 he takes Christ as the speaker. In § 7 he says that propter 
seqzientia, "to suit the words which foHow," it is better to take 
the soul (or human nature, or the Church) as the speaker. For the 
application of the imagery of Canticles to the Church or to the 
individual soul cf. de Myst. vii. 37 (note). 

2 Cf. iv. 2. 7 (note). 3 Cant. i. 1. 


i2o THE TREATISE 

9. And we have further : Thy name is an ointment 
poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.1 Who are 
those virgins but the souls of individuals which have put 
off the old age of this body, being renewed through the 
Holy Spirit ? 

10. Draw us; we will run after the fragrance of thy 
ointments.2 See what he says. Thou canst not follow 
Christ unless he himself draws thee. Therefore, that 
thou mayest know this : When I am lifted up, he says, 
I will draw all unto me.z 

11. The king hath brought me into his chamber* The 
Greek text has "into his storehouse5 and into his 
cellar," where are good draughts, pleasant savours, sweet 
honey, divers fruits, varied foods, that thy banquets may 
be seasoned with numerous dishes. 


CHAPTER III 

Farther illustrations of the blessings of Connnunionfrom Psalm xxiii. 

and from Canticles. 

12. Therefore thou hast come to the altar, thou 
has received the body of Christ. Hear again what 
sacraments thou hast obtained. Hear holy David 
speaking. He too foresaw these mysteries in the spirit 
and rejoiced and said that he lacked nothing* Why? 
Because he that hath received the body of Christ shall 
never hunger.7 

13. How often hast thou heard the twenty-second 

1 Cant. i. 2. Cf. de Myst. vi. 29. 

2 Cant. i. 3. Cf. de Myst. vi. 29. 

3 Jn. xii. 32. * Cant. i. 3. 

5 The LXX has rafxuov, which the author renders by the two 
words promptuarhim and cellarium. 

6 Ps. xxiii. (xxii. Vulg. ) 1. 

7 Jn- vi- 35- Cf. de Mvst. viii. 48. 



Psalm 1 and not understood ? See how it is suited to 
the heavenly sacraments. The Lord is my shepherd; 
and I shall not want. In a green pasture, there hath he 
made me to lie down. He hath tended me by the water 
of comfort, he convert eth my soul. He hath led me in the 
paths of righteousness for his name's sake. Yea, though 
I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will 
fear no evil, for thou art with me. Thy rod and thy staff, 
they have comforted me.2 Rod is rule, staff is passion ; 
that is the eternal Divinity of Christ, but also his pas- 
sion in the body. The one created, the other redeemed. 
Thou hast prepared a table before me against them that 
trouble me. Thou hast anointed my head with oil, and 
my inebriating cup how glorious it is.3 

14. Therefore thou hast come to the altar, thou hast 
received the grace of Christ, thou hast obtained the 
heavenly sacraments. The Church rejoices in the re- 
demption of many and is glad with spiritual exultation 
that her white-robed household stand at her side.4 
Thou hast this in the Song of Songs. In joy she calls 
Christ, having ready a feast which can seem worthy of 
heavenly banqueting. Therefore she says : Let my 
brother come down into his garden and take the fruit of his 
fruit-trees.5 What are his fruit-trees? Thou becamest 
a dry tree in Adam ; but now through the grace of 
Christ thou hast budded into a fruitful tree. 

15. The Lord Jesus willingly accepts and with heavenly 
condescension answers to his church. / am come down, 

1 The author follows the numbering of the Psalms in the Latin 
Version, which is also that of the LXX. 

2 Ps. xxiii. (xxii. Vulg. ) 1-4. 

3 Ps. xxiii. (xxii. Vulg.) 5. Cf. de My St. viii. 43 (note). 

4 A reference to the newly-baptized in^their white robes. Cf. de 
Myst. vii. 34. The word familia (rendered "household") is of 
common occurrence in the prayers of the Western service- 
books. 

5 Cant. v. 1. Cf. de Myst. ix. 56. 



he says,1 into my garden; I have gathered the vintage of 
myrrh with my ointments. 1 have eaten my bread with 
my honey and I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, 
he says, my brethren, and be drunk. 

1 6. I have gathered the vintage of myrrh with my oint- 
ments. What is that vintage? Learn the vine and 
you shall recognize the vintage. Thou hast brought, he 
says, a vine out of Egypt,2, that is the people of God. 
Ye are the vine, ye are the vintage ; planted as a vine, 
as a vintage have ye given fruit. I have gathered the 
vintage of myrrh with my unguents, that is for the sweet 
savour which you have received. 

17. / have eaten my bread with my honey. Dost thou 
see that in this bread there is no bitterness, but all is 
sweetness ? I have drunk my wine with my milk. Dost 
thou see that the joy is of that kind which is not defiled 
with the stains of any sin ? For as often as thou drinkest 
thou receivest remission of sins and art inebriated with 
the spirit. Whence also the Apostle says : Be not drunk 
with wine, but be filled with the Holy Spirit.3 For he who 
is drunk with wine staggers and reels : he who is inebriated 
with the Spirit is rooted in Christ. And therefore it is 
a glorious inebriation, which works sobriety of mind. 
This is what we briefly mention with respect to the 
sacraments. 

CHAPTER IV 

Exposition of the Lord's Prayer. 

18. Now, what remains save prayer? And think not 
that it is a matter of little worth, to know how to pray. 

1 Cant. v. 1. Cf.de Myst. ix. 57, 58. 

2 Ps. lxxx. 8 (lxxix. 9, Vulg.). 

3 Eph. v. 18. The reading "Holy Spirit" is also found in 
Ambrose, de Noe et Area, 29. 



The holy Apostles said to the Lord Jesus : Lord teach us 
to pray, as John taught his disciples.1 Then the Lord 
says a prayer, Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed 
be thy name ; thy kingdom come ; thy will be done, as in 
heaven, so on earth. Give us this day our daily2, bread. 
And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors. 
And let us not be led into temptation? but deliver us from 
evil. Thou seest how short the prayer is and full of all 
excellencies ! What grace in the first word ! 

19. O man, thou didst not dare to raise thy face to 
heaven, thou didst direct thine eyes to the earth, and 
suddenly thou didst receive the grace of Christ ; all thy 
sins were forgiven. From a bad servant thou becamest 
a good son. Therefore be bold, not because of thy own 
action, but because of the grace of Christ. For by gracz 
are ye saved,41 says the Apostle. Therefore there is no 
arrogance here, but faith ; to proclaim what thou hast 
received is not pride, but devotion. Therefore raise thy 
eyes to the Father who has begotten thee through the 
laver, to the Father who has redeemed thee through the 
Son, and say Our Father. A good boldness5 that, but 
modest. Thou calledst him "Father" as a son; but do 
not claim anything specifically for thyself. He is the 
Father of Christ alone specially, he is Father of us all in 
common, because he begot him alone, us he created. 
Therefore say thou also through grace, Our Father, that 

1 Lk. xi. 1. 

2 quotidianum. So Vulgate in Lk., but snpersitbstantialem in 
Mt. (see § 24, note). In the following clause the author follows 
the version in Mt., reading debita ("debts"). 

3 The Old Latin version of this clause ; found in Cyprian, de 
Or. Dom. 7, and still earlier in Tertullian. See Introd. p. xli. 

4 Eph. ii. 8. 

5 praesumtio. For the idea cf. the prologue to the Lord's prayer 
in the Roman Canon, audemus dicere ("we are bold to say"), 
which is found also in the Eastern rites, and is allurled to by Cyril 
of Jerusalem, Jerome, and others. 


i24 THE TREATISE 

thou mayest deserve to be a son. Commend thyself by 
fixing thy looks and regards on the Church.1 

20. Our Father, which art in heaven. What is in heaven? 
Hear the scripture saying : The Lord is high above all 
heavens. And everywhere thou findest it written that 
the Lord is above the heaven of heavens,2 as if there were 
not in heaven angels too, as if there were not in heaven 
dominations too,3 but in those heavens of which it 
was said : The heavens declare the glory of God* Heaven 
is there where guilt hath ceased, where crimes keep 
holiday. Heaven is where there is no stroke of death. 

21. Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy 
name. What is hallowed ? Is it as if we desired that he 
should be hallowed who says : Ye shall be holy, for I am 
holy,5 as if any hallowing could accrue to him from our 
prayer ? Not at all. But may it be hallowed in us, that 
its hallowing may reach us. 

22. Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy 
name, thy kingdom come. As if the kingdom of God 
were not eternal. Jesus himself says : To this end was I 
born* and dost thou say to the Father, Thy kingdom 
come, as if it had not come ? But the kingdom of God 
then comes, when you have obtained his grace. For he 
himself says : The kingdom of God is within you? 

1 i. e. by using the words " Our Father," which implies the 
Church, we commend ourselves as members of it. 

a In the former part of this passage the author has in mind 
Ps. cxiii. (cxii. Vulg. ) 4, which is here freely rendered. The words 
"the Lord is above the heaven of heavens" appear to correspond 
to no single passage, but represent the sense of such passages as 
Ps. lvii. (lvi. Vulg.) 6; Ps. lxviii. 33 (lxvii. 34, Vulg.); 2 Chron. 
vi. 18 (cf. 2 Chron. ii. 6 ; I Kings viii. 27). 

3 The passage is obscure, and the sense would be improved by 
reading "quasi non in caelis ubi et angeli, quasi non in caelis ubi et 
dominationes," implying that He is not in the heavens where the 
angels are, but in the higher heaven. The emphasis is on the fact 
that the Lord is "above the heavens." 

4 Ps. xix. (xviii. Vulg.) I. 6 Lev. xi. 44; xix. 2 ; xx. 7. 
6 Jn. xviii. 37. 7 Lk. xvii. 21. 



^.23. Thy kingdom come ; thy will be done, as in heaven, 
so On earth. Give us this day our daily bread. By the 
blood of Christ all things are set at peace, whether in 
heaven or on earth.1 Heaven is hallowed, the devil is 
cast down. The place of his resort is that place,2 where 
is also the man whom he has deceived. Thy will be 
done, etc., i. e. let there be peace on earth as in heaven. 

- 24. Give us this day our daily bread. I remember my 
sermon when I was dealing with the Sacraments.3 I 
said to you that before the words of Christ that which is 
offered is called bread : when the words of Christ have 
been uttered, it is no longer called bread, but is named 
body. Why then in the Lord's Prayer, which follows 
afterwards, does he say : Our bread ? He called it bread 
indeed, but he called it eVtovVioy,4 that is supersub- 
stantial. It is not the bread which passes into the body, 
but that bread of eternal life,5 which supports the sub- 
stance of our soul. Therefore in Greek it is called 
l-rnova-Lov. The Latin, however, calls this bread "daily" 
which the Greeks call "coming." For the Greeks call 
the coming day rrjv Ittlovo-olv rj/jiipav. Therefore what the 

1 Cf. Col. i. 20. 

2 Another reading is : ubi versaitir ? ubi et homo. " Where does 
he resort? There, where man is." 

3 Cf. iv. 4. 14, 19 ; iv. 5. 25. 

* The reference of eirioxxrios to ovcrla (" essence," "being," "exist- 
ence ") is due to Origen (or one of his Alexandrian teachers), and 
descended from him to later commentators. The Old Latin Version 
(as all the older versions) adopts the other sense and renders quoti- 
dianum ("daily"). Jerome changed this to supersubstantialem 
in Mt. , but retained quotidiamtm in Lk. The liturgical form is 
universally quotidianum. Cf. Lightfoot, On afresh revision of the 
N. T. pp. 195 f. If the word snpersubstantialis was due to 
Jerome, the fact furnishes a presumption that our author wrote after 
him. Here an Old Latin text of the prayer is used by the author; 
accordingly, quotidianum alone is recognized as the actual current 
reading (T. ). Ambrose discusses the interpretation of the word, 
and gives Origen's view in de Fide, iii. ^5. 127. For Origen see 
de Orat. 27. The closest parallel, however, to this section is in 
Cyril of Jerusalem, Cat. xxiii. 15. 

5 Cf. Jn. vi. 48-50. 



Latin and what the Greek text said seem both useful. 
The Greek indicated both in one expression,1 the Latin 
said "daily." 

25. If it is daily bread, why dost thou take it once a 
year,2 as the Greeks in the East are accustomed to do ? 
Take daily what is to profit thee daily. So live that 
thou mayest deserve to receive it daily. He who does 
not deserve to receive it daily, does not deserve to 
receive it once a year; as holy Job offered sacrifice daily 
for his sons, lest perchance they should have done any 
sin in heart or word.3 Therefore dost thou hear that as 
often as sacrifice is offered, the Lord's death, the Lord's 
resurrection, the Lord's ascension and the remission of 
sins is signified,4 and dost thou not take this bread of 
life daily? He who has a wound needs a medicine. 
The wound is that we are under sin ; the medicine is the 
heavenly and venerable sacrament. 

26. Give us this day our daily bread. If thou receivest 
daily, "this day" is "daily" to thee. If Christ is for 

1 The writer means that itnovciov is capable of a twofold inter- 
pretation, (i) "Bread which contributes to existence*' (Origen), 
which the writer, like Origen, explains as that "which supports the 
substance of the soul." (2) "Bread for the coming day" (t7jk 
iTnovaav rjfiepav), which in the Latin Version is represented by 
quotidianum ("daily"). This latter rendering leads him to speak 
of "daily communion." 

2 Similarly Augustine (de Semi. Dom. in 7nonte, ii. 7. 26) com- 
plains that many in the East do not communicate daily, though our 
Lord speaks of "daily bread." Chrysostom in several of his 
homilies complains of the neglect of communion at Constantinople, 
and in one passage (in Heb. xvii. 4) he asserts that many com- 
municate once a year, others twice, others often. These strictures 
on Eastern practice may just possibly show an acquaintance on the 
part of the author with Chrysostom's writings, in which case they 
are a further indication of the date of de Sacramentis . Ambrose 
(de Paenitentia, ii. 9. 89) similarly refers to those who abstain from 
communion. 

3 Job i. 5. 

4 The writer is probably referring to the Anamnesis, the words of 
which he has quoted above (iv. 6. 27). For elevatio of the "ascen- 
sion" cf. Acts i. 9 (Vulg. ) ; elevatus est. 



thee "this day," he rises again for thee "daily." How? 
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.1 There- 
fore "this day" is when Christ rises again. Yesterday 
and to-day he himself is,2 says the Apostle Paul. But in 
another place he says, The night is far spent, the day is 
at hand? Yesternight is far spent, the present day is at 
hand. 

27. There follows: Forgive us our debts, as we also 
forgive our debtors. What is the debt but sin ? There- 
fore if thou hadst not borrowed money at interest, thou 
wouldst not now be in want; therefore sin is imputed 
to thee. Thou hast had money, wherewith thou wast 
born rich. Thou wast rich, being made in the image 
and likeness of God.4 Thou hast lost what thou hadst, 
that is humility ; whilst thou desirest to indicate thy 
pride, thou hast lost money, thou hast become naked as 
Adam,5 thou hast accepted from the devil a debt which 
was not necessary. And therefore thou who wast free in 
Christ hast become a debtor to the devil. The enemy 
held thy bond, but the Lord crucified it, and blotted it 
out6 with his blood. He took away thy debt, he restored 
thy liberty. 

28. Well, therefore, does he say : And forgive us our 
debts, as we also forgive our debtors. Mark what thou 
sayest. As I forgive so do thou also forgive me. If 
thou hast forgiven, thou doest well in suing 7 that it be 
forgiven thee. If thou dost not forgive, how canst thou 
sue him, that it may be forgiven thee ? 

29. And let us not be led into temptation, but deliver us 
from evil. Mark what he says : And let us not be led 
into temptation which we cannot endure.8 He doth not 

1 Ps. ii. 7. a Heb. xiii. 8. 3 Rom. xiii. 12. 

4 Gen. i. 26. 5 Gen. iii. 7. - 6 Cf. Col. ii. 14. 

7 bene convents. Another reading is bene convenit, " it is right 
and proper that it be forgiven thee." 

8 Cf. I Cor. x. 13. The words quamferre non possumus (" which 



say : " Lead us not into temptation," but as an athlete 
he wishes such a trial as human nature can bear : that 
each may be delivered from evil, that is from the foe, 
from sin. 

30. But the Lord who has taken away your sin, and 
pardoned your faults, is mighty to defend and guard you 
against the wiles of the devil your adversary, that the foe 
who is wont to beget guilt may not creep upon you. 
But he who commits himself to God fears not the devil. 
For if God is for us, who is against us?1 To him, there- 
fore, be praise and glory from the ages and now, always, 
and for ever and ever. — Amen. 

we cannot endure ") here are explanatory, and not a part of the 
Lord's Prayer, as the author quotes the full text of that prayer 
wiihout them in v. 4. 18. But the words are found in some texts 
of the Lord's Prayer, and are quoted by Jerome, Hilary, and Ps. 
Aug., Serm. lxxxiv. For the reading "let us not be led" {ne 
patiaris induct nos) see note on v. 4. 18. 
1 Rom. viii. 31. 


BOOK VI 
CHAPTER I 

The reality of the gift of Christ's flesh and blood in the sacrament is 
shown and illustrated from John vi. 

i. As our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Son of God, 
not after the manner of men, through grace, but as a son 
of the essence of his father, so it is true flesh, as he 
himself said,1 which we receive, and his true blood is 
our drink. 

2. But perchance thou mayest say, what the disciples 
of Christ also said then when they heard him saying : 
Unless a man eat my -flesh and drink my blood, he shall 
not dwell in me, nor shall he have eternal life2 — perchance 
thou mayest say : " How are these things real ? I who 
see the likeness, do not see the reality of blood." 

3. First of all, I told thee of the word of Christ, 
which acts so that it can change and alter the appointed 
forms3 of nature. Then when the disciples of Christ 
endured not his saying, but hearing that he gave his flesh 
to eat and gave his blood to drink, they turned back ; 
but Peter alone said : Thou hast the words of eternal life, 
and how shall I withdraw from thee ? 4 Accordingly, lest 
others should say this, feeling a shrinking from actual 
blood, and that yet the grace of redemption might 

1 Jn. vi. 55. 

2 The quotation is a conflation of Jn. vi. 53, 54, 56. 

3 genera instituta. Some MSS. read 4' genera et instituta " 
(so Lanfranc). Erasmus has instituta generalia, ' ' the general 
ordinances." 

4 Jn. vi. 68 (quoted freely). 

I I2Q 


1 3o THE TREATISE 

remain, therefore thou receivest the sacrament in a simili- 
tude, but truly obtainest the grace and virtue of the 

nature.1 

4. / am, says he, the living bread which came down 
from heaven.2 But flesh did not come down from heaven, 
that is to say, he took flesh of the Virgin on earth. 
How then did bread come down from heaven, and that, 
too, living bread? Because our Lord Jesus Christ is 
alike a sharer both in divinity and body. And thou 
who receivest his flesh partakest of his divine essence in 
that food. 

CHAPTER II 

The sacraments show the operation of the Trinity and the equality 
of the Three Persons. Refutation of Arian teaching. 

5. Therefore thou hast been taught about3 the 
sacraments, thou hast learnt all things most fully, because 
thou hast been baptized in the name of the Trinity. In 
all that we have done the mystery of the Trinity has 
been preserved. Everywhere Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost, one operation, one sanctification, though certain 
things seem to be as it were special.4 

1 The meaning is that, though the communicant receives the 
body of Christ " in a similitude " (z. e. under the forms of bread and 
wine), yet he no less truly receives the virtue of the reality, i. e. the 
body of Christ. The outward appearance of the bread is a 
"symbol," or "similitude," but it is a symbol of a "grace" and 
"virtue" which are truly received. The author, who has hitherto 
expressed himself in such realistic terms as to the conversion of the 
elements into the Body and Blood of Christ, here falls back upon 
the earlier language current in East and West and represented in 
the prayers of the Canon quoted by him in iv. 5. 21 ("the figure 
(fgura) of the body and blood of Christ"). See Introd. pp. xviii, 
xxxvii. 

2 Jn. vi. 51. Cf. de Myst. viii. 47. 

3 accepistis de. Another rendering is "thou hast received of" 
the sacraments. But the more natural phrase in that case would 
have been accepistis sacramenta. 

4 i. e. to the different Persons of the Trinity. 



6. How? It is God who anointed thee, and the Lord 
signed thee, and put the Holy Spirit in thy heart.1 Thou 


hast therefore received the Holy Spirit in thy heart. 
Hear another truth, that as the Holy Spirit is in the 
heart, so also is Christ in the heart. How ? Thou hast 
Christ saying this to his Church in the Song of Songs : 
Set me as a seal in thy heart, as a seal upon thy arms.2, 

7. Therefore God anointed thee, Christ signed thee. 
How ? Because thou wast signed with the image of the 
cross itself unto his passion, thou receivedst a seal unto 
his likeness, that thou mayest rise unto his image, and 
live after His pattern, who was crucified to sin and liveih 
to God? And thy old man plunged into the font was 
crucified to sin, but rose again unto God.4 

8. Then thou hast elsewhere a special work that, 
while God called thee, in baptism thou art as it were 
specially crucified with Christ.5 Then (as an instance of 
special operation) when thou receivest the spiritual seal, 
note that there is a distinction of persons, but that the 
whole mystery of the Trinity is bound up together. 

9. Then what said the Apostle to thee, as was read 
the day before yesterday? Now there are diversities of 
gifts, but the same Spirit. There are diversities of minis- 
tries, but the same Lord. There are diversities of opera- 
tions, but it is the same God which worketh all in all. 
All, says he, God worketh. These words, too, were read 
of the Spirit of God : one and the same Spirit dividing 
to each as He wills.7 Hearken to the Scripture saying 
that the Spirit divides according to His own will, not in 

1 2 Cor. i. 21, 22. 

* Cant. viii. 6. Cf. de Myst. vii. 41, 42 for this and the following 
section. 

3 Rom. vi. 10. 4 Rom. vi. 6. 6 Cf. Gal. ii. 19. 

• I Cor. xii. 4-6. Some MSS. read mysteriorum for minis- 
teriorum. But the latter, which is an Old Latin reading, is found 
in the quotations of the passage by most of the Latin Fathers. 

7 1 Cor. xii. 11. 


i32 THE TREATISE 

obedience to others. So then the Spirit divides to you 
grace as He wills, not as He is bidden, and chiefly so 
because He is the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ. And 
hold fast this, that He is the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of 
God, the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit the Paraclete. 

10. The Arians think that they derogate from the 
Holy Spirit, if they speak of Him as the Spirit the Para- 
clete. What does Paraclete mean but consoler? As 
though we did not read of the Father that He himself 
is the God of consolation.1 Thou seest then that they 
think that an attribute, which pious affection proclaims, 
as showing the power of the eternal Father, must be 
derogatory to the Holy Spirit. 


CHAPTER III 

How and where Christians ought to pray. 

1 1 . Now learn how we should pray. Many are the 
excellences of prayer. Where we should pray is no 
small matter, no small subject of inquiry. The Apostle 
says : / desire that men should pray in every -place, lifting 
up pure hands without wrath and disputing? And the 
Lord says in the Gospel : But thou, when thou pray est, 
enter into thy chamber, and when thou hast shut the door, 
pray to thy father? Does not there seem to be a contra- 
diction between the words of the Apostle, Pray in every 
place, and those of the Lord, Enter into thy chamber and 
pray ? But there is no contradiction. Let us then clear 
up this point. Then, how thou shouldst begin prayer, 
under what system order its various parts, what subjoin, 

1 2 Cor. i. 3. 

2 1 Tim. ii. 8. Origen deals with the same passage in de 
Or at. 31. 

3 Mt. vi. 6. 



what state as petition,1 how close the prayer, then for 
whom thou shouldst pray — all these we may discuss. 

12. First, where thou shouldst pray. Paul seems to 
say one thing and the Lord another. Was it possible 
that Paul could teach anything contrary to the precepts 
of Christ ? Surely not. Why ? Because he is not the 
opponent, but the interpreter of Christ. Be ye imitators, 
he says, of me, as I also of Christ.2 What then ? Thou 
canst pray everywhere, and yet always pray in thy 
chamber. Everywhere thou hast thy chamber. Though 
thou be amidst the nations, amidst the Jews, thou hast 
everywhere thy secret place. Thy mind is thy chamber. 
Though thou be set in a multitude, yet in the inner 
man thou possessest thy place of secrecy and retirement.3 

13. But thou when thou pray est enter into thy chamber. 
Well does he say enter ; that thou mayest not pray like 
the Jew, to whom it is said : This people honoureth me 
with their lips, but their heart is far from me* Let not 
then thy prayer proceed only from thy lips. Let the 
whole intention of thy mind be fixed, enter into the 
recess of thy heart, enter it with thy whole self. Let 
not him, whom thou wishest to please, see thee to be 
careless.5 Let him see that thou prayest from the heart, 
that when thou prayest from the heart he may deign to 
hear thee. 

14. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber. 
In another place thou hast this too : Go, my people, 
enter into thy secret places, shut thy door, hide thyself for 
a little, until the anger of the Lord be overpast* This the 

1 quo ordine distinguere, quid sublexere, quid allegare. This is 
explained below, §§ 22-25. Sublexere ("subjoin") seems to cor- 
respond to the obsecratio or "supplication" in §22; allegare to 
the postulatio ("petition"); see note -on § 22. The question 
" for whom we should pray" is, however, never dealt with. 

* I Cor. xi. I. 3 Cf. de Inst. Virg. i. 7. 

4 Mt. xv. 8 ; Mk. vii. 6. 6 perfunctorium. 

6 Is. xxvi. 20. 


i34 THE TREATISE 

Lord spake by the prophet, but in the Gospel he said : 
But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and, 
when thou hast shut the door, pray to thy Father. 

15. What is meant by "shutting the door"? Hear 
what door thou hast, which thou shouldest shut, when 
thou prayest. Would that the women would listen to 
this ! * Thou hast heard it already. Holy David taught 
thee when he said : Lord, set a guard upon my mouth and 
a door round about my lips.2 Elsewhere there is the 
door, which the Apostle Paul speaks of, when he says : 
That the door of the word may be opened for me, to speak 
the mystery of Christ.3 That is, when thou prayest, do 
not shout aloud, nor let thy prayer go forth abroad, nor 
noise it among the people. In thy privacy pray, sure 
that he can hear thee in private, who sees all things, 
hears all things. And pray in secrecy to thy Father, who 
hears thy secret prayers. 


CHAPTER IV 

On prayer in secret. Exposition of 1 Tim. ii. 8. 

16. But let us ask why this is profitable, why we should 
rather pray in secrecy, than with loud calling. Hearken. 
Let us take an example from the usage of men. If thou 
art asking of a man, who hears quickly, thou dost not 
think that there is need of loud shouting. Thou askest 
softly in moderate tones. If thou askest of some deaf 
person, dost not thou begin to call aloud, that he may 
be able to hear thee ? So then he who clamours thinks 
that God cannot hear him, unless he clamours. And in 

1 On this see Ambrose, de Virginibus, iii. 3. II, where there is 
a similar injunction of silence in church. 

2 Ps. cxli. (cxl. Vulg.) 3. 

3 Col. iv. 3. The reading " aperiatur mihi ostium verbi" is 
found in the writings of Ambrose. 



asking Him thus he derogates from His power. But he 
who prays in silence shows his faith, and confesses that 
God is the searcher of the heart and reins* and hears thy 
prayer before it is uttered by thy lips. 

17. Let us then consider this — I would that men should 
fray in every place.2 Why did he say " men " ? Surely 
prayer is common both to men and women. I find no 
reason for this, unless indeed the holy Apostle said 
"men," lest the women should be too forward and 
wrongly understand the words in every place and begin 
to clamour everywhere. Such women we cannot endure 
in the Church. 

18. / would that men, that is those who can observe 
the precept, should pray in every place, lifting up pure 
hands. What is meant by lifting up pure hands ? Oughtest 
thou in thy prayer to show forth the cross of the Lord 
to all and sundry?3 That indeed is a proof of thy 
piety,4 not of thy modesty. But it is possible for thee 
to pray, without displaying any outward figure, but lifting 
up thy actions. If thou wouldst have thy prayer5 
effective, lift pure hands by thy innocence. Lift them 
not every day.6 Thou hast lifted them once for all ; 
there is no need to lift them again. 

19. I would that men should pray in every place, lifting 
up pure hands without wrath and disputing. Nothing 
can be truer. Wrath, it says, destroys even the wise.1 

1 Rev. ii. 23. Cf. Jer. xvii. 10; Ps. vii. 9 (11, Vulg.). 
8 1 Tim. ii. 8. 

3 The reference is to the hands outstretched in prayer, in which 
many Christian writers saw the symbolism of the Cross. Cf. 
Minucius Felix, Octav. 29, crucis signum est . . . cum homo 
porrectis manibus deum pura mente veneratur. 

4 virtutis. Or the meaning may be "courage." 
6 orationcm. Another reading is operationem. 

6 The thought seems to be that the Christian at baptism enters 
on the life of innocence. This is "the lifting up of pure hands," 
and this should not have to be repeated. 

7 Prov. xv. 1 (LXX. Not in Heb. or Vulg.). 



Therefore at all times, as far as is possible, a Christian 
man should control his anger, and especially when he 
comes to prayer. Let not the fierceness of wrath disturb 
thy mind, let not a kind of fury hinder thy prayer. But 
rather come with tranquil mind. For why wilt thou be 
angry? Has thy servant committed a fault? Thou 
comest to pray that thy faults may be forgiven thee, and 
thou art indignant with another ! That is what is meant 
by "without wrath." 


CHAPTER V 

On the modesty which women ought to show in prayer. The parts 
of prayer are illustrated from i Tim. ii. i. Application to the 
Lord's Prayer and Psalm viii. Conclusion. 

20. Now as to "disputing." Often a man of business 
comes to prayer, or a covetous man. One thinks of 
money, the other1 of gain, one of honour to be won, 
the other of avarice ; and yet he thinks that God can 
hear him. And therefore when thou prayest, it is right 
that thou shouldest put divine things before human 
things. 

21. Likewise too I would that the women pray, not flaunt- 
ing themselves in ornaments or in pearls, says the Apostle 
Paul.2 The Apostle Peter also says3: "The influence 
of a woman availeth much to turn the affections of her 
husband by the good conversation of his wife, and to 
convert the unbeliever to the grace of Christ." Such 
power has the grave demeanour and chastity of a wife 
and her good conversation to summon her husband to 
faith and devotion, and the same is often effected by the 

1 Or. we may render "another . . . another . . . another." 

2 The quotation is a very free citation of 1 Tim. ii. 9. 

3 A free paraphrase of 1 Pet. iii. 1, 2. 



words of a wise man. Therefore let a woman's adorn- 
ment, he says, not be in decking of the hair or braided 
locks, but in prayer from a pure heart, where is the hidden 
man of the heart, which is always rich in the sight of God.1 
Thou hast, therefore, wherein thou mayest be rich. In 
Christ are thy riches, the badges of chastity and purity, 
faith, devotion, and mercy. These are the treasures of 
righteousness, as the prophet said.2 

22. Next comes the question, what should be the 
beginning of prayer? Tell me, if you wished to make 
a request of a man and were to begin thus: "Come, 
grant me what I seek of thee," does not this seem an 
arrogant form of prayer?3 Prayer, therefore, should 
begin with the praise of God, that thou mayest ask of 
the almighty God, to whom all things are possible, who 
has the will to grant. Then follows the supplication, as 
the Apostle taught us when he said, / beseech, therefore, 
that first of all prayers, supplications, petitions, giving of 
thanks be made.4. The first part of the prayer, therefore, 
ought to contain the praise of God, the second the 
supplication, the third the petition, the fourth the giving 
of thanks. Thou shouldest not, like a starveling for 
food, begin with food, but with the praises of God. 

1 A conflation of passages from I Pet. iii. 3, I Tim. ii. 9 ("braided 
locks"), 2 Tim. ii. 22 ("those who call on the Lord from a pure 
heart "). 

2 Is. xxxiii. 6 (LXX. The Heb. and Vulg. are different). 

3 The whole of this passage appears to be modelled upon Ambrose, 
de Inst. Virg. ii. 8-10. In both the order of words in I Tim. ii. I 
is orationes, obsecrationcs ("prayers, supplications"), which is 
reversed in the Vulgate. In both this order is essential to the 
argument. The obsecratio or supplicatio appears to be a general 
wish or aspiration for the favour of God, while the postulatio is a 
petition for certain definite things. In de Sacrani. "hallowed be 
Thy name" is the obsecratio ("supplication"), while the rest of the 
prayer is postulatio ("petition"), ihe^gratiarum actio ("giving of 
thanks ") being represented by the doxology. In de hist. Virg. 
ii. 10 it is said that the Lord's Prayer can be divided in this way, 
but the details are left to the intelligence of the reader. 

4 1 Tim. ii. 1. Cf. Origen, de Orat. 14. 



23. Thus it is that your prudent public speakers have 
this rule that they court the favour of the judge. They 
begin with his praises, that they may have the goodwill 
of him who tries the case. Then he gradually begins to 
beg the judge to deign to listen to him patiently. Thirdly, 
he dares to put forward his petition, to set forth what 
he seeks. Fourthly, as he began with the praises of 
God, so he should end with praise.1 

24. Thou findest this in the Lord's prayer, Our Father, 
which art in heaven. It is an act of praise to God to 
declare Him a Father. Therein lies the glory that 
belongs to fatherly goodness. It is the praise of God, 
that he dwells in heaven, not on earth. Our Father, 
which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. That is, 
that he should hallow his servants. For his name is 
hallowed in us, when men are declared to be Christians. 
So then Hallowed be thy name shows a wish. Thy kingdom 
come — a petition that the kingdom of Christ be in us. 
If God reigns in us, the adversary cannot find a place. 
Guilt does not reign, sin does not reign. But virtue 
reigns, chastity reigns, devotion reigns. Then : Thy will 
be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our 
daily bread. This petition is the chief of those things 
which are asked. And forgive us, he says, our debts, as 
we also forgive our debtors. Therefore daily receive,2 
that daily thou mayest ask forgiveness for thy debt. 
And suffer us not to be led into temptation, but deliver 
us from evil. What follows ? Hearken what the priest 
says : " Through our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom, with 
whom, there is to thee honour, praise, glory, majesty, 
power, with the Holy Spirit, from all ages, both now and 
always and for ever and ever. — Amen."3 

1 With this section cf. Origen, de Orat. 33. 

8 i.e. "receive that bread," a reference to the preceding petition. 

3 This doxology resembles that found in the Greek liturgies 

(James, Mark, Basil, Chrysostom) at the close of the Lord's Prayer. 



25. Another example. Though the Psalms of David 
are one book, possessing the excellences of prayer, which 
we have mentioned above, yet often too in a single psalm 
we find represented all these parts of prayer, as we see 
in the eighth psalm. Thus he begins as follows : 0 Lord, 
our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the earth.1 So 
then we have the first part of the prayer.2 Then the 
supplication. For I shall behold thy heavens, the works of 
thy fingers, that is, I shall behold the heavens, the moon and 
the stars which thou hast founded. He surely does not 
mean, I shall see the sky, but I shall see the heavens, 
in which celestial grace and splendour begin to shine. 
These heavens then the prophet promised should be 
given to him, since he deserved3 celestial grace from the 
Lord. The moon and the stars which thou hast founded. 
He calls the Church the moon, and the saints shining 
with celestial grace he calls the stars.4 Then observe his 
petition : What is man that thou are mindful of him, or the 

A similar doxology forms the conclusion of the Canon, and precedes 
the Lord's Prayer in the Ambrosian Sacramentary of Biasca 
(cent, x.), and also occurs in this latter position in the Roman 
Canon {Gelasian Sacramentary, Wilson, p. 236). In this respect 
the rite with which the author was familiar corresponded with the 
Greek rites mentioned above, and the position of the doxology in 
the Sacramentary of Biasca may be due to a later rearrangement. 
From its liturgical use the doxology passed into the text of Mt. 
vi. 13. 

1 Psalm viii. i f. With the exposition which follows cf. Ambrose, 
de Inst. Virg. ii. 9. 

2 Or "the prayer proper comes first," oratio signifying the open- 
ing of praise. This seems to be the use in de hist. Virg. ii. 9, 
hactcnus oratio : inde sequitur obsecratio. It must be remembered 
that oratio would suggest any speech, as well as prayer. 

8 merer etur. The reading of the Benedictine edd. mererentur 
cannot be right. 

* Cf. Keble, Christian Year (Septuagesima) : 

The Moon above, the Church below, 
A wondrous race they'run 

• • • • • 

The Saints, like stars, around His seat, 
Perform their courses still. 



son of man that thou visitest him ? Thou madest him a little 
lower than the angels, thou hast crowned him with glory 
and honour, and hast set him over the works of thy hands. 
Then there is another thanksgiving : Thou hast put all 
things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts 
of the field.1 

26. We have taught, so far as we could grasp them, 
truths which perhaps we have not learned, and we have 
set them forth as far as we were able. May your holiness,2 
informed by priestly training, labour to hold fast what it 
has received from God. And may that oblation, like a 
pure victim, always find in you its seal, that you your- 
selves may be able to attain to grace and the rewards 
of virtue by our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom is glory, 
honour, praise, everlastingness, from the ages, and now, 
and always, and for ever and ever. — Amen. 

1 It is difficult to see, in the above interpretation of Psalm viii., 
in what sense the words " I shall behold the heaven" and "What 
is man . . . that thou visitest him?" can be regarded as "prayers." 
The explanation, perhaps, is that the former verse is taken to refer 
to the future establishment of the true heaven, i. e. that in which 
Christ is the sun, and the Church the moon ; while the latter verse 
foreshadows the humiliation and exaltation of Christ. These verses, 
in the author's view, were prophecies of David, but, as they lay in 
the future, they were also aspirations, and therefore, in a sense, 
prayers. The lines of Keble, quoted in the preceding note, and 
the use of Ps. viii. as a proper Psalm for Ascension Day, are an echo 
of some of the ideas propounded in this section. In the author's 
interpretation, the opening ascription of praise is the oratio (or 
" prayer"). The words " I shall behold the heaven, the moon and 
the stars" are the obsecratio ("supplication"); while the words 
" What is man . . . works of Thy hands " are the postulatio (" peti- 
tion"). The words "Thou hast put all things . . . beasts of the 
field " form the concluding thanksgiving. In dc Inst. Virg. ii. 9, 
Ambrose gives a similar interpretation of the psalm, though in a 
more intelligible form. The opening of praise is the same, though 
more of it is quoted ; but the obsecratio is found in the words " that 
thou mayst destroy the enemy and the avenger." The words, 
" I shall behold," etc., are interpreted in the same way as here, but 
are regarded as the postulatio ; while the rest of the psalm, beginning 
" What is man," forms the concluding thanksgiving. 

2 On this expression see note on i. 6. 24. 


