# source: Fathers/English/ANF/Volume V.   The Fathers of the Third Century
# series: ANF
# volume: Volume V
# father: Hippolytus
# work: Commentary on Daniel
# clavis: CPG-1873
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Salmond / Schaff English translation.
   On Daniel.

   I.

   Preface by the most holy Hippolytus, (Bishop) of Rome. [1285]

   As I wish to give an accurate account of the times of the captivity of
   the children of Israel in Babylon, and to discuss the prophecies
   contained in the visions of the blessed Daniel, (as well as) his manner
   of life from his boyhood in Babylon, I too shall proceed to bear my
   testimony to that holy and righteous man, a prophet and witness of
   Christ, who not only declared the visions of Nebuchadnezzar the king in
   those times, but also trained youths of like mind with himself, and
   raised up faithful witnesses in the world. He is born, then, in the
   time of the prophetic ministry of the blessed Jeremiah, and in the
   reign of Jehoiakim or Eliakim. Along with the other captives, he is
   carried off a prisoner to Babylon. Now there are born to the blessed
   Josiah these five sons--Jehoahaz, Eliakim, Johanan, Zedekiah, or
   Jeconiah, and Sadum. [1286] And on his father's death, Jehoahaz is
   anointed as king by the people at the age of twenty-three years.
   Against him comes up Pharaoh-Necho, in the third month of his reign;
   and he takes him (Jehoahaz) prisoner, and carries him into Egypt, and
   imposes tribute on the land to the extent of one hundred talents of
   silver and ten talents of gold. And in his stead he sets up his brother
   Eliakim as king over the land, whose name also he changed to Jehoiakim,
   and who was then eleven years old. Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar
   king of Babylon, [1287] and carries him off prisoner to Babylon, taking
   with him also some of the vessels of the house in Jerusalem. Thrown
   into prison as a friend of Pharaoh, and as one set up by him over the
   kingdom, [1288] he is released at length in the thirty-seventh year by
   Evil-Merodach king of Babylon; and he cut his hair short, and was
   counsellor to him, and ate at his table until the day that he died. On
   his removal, his son Jehoiakim [1289] reigns three years. [1290] And
   against him came up Nebuchadnezzar, and transports him and ten thousand
   of the men of his people to Babylon, and sets up in his stead his
   father's brother, whose name he changed also to Zedekiah; and after
   making agreement with him by oath and treaty, he returns to Babylon.
   This (Zedekiah), after a reign of eleven years, revolted from him and
   went over to Pharaoh king of Egypt. And in the tenth year
   Nebuchadnezzar came against him from the land of the Chaldeans, and
   surrounded the city with a stockade, and environed it all round, and
   completely shut it up. In this way the larger number of them perished
   by famine, and others perished by the sword, and some were taken
   prisoners, and the city was burned with fire, and the temple and the
   wall were destroyed. And the army of the Chaldeans seized all the
   treasure that was found in the house of the Lord, and all the vessels
   of gold and silver; and all the brass, Nebuzaradan, chief of the
   slaughterers, [1291] stripped off, and carried it to Babylon. And the
   army of the Chaldeans pursued Zedekiah himself as he fled by night
   along with seven hundred men, and surprised him in Jericho, and brought
   him to the king of Babylon at Reblatha. And the king pronounced
   judgment upon him in wrath, because he had violated the oath of the
   Lord, and the agreement he had made with him; and he slew his sons
   before his face, and put out Zedekiah's eyes. And he cast him into
   chains of iron, and carried him to Babylon; and there he remained
   grinding at the mill until the day of his death. And when he died, they
   took his body and cast it behind the wall of Nineveh. In his case is
   fulfilled the prophecy of Jeremiah, saying, "(As) I live, saith the
   Lord, though Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah should become the
   signet upon my right hand, yet will I pluck thee thence; and I will
   give thee into the hands of them that seek thy life, of them whose face
   thou fearest, even into the hands of the Chaldeans. And I will cast
   thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into a country where thou wast
   not born; and there ye shall die. But to the land which they desire in
   their souls, I will not send thee back. Dishonoured is Jeconias, like
   an unserviceable vessel, of which there is no use, since he is cast out
   and expelled into a land which he knew not. O earth, hear the word of
   the Lord. Write this man, a man excommunicate; for no man of his seed
   shall prosper (grow up), sitting upon the throne of David, ruling any
   more in Judah." [1292] Thus the captivity in Babylon befell them after
   the exodus from Egypt.  When the whole people, then, was transported,
   and the city made desolate. and the sanctuary destroyed, that the word
   of the Lord might be fulfilled which He spake by the mouth of the
   prophet Jeremiah, saying, "The sanctuary shall be desolate seventy
   years;" [1293] then we find that the blessed Daniel prophesied in
   Babylon, and appeared as the vindicator of Susanna.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1285] Simon de Magistris, Daniel secundum Septuaginta, from the Codex
   Chisianus, Rome, 1772; and Mai, Script. vet. collectio nova, i. iii.
   ed. 1831, pp. 29-56.

   [1286] Shallum. See 1 Chron. iii. 15.

   [1287] 2 Kings xxiv. 10.

   [1288] 2 Kings xxv. 27. Note the confusion between Jehoiakim and
   Jehoiachin in what follows.

   [1289] i.e., Jehoiachin.

   [1290] Others trimenion = three months.

   [1291] archimageiros, "chief cook."

   [1292] Jer. xxii. 24, etc.

   [1293] Jer. xxv. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

   II.

   The interpretation by Hippolytus, (bishop) of Rome, of the visions of
   Daniel and Nebuchadnezzar, taken in conjunction. [1294]

   1. In speaking of a "lioness from the sea," [1295] he meant the rising
   of the kingdom of Babylon, and that this was the "golden head of the
   image." And in speaking of its "eagle wings," he meant that king
   Nebuchadnezzar was exalted and that his glory was lifted up against
   God. Then he says "its wings were plucked off," i.e., that his glory
   was destroyed; for he was driven out of his kingdom. And the words, "A
   man's heart was given it, and it was made stand upon the feet of a
   man," mean that he came to himself again, and recognised that he was
   but a man, and gave the glory to God. Then after the lioness he sees a
   second beast, "like a bear," which signified the Persians. For after
   the Babylonians the Persians obtained the power. And in saying that "it
   had three ribs in its mouth," he pointed to the three nations,
   Persians, Medes, and Babylonians, which were expressed in the image by
   the silver after the gold. Then comes the third beast, "a leopard,"
   which means the Greeks; for after the Persians, Alexander of Macedon
   had the power, when Darius was overthrown, which was also indicated by
   the brass in the image. And in saying that the beast "had four wings of
   a fowl, and four heads," he showed most clearly how the kingdom of
   Alexander was parted into four divisions. For in speaking of four
   heads, he meant the four kings that arose out of it. For Alexander,
   when dying, divided his kingdom into four parts. Then he says, "The
   fourth beast (was) dreadful and terrible: it had iron teeth, and claws
   of brass."  Who, then, are meant by this but the Romans, whose kingdom,
   the kingdom that still stands, is expressed by the iron? "for," says
   he, "its legs are of iron."

   2. After this, then, what remains, beloved, but the toes of the feet of
   the image, in which "part shall be of iron and part of clay mixed
   together?" By the toes of the feet he meant, mystically, the ten kings
   that rise out of that kingdom. As Daniel says, "I considered the beast;
   and, lo, (there were) ten horns behind, among which shall come up
   another little horn springing from them;" by which none other is meant
   than the antichrist that is to rise; and he shall set up the kingdom of
   Judah. And in saying that "three horns" were "plucked up by the roots"
   by this one, he indicates the three kings of Egypt, Libya, and
   Ethiopia, whom this one will slay in the array of war. And when he has
   conquered all, he will prove himself a terrible and savage tyrant, and
   will cause tribulation and persecution to the saints, exalting himself
   against them. And after him, it remains that "the stone" shall come
   from heaven which "smote the image" and shivered it, and subverted all
   the kingdoms, and gave the kingdom to the saints of the Most High. This
   "became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth."

   3. As these things, then, are destined to come to pass, and as the toes
   of the image turn out to be democracies, [1296] and the ten horns of
   the beast are distributed among ten kings, let us look at what is
   before us more carefully, and scan it, as it were, with open eye. The
   "golden head of the image" is identical with the "lioness," by which
   the Babylonians were represented. "The golden shoulders and the arms of
   silver" are the same with the "bear," by which the Persians and Medes
   are meant. "The belly and thighs of brass" are the "leopard," by which
   the Greeks who ruled from Alexander onwards are intended. The "legs of
   iron" are the "dreadful and terrible beast," by which the Romans who
   hold the empire now are meant. The "toes of clay and iron" are the "ten
   horns" which are to be. The "one other little horn springing up in
   their midst" is the "antichrist." The stone that "smites the image and
   breaks it in pieces," and that filled the whole earth, is Christ, who
   comes from heaven and brings judgment on the world.

   4. But that we may not leave our subject at this point undemonstrated,
   we are obliged to discuss the matter of the times, of which a man
   should not speak hastily, because they are a light to him. For as the
   times are noted from the foundation of the world, and reckoned from
   Adam, they set clearly before us the matter with which our inquiry
   deals. For the first appearance of our Lord in the flesh took place in
   Bethlehem, under Augustus, in the year 5500; and He suffered in the
   thirty-third year. And 6,000 years must needs be accomplished, in order
   that the Sabbath may come, the rest, the holy day "on which God rested
   from all His works." [1297] For the Sabbath is the type and emblem of
   the future kingdom of the saints, when they "shall reign with Christ,"
   when He comes from heaven, as John says in his Apocalypse: for "a day
   with the Lord is as a thousand years." [1298] Since, then, in six days
   God made all things, it follows that 6,000 years must be fulfilled. And
   they are not yet fulfilled, as John says: "five are fallen; one is,"
   that is, the sixth; "the other is not yet come." [1299]

   5. In mentioning the "other," moreover, he specifies the seventh, in
   which there is rest. But some one may be ready to say, How will you
   prove to me that the Saviour was born in the year 5500? Learn that
   easily, O man; for the things that took place of old in the wilderness,
   under Moses, in the case of the tabernacle, were constituted types and
   emblems of spiritual mysteries, in order that, when the truth came in
   Christ in these last days, you might be able to perceive that these
   things were fulfilled. For He says to him, "And thou shalt make the ark
   of imperishable wood, and shalt overlay it with pure gold within and
   without; and thou shalt make the length of it two cubits and a half,
   and the breadth thereof one cubit and a half, and a cubit and a half
   the height;" [1300] which measures, when summed up together, make five
   cubits and a half, so that the 5500 years might be signified thereby.

   6. At that time, then, the Saviour appeared and showed His own body to
   the world, (born) of the Virgin, who was the "ark overlaid with pure
   gold," with the Word within and the Holy Spirit without; so that the
   truth is demonstrated, and the "ark" made manifest. From the birth of
   Christ, then, we must reckon the 500 years that remain to make up the
   6000, and thus the end shall be. And that the Saviour appeared in the
   world, bearing the imperishable ark, His own body, at a time which was
   the fifth and half, John declares: "Now it was the sixth hour," [1301]
   he says, intimating by that, one-half of the day. But a day with the
   Lord is 1000 years; and the half of that, therefore, is 500 years. For
   it was not meet that He should appear earlier, for the burden of the
   law still endured, nor yet when the sixth day was fulfilled (for the
   baptism is changed), but on the fifth and half, in order that in the
   remaining half time the gospel might be preached to the whole world,
   and that when the sixth day was completed He might end the present
   life.

   7. Since, then, the Persians held the mastery for 330 years, [1302] and
   after them the Greeks, who were yet more glorious, held it for 300
   years, of necessity the fourth beast, as being strong and mightier than
   all that were before it, will reign 500 years. When the times are
   fulfilled, and the ten horns spring from the beast in the last (times),
   then Antichrist will appear among them. When he makes war against the
   saints, and persecutes them, then may we expect the manifestation of
   the Lord from heaven.

   8. The prophet having thus instructed us with all exactness as to the
   certainty of the things that are to be, broke off from his present
   subject, and passed again to the kingdom of the Persians and Greeks,
   recounting to us another vision which took place, and was fulfilled in
   its proper time; in order that, by establishing our belief in this, he
   might be able to present us to God as readier believers in the things
   that are to be. Accordingly, what he had narrated in the first vision,
   he again recounts in detail for the edification of the faithful. For by
   the "ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward," he means
   Darius, the king of the Persians, who overcame all the nations; "for,"
   says he, "these beasts shall not stand before him."  And by the
   "he-goat that came from the west," he means Alexander the Macedonian,
   the king of the Greeks; and in that he "came against that very ram, and
   was moved with choler, and smote him upon the face, and shivered him,
   and cast him upon the ground, and stamped upon him," this expresses
   just what has happened.

   9. For Alexander waged war against Darius, and overcame him, and made
   himself master of the whole sovereignty, after routing and destroying
   his camp. Then, after the exaltation of the he-goat, his horn--the
   great one, namely--was broken; and there arose four horns under it,
   toward the four winds of heaven.  For, when Alexander had made himself
   master of all the land of Persia, and had reduced its people into
   subjection, he thereupon died, after dividing his kingdom into four
   principalities, as has been shown above. And from that time "one horn
   was exalted, and waxed great, even to the power of heaven; and by him
   the sacrifice," he says, "was disturbed, and righteousness cast down to
   the ground."

   10. For Antiochus arose, surnamed Epiphanes, who was of the line of
   Alexander. And after he had reigned in Syria, and brought under him all
   Egypt, he went up to Jerusalem, and entered the sanctuary, and seized
   all the treasures in the house of the Lord, and the golden candlestick,
   and the table, and the altar, and made a great slaughter in the land;
   even as it is written: "And the sanctuary shall be trodden under foot,
   unto evening and unto morning, a thousand and three hundred days." For
   it happened that the sanctuary remained desolate during that period,
   three years and a half, that the thousand and three hundred days might
   be fulfilled; until Judas Maccabæus arose after the death of his father
   Matthias, and withstood him, and destroyed the encampment of Antiochus,
   and delivered the city, and recovered the sanctuary, and restored it in
   strict accordance with the law.

   11. Since, then, the angel Gabriel also recounted these things to the
   prophet, as they have been understood by us, as they have also taken
   place, and as they have been all clearly described in the books of the
   Maccabees, let us see further what he says on the other weeks. For when
   he read the book of Jeremiah the prophet, in which it was written that
   the sanctuary would be desolate seventy years, he made confession with
   fastings and supplications, and prayed that the people might return
   sooner from their captivity to the city Jerusalem. Thus, then, he
   speaks in his account: "In the first year of Darius the son of
   Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was king over the realm of the
   Chaldeans, I Daniel understood in the books the number of the years, as
   the word of the Lord had come to Jeremiah the prophet, for the
   accomplishment of the desolation of Jerusalem in seventy years," etc.

   12. After his confession and supplication, the angel says to him, "Thou
   art a man [1303] greatly beloved:" for thou desirest to see things of
   which thou shalt be informed by me; and in their own time these things
   will be fulfilled; and he touched me, saying, "Seventy weeks are
   determined upon thy people, and upon the holy city, to seal up sins and
   to blot out transgressions, and to seal up vision and prophet, and to
   anoint the Most Holy; and thou shalt know and understand, that from the
   going forth of words for the answer, and for the building of Jerusalem,
   unto Christ the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two
   weeks."

   13. Having mentioned therefore seventy weeks, and having divided them
   into two parts, in order that what was spoken by him to the prophet
   might be better understood, he proceeds thus, "Unto Christ the Prince
   shall be seven weeks," which make forty-nine years. It was in the
   twenty-first year that Daniel saw these things in Babylon. Hence, the
   forty-nine years added to the twenty-one, make up the seventy years, of
   which the blessed Jeremiah spake: "The sanctuary shall be desolate
   seventy years from the captivity that befell them under Nebuchadnezzar;
   and after these things the people will return, and sacrifice and
   offering will be presented, when Christ is their Prince." [1304]

   14. Now of what Christ does he speak, but of Jesus the son of Josedech,
   who returned at that time along with the people, and offered sacrifice
   according to the law, in the seventieth year, when the sanctuary was
   built? For all the kings and priests were styled Christs, because they
   were anointed with the holy oil, which Moses of old prepared. These,
   then, bore the name of the Lord in their own persons, showing aforetime
   the type, and presenting the image until the perfect King and Priest
   appeared from heaven, who alone did the will of the Father; as also it
   is written in Kings:  "And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that
   shall do all things according to my heart." [1305]

   15. In order, then, to show the time when He is to come whom the
   blessed Daniel desired to see, he says, "And after seven weeks there
   are other threescore and two weeks," which period embraces the space of
   434 years. For after the return of the people from Babylon under the
   leadership of Jesus the son of Josedech, and Ezra the scribe, and
   Zerubbabel the son of Salathiel, of the tribe of David, there were 434
   years unto the coming of Christ, in order that the Priest of priests
   might be manifested in the world, and that He who taketh away the sins
   of the world might be evidently set forth, as John speaks concerning
   Him: "Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world!"
   [1306] And in like manner Gabriel says: "To blot out transgressions,
   and make reconciliation for sins." But who has blotted out our
   transgressions? Paul the apostle teaches us, saying, "He is our peace
   who made both one;" [1307] and then, "Blotting out the handwriting of
   sins that was against us." [1308]

   16. That transgressions, therefore, are blotted out, and that
   reconciliation is made for sins, is shown by this.  But who are they
   who have reconciliation made for their sins, but they who believe on
   His name, and propitiate His countenance by good works? And that after
   the return of the people from Babylon there was a space of 434 years,
   until the time of the birth of Christ, may be easily understood. For,
   since the first covenant was given to the children of Israel after a
   period of 434 years, it follows that the second covenant also should be
   defined by the same space of time, in order that it might be expected
   by the people and easily recognised by the faithful.

   17. And for this reason Gabriel says:  "And to anoint the Most Holy."
   And the Most Holy is none else but the Son of God alone, who, when He
   came and manifested Himself, said to them, "The Spirit of the Lord is
   upon me, because He has anointed me;" [1309] and so forth. Whosoever,
   therefore, believed on the heavenly Priest, were cleansed by that same
   Priest, and their sins were blotted out. And whosoever believed not on
   Him, despising Him as a man, had their sins sealed, as those which
   could not be taken away; whence the angel, foreseeing that not all
   should believe on Him, said, "To finish sins, and to seal up sins."
   For as many as continued to disbelieve Him, even to the end, had their
   sins not finished, but sealed to be kept for judgment. But as many as
   will believe on Him as One able to remit sins, have their sins blotted
   out. Wherefore he says: "And to seal up vision and prophet."

   18. For when He came who is the fulfilling of the law and of the
   prophets (for the law and the prophets were till John), it was
   necessary that the things spoken by them should be confirmed (sealed),
   in order that at the coming of the Lord all things loosed should be
   brought to light, and that things bound of old should now be loosed by
   Him, as the Lord said Himself to the rulers of the people, when they
   were indignant at the cure on the Sabbath-day:  "Ye hypocrites, doth
   not each one of you loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead
   him away to watering? and ought not this woman, being a daughter of
   Abraham, whom Satan hath bound these eighteen years, be loosed on the
   Sabbath-day?" [1310] Whomsoever, therefore, Satan bound in chains,
   these did the Lord on His coming loose from the bonds of death, having
   bound our strong adversary and delivered humanity. As also Isaiah says:
   "Then will He say to those in chains, Go forth; and to them that are in
   darkness, Show yourselves." [1311]

   19. And that the things spoken of old by the law and the prophets were
   all sealed, and that they were unknown to men, Isaiah declares when he
   says: "And they will deliver the book that is sealed to one that is
   learned, and will say to him, Read this; and he will say, I cannot read
   it, for it is sealed." [1312]  It was meet and necessary that the
   things spoken of old by the prophets should be sealed to the
   unbelieving Pharisees, who thought that they understood the letter of
   the law, and be opened to the believing.  The things, therefore, which
   of old were sealed, are now by the grace of God the Lord all open to
   the saints.

   20. For He was Himself the perfect Seal, and the Church is the key: "He
   who openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth,"
   [1313] as John says. And again, the same says: "And I saw, on the right
   hand of Him that sat on the throne, a book written within and without,
   sealed with seven seals; and I saw an angel proclaiming with a loud
   voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?"
   and so forth.  "And I beheld in the midst of the throne, and of the
   four beasts, a Lamb standing slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes,
   which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth. And
   He came and took the book out of the right hand of Him that sat upon
   the throne. And when He had taken the book, the four beasts and
   four-and-twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having harps and
   golden vials full of incense, which is the prayers of the saints.  And
   they sing a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
   open the seals thereof: for Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to
   God by Thy blood." [1314] He took the book, therefore, and loosed it,
   in order that the things spoken concerning Him of old in secret, might
   now be proclaimed with boldness upon the house-tops. [1315]

   21. For this reason, then, the angel says to Daniel, "Seal the words,
   for the vision is until the end of the time." But to Christ it was not
   said "seal," but "loose" the things bound of old; in order that, by His
   grace, we might know the will of the Father, and believe upon Him whom
   He has sent for the salvation of men, Jesus our Lord. He says,
   therefore, "They shall return, and the street shall be built, and the
   wall;" which in reality took place. For the people returned and built
   the city, and the temple, and the wall round about. Then he says:
   "After threescore and two weeks the times will be fulfilled, and one
   week will make a covenant with many; and in the midst (half) of the
   week sacrifice and oblation will be removed, and in the temple will be
   the abomination of desolations."

   22. For when the threescore and two weeks are fulfilled, and Christ is
   come, and the Gospel is preached in every place, the times being then
   accomplished, there will remain only one week, the last, in which Elias
   will appear, and Enoch, and in the midst of it the abomination of
   desolation will be manifested, [1316] viz., Antichrist, announcing
   desolation to the world. And when he comes, the sacrifice and oblation
   will be removed, which now are offered to God in every place by the
   nations. These things being thus recounted, the prophet again describes
   another vision to us.  For he had no other care save to be accurately
   instructed in all things that are to be, and to prove himself an
   instructor in such.

   23. He says then: "In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a word
   was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was Belshazzar; and the word was
   true, and great power and understanding were given him in the vision.
   In those days I Daniel was mourning three weeks of days. I ate no
   pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine into my mouth, neither did
   I anoint myself at all, till three weeks of days were fulfilled. On the
   fourth day of the first month I humbled myself," says he, "one and
   twenty days," praying to the living God, and asking of Him the
   revelation of the mystery. And the Father in truth heard me, and sent
   His own Word, to show what should happen by Him. And that took place,
   indeed, by the great river. For it was meet that the Son should be
   manifested there, where also He was to remove sins.

   24. "And I lifted up mine eyes," he says, "and, behold, a man clothed
   in linen." [1317] In the first vision he says, "Behold, the angel
   Gabriel (was) sent." Here, however, it is not so; but he sees the Lord,
   not yet indeed as perfect man, but with the appearance and form of man,
   as he says: "And, behold, a man clothed in linen." For in being clothed
   in a various-coloured coat, he indicated mystically [1318] the variety
   of the graces of our calling. For the priestly coat was made up of
   different colours, as various nations waited for Christ's coming, in
   order that we might be made up (as one body) of many colours. "And his
   loins were girded with the gold of Ophaz."

   25. Now the word "Ophaz," which is a word transferred from Hebrew to
   Greek, denotes pure gold.  With a pure girdle, therefore, he was girded
   round the loins. For the Word was to bear us all, binding us like a
   girdle round His body, in His own love. The complete body was His,
   [1319] but we are members in His body, united together, and sustained
   by the Word Himself. "And his body was like Tharses." [1320] Now
   "Tharses," by interpretation, is "Ethiopians." For that it would be
   difficult to recognise Him, the prophet had thus already announced
   beforehand, intimating that He would be manifested in the flesh in the
   world, but that many would find it difficult to recognise Him.  "And
   his face as lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire;" for it was meet
   that the fiery and judicial power of the Word should be signified
   aforetime, in the exercise of which He will cause the fire (of His
   judgment) to light with justice upon the impious, and consume them.

   26. He added also these words:  "And his arms and his feet like
   polished brass;" to denote the first calling of men, and the second
   calling like unto it, viz. of the Gentiles. [1321] "For the last shall
   be as the first; for I will set thy rulers as at the beginning, and thy
   leaders as before. And His voice was as the voice of a great
   multitude." [1322] For all we who believe on Him in these days utter
   things oracular, as speaking by His mouth the things appointed by Him.

   27. And after a little He says to him:  "Knowest thou wherefore I come
   unto thee? And now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia.
   But I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of truth: and
   there is none that holdeth with me in these things but Michael your
   prince, and I left him there. For from the day that thou didst give thy
   countenance to be afflicted before the Lord thy God, thy prayer was
   heard, and I was sent to fight with the prince of Persia:"  for a
   certain counsel was formed not to send the people away:  "that
   therefore thy prayer might be speedily granted, I withstood him, and
   left Michael there."

   28. And who was he that spake, but the angel who was given to the
   people, as he says in the law of Moses: "I will not go with you,
   because the people is stiff-necked; but my angel shall go before along
   with you?" [1323] This (angel) withstood Moses at the inn, when he was
   bringing the child uncircumcised into Egypt. For it was not allowed
   Moses, who was the elder (or legate) and mediator of the law, and who
   proclaimed the covenant of the fathers, to introduce a child
   uncircumcised, lest he should be deemed a false prophet and deceiver by
   the people.  "And now," says he, "will I show the truth to thee." Could
   the Truth have shown anything else but the truth?

   29. He says therefore to him: "Behold, there shall stand up three kings
   in Persia: and the fourth shall be far richer than they all; and when
   he has got possession of his riches, he shall stand up against all the
   realms of Grecia. And a mighty king shall stand up, and shall rule with
   great dominion, and do according to his will; and when his kingdom
   stands, it shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds
   of heaven."  These things we have already discussed above, when we
   discoursed upon the four beasts. But since Scripture now again sets
   them forth explicitly, we must also discourse upon them a second time,
   that we may not leave Scripture unused and unexplained.

   30. "There shall stand up yet three kings," he says, "in Persia; and
   the fourth shall be far richer than they all." This has been fulfilled.
   For after Cyrus arose Darius, and then Artaxerxes. These were the three
   kings; (and) the Scripture is fulfilled. "And the fourth shall be far
   richer than they all." Who is that but Darius, who reigned and made
   himself glorious,--who was rich, and assailed all the realms of Greece?
   Against him rose Alexander of Macedon, who destroyed his kingdom; and
   after he had reduced the Persians, his own kingdom was divided toward
   the four winds of heaven. For Alexander at his death divided his
   kingdom into four principalities. "And a king shall stand up, and shall
   enter into the fortress of the king of Egypt."

   31. For Antiochus became king of Syria. He held the sovereignty in the
   107th year of the kingdom of the Greeks. And in those same times indeed
   he made war against Ptolemy king of Egypt, and conquered him, and won
   the power. On returning from Egypt he went up to Jerusalem, in the 103d
   year, and carrying off with him all the treasures of the Lord's house,
   he marched to Antioch. And after two years of days the king sent his
   raiser of taxes [1324] into the cities of Judea, to compel the Jews to
   forsake the laws of their fathers, and submit to the decrees of the
   king. And he came, and tried to compel them, saying, "Come forth, and
   do the commandment of the king, and ye shall live."

   32. But they said, "We will not come forth: neither will we do the
   king's commandment; we will die in our innocency: and he slew of them a
   thousand souls." [1325] The things, therefore, which were spoken to the
   blessed Daniel are fulfilled: "And my servants shall be afflicted, and
   shall fall by famine, and by sword, and by captivity." [1326] Daniel,
   however, adds: "And they shall be holpen with a little help." For at
   that time Matthias arose, and Judas Maccabæus, and helped them, and
   delivered them from the hand of the Greeks.

   33. That therefore was fulfilled which was spoken in the Scripture. He
   proceeds then thus: "And the (king's) daughter of the South shall come
   to the king of the North to make an agreement with him; and the arms of
   him that bringeth her shall not stand; and she, too, shall be smitten,
   and shall fall, and he that bringeth her." For this was a certain
   Ptolemaïs, [1327] queen of Egypt. At that time indeed she went forth
   with her two sons, Ptolemy and Philometor, to make an agreement with
   Antiochus king of Syria; and when she came to Scythopolis, she was
   slain there. For he who brought her betrayed her. At that same time,
   the two brothers made war against each other, and Philometor was slain,
   and Ptolemy gained the power.

   34. War, then, was again made by Ptolemy against Antiochus, (and)
   Antiochus met him. For thus saith the Scripture: "And the king of the
   South shall stand up against the king of the North, and her seed shall
   stand up against him." And what seed but Ptolemy, who made war with
   Antiochus? And Antiochus having gone forth against him, and having
   failed to overcome him, had to flee, and returned to Antioch, and
   collected a larger host. Ptolemy accordingly took his whole equipment,
   and carried it into Egypt. And the Scripture is fulfilled, as Daniel
   says: And he shall carry off into Egypt their gods, and their
   cast-works, and all their precious (vessels of) gold.

   35. And after these things Antiochus went forth a second time to make
   war against him, and overcome Ptolemy. And after these events Antiochus
   commenced hostilities again against the children of Israel, and
   despatched one Nicanor with a large army to subdue the Jews, at the
   time when Judas, after the death of Matthias, ruled the people; and so
   forth, as is written in the Maccabees. These events having taken place,
   the Scripture says again: "And there shall stand up another king, and
   he shall prevail upon the earth; and the king of the South shall stand
   up, and he shall obtain his daughter to wife."

   36. For it happened that there arose a certain Alexander, [1328] son of
   Philip. He withstood Antiochus [1329] at that time, and made war upon
   him, and cut him off, and gained possession of the kingdom. Then he
   sent to Ptolemy king of Egypt, saying, Give me thy daughter Cleopatra
   to wife. And he gave her to Alexander to wife. And thus the Scripture
   is fulfilled, when it says:  "And he shall obtain his daughter to
   wife." And it says further: "And he shall corrupt her, and she shall
   not be his wife." This also has been truly fulfilled. For after Ptolemy
   had given him his daughter, he returned, and saw the mighty and
   glorious kingdom of Alexander. And coveting its possession, he spoke
   falsely to Alexander, as the Scripture says:  "And the two kings shall
   speak lies at (one) table."  And, in sooth, Ptolemy betook himself to
   Egypt, and collected a great army, and attacked the city at the time
   when Alexander had marched into Cilicia.

   37. Ptolemy then invaded the country, and established garrisons
   throughout the cities; and on making himself master of Judea, set out
   for his daughter, and sent letters to Demetrius in the islands, saying,
   Come and meet me here, and I will give thee my daughter Cleopatra to
   wife, for Alexander has sought to kill me. Demetrius came accordingly,
   and Ptolemy received him, and gave him her who had been destined for
   Alexander. Thus is fulfilled that which is written: "And he shall
   corrupt her, and she shall not be his wife." Alexander was slain.  Then
   Ptolemy wore two crowns, that of Syria and that of Egypt, and died the
   third day after he had assumed them. Thus is fulfilled that which is
   written in Scripture: "And they shall not give him the glory of the
   kingdom." For he died, and received not honour from all as king.

   38. The prophet then, after thus recounting the things which have taken
   place already, and been fulfilled in their times, declares yet another
   mystery to us, while he points out the last times. For he says: "And
   there shall rise up another shameless king; and he shall exalt himself
   above every god, and shall magnify himself, and shall speak marvellous
   things, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished;" and so
   forth.  "And these shall escape out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and
   the chief (or principality) of the children of Ammon. And he shall
   stretch forth his hand upon the land; and the land of Egypt shall not
   escape. And he shall have power over the secret treasures of gold and
   silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt and of the Libyans,
   and the Ethiopians in their strongholds."

   39. Thus, then, does the prophet set forth these things concerning the
   Antichrist, who shall be shameless, a war-maker, and despot, who,
   exalting himself above all kings and above every god, shall build the
   city of Jerusalem, and restore the sanctuary. Him the impious will
   worship as God, and will bend to him the knee, thinking him to be the
   Christ. He shall cut off the two witnesses and forerunners of Christ,
   who proclaim His glorious kingdom from heaven, as it is said: "And I
   will give (power) unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
   thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth." [1330]
   As also it was announced to Daniel: "And one week shall confirm a
   covenant with many; and in the midst of the week it shall be that the
   sacrifice and oblation shall be removed"--that the one week might be
   shown to be divided into two. The two witnesses, then, shall preach
   three years and a half; and Antichrist shall make war upon the saints
   during the rest of the week, and desolate the world, that what is
   written may be fulfilled: "And they shall make the abomination of
   desolation for a thousand two hundred and ninety days."

   40. Daniel has spoken, therefore, of two abominations; the one of
   destruction, and the other of desolation. What is that of destruction,
   but that which Antiochus established there at the time? And what is
   that of desolation, but that which shall be universal when Antichrist
   comes?  "And there shall escape out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and
   the chief of the children of Ammon." For these are they who ally
   themselves with him on account of their kinship, and first address him
   as king. Those of Edom are the sons of Esau, who inhabit Mount Seir.
   And Moab and Ammon are they who are descended from his two daughters,
   as Isaiah also says: "And they shall fly (extend themselves) in the
   ships of strangers, and they shall also plunder the sea; and those from
   the east, and from the west, and the north, shall give them honour: and
   the children of Ammon shall first obey them." [1331] He shall be
   proclaimed king by them, and shall be magnified by all, and shall prove
   himself an abomination of desolation to the world, and shall reign for
   a thousand two hundred and ninety days. "Blessed is he that waiteth,
   and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days;" for
   when the abomination cometh and makes war upon the saints, whosoever
   shall survive his days, and reach the forty-five days, while the other
   period of fifty days advances, to him the kingdom of heaven comes.
   Antichrist, indeed, enters even into part of the fifty days, but the
   saints shall inherit the kingdom along with Christ.

   41. These things being thus narrated, Daniel proceeds: "And, behold,
   there stood two men, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and
   the other on that side; and they made answer to the man that stood upon
   the bank of the river, and said to him, How long shall it be to the end
   of these wonderful words which thou hast spoken? And I heard the man
   clothed in linen, who was upon the water of the river; and he lifted up
   his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by Him that
   liveth for ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; and
   they shall know all these things when the dispersion is accomplished."

   42. Who, then, were the two men who stood on the bank of the river, but
   the law and the prophets? And who was he who stood upon the water, but
   He concerning whom they prophesied of old, who in the last times was to
   be borne witness to by the Father at the Jordan, and to be declared to
   the people boldly by John, "who wore the casty [1332] of the scribe
   about his loins, and was clothed with a linen coat of various colours?"
   These, therefore, interrogate Him, knowing that to Him were given all
   government and power, in order to learn accurately of Him when He will
   bring the judgment on the world, and when the things spoken by Him will
   be fulfilled. And He, desiring by all means to convince them, lifted
   His right hand and His left hand to heaven, and sware by Him that
   liveth for ever. Who is He that swore, and by whom sware He? Manifestly
   the Son by the Father, saying, The Father liveth for ever, but in a
   time, and times, and an half, when the dispersion is accomplished, they
   shall know all these things.

   43. By the stretching forth of His two hands He signified His passion;
   and by mentioning "a time, and times, and an half, when the dispersion
   is accomplished," He indicated the three years and a half of
   Antichrist. For by "a time" He means a year, and by "times" two years,
   and by an "half time" half a year. These are the thousand two hundred
   and ninety days of which Daniel prophesied for the finishing of the
   passion, and the accomplishment of the dispersion when Antichrist
   comes. In those days they shall know all these things. And from the
   time of the removal of the continuous sacrifice there are also reckoned
   one thousand two hundred and ninety days. (Then) iniquity shall abound,
   as the Lord also says:  "Because iniquity shall abound, the love of
   many shall wax cold." [1333]

   44. And that divisions will arise when the falling away takes place, is
   without doubt. And when divisions arise, love is chilled. The words,
   "Blessed is he that waiteth and cometh to the thousand three hundred
   and five and thirty days," have also their value, as the Lord said:
   "But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved."
   Wherefore let us by no means admit the falling away, lest iniquity
   abound, and the abomination of desolation--that is, the
   adversary--overtake us. And He said to him, "unto evening"--that is,
   unto the consummation--"and morning." What is "morning?" The day of
   resurrection. For that is the beginning of another age, as the morning
   is the beginning of the day. And the thousand and four hundred days are
   the light of the world. For on the appearing of the light in the world
   (as He says, "I am the light of the world"), the sanctuary shall be
   purged, as he said, [1334] (of) the adversary. For it cannot by any
   means be purged but by his destruction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1294] The same method of explaining the two visions is also adopted by
   Jacobus Nisibenus, serm. v., and by his illustrious disciple Ephraem
   Syrus on Dan. vii. 4. [Let me again refer to Dr. Pusey's work on
   Daniel, as invaluable in this connection. The comments of our author on
   this book and on "the Antichrist," infra, deserve special attention, as
   from a disciple of the disciples of St. John himself.]

   [1295] Dan. vii.

   [1296] [True in a.d. 1885. A very pregnant testimony to our own times.]

   [1297] This is what Photius condemned in Hippolytus. Irenæus, however,
   held the same opinion (book v. c. 28 and 29). The same view is
   expressed yet earlier in the Epistle of Barnabas (sec. 15). It was an
   opinion adopted from the rabbis.

   [1298] Ps. xc. 4.

   [1299] Apoc. xvii. 10.

   [1300] Ex. xxv. 10.

   [1301] John xix. 14.

   [1302] Migne thinks we should read diakosia triakonta, i.e., 230, as it
   is also in Julius Africanus, who was contemporary with Hippolytus. As
   to the duration of the Greek empire, Hippolytus and Africanus make it
   both 300 years, if we follow Jerome's version of the latter in his
   comment on Dan. ix. 24. Eusebius makes it seventy years longer in his
   Demonstr. Evang., viii. 2.

   [1303] Literally, "a man of desires." [Our author plays on this word,
   as if the desire of knowledge were referred to. Our Authorized Version
   is better, and the rendering might be "a man of loves."]

   [1304] Jer. xxv. 11.

   [1305] 1 Sam. ii. 35.

   [1306] John i. 29.

   [1307] Eph. ii. 14.

   [1308] Col. ii. 14.

   [1309] Isa. lxi. 1; Luke iv. 18.

   [1310] Luke xiii. 15, 16.

   [1311] Isa. xlix. 9.

   [1312] Isa. xxix. 11.

   [1313] Apoc. iii. 7.

   [1314] Apoc. v.

   [1315] Cf. Matt. x. 27.

   [1316] In the text, the word heos, "until," is introduced, which seems
   spurious.

   [1317] baddin.

   [1318] In the text, musterion (of "mysteries"), for which musteriodos
   or mustikos, "mystically," is proposed.

   [1319] The Latin translation renders: His body was perfect.

   [1320] "Thares" (Tharseis) in Hippolytus. The Septuagint gives Tharsis
   as the translation of the Hebrew trsys, rendered in our version as
   "beryl" (Dan. x. 6).

   [1321] Isa. i. 26.

   [1322] Apoc. xix. 6.

   [1323] Ex. xxxii. 4; xxxiii. 3.

   [1324] phorologon.

   [1325] 1 Macc. ii. 33.

   [1326] Dan. xi. 33.

   [1327] He seems to refer to Cleopatra, wife and niece of Physco. For
   Lathyrus was sometimes called Philometor in ridicule (epi chleuasma),
   as Pausanias says in the Attica.

   [1328] He refers to Alexander I. king of Syria, of whom we read in 1
   Macc. x. He pretended to be the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and even
   gained a decree of the senate of Rome in his favour as such. Yet he was
   a person of unknown origin, as indeed he acknowledged himself in his
   choice of the designation Theopator. Livy calls him "a man unknown, and
   of uncertain parentage" (homo ignotus et incertæ stirpis). So
   Hippolytus calls him here, "a certain Alexander" (tina). He had also
   other surnames, e.g., Euergetes, Balas, etc.

   [1329] For "Antiochus" in the text, read "Demetrius."

   [1330] Apoc. xi. 3.

   [1331] Isa. xi. 14.

   [1332] Girdle.

   [1333] Matt. xxiv. 12.

   [1334] The text gives ho antikeimenos , which is corrupt.
     __________________________________________________________________

   III.

   Scholia on Daniel. [1335]

   Chap. i. 1 "In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim." The Scripture
   narrates these things, with the purpose of intimating the second
   captivity of the people, when Jehoiakim and the three youths with him,
   together with Daniel, were taken captive and carried off.

   2. "And the Lord gave," etc.  These words, "and the Lord gave," are
   written, that no one, in reading the introduction to the book, may
   attribute their capture to the strength of the captors and the
   slackness of their chief. And it is well said, "with part," for the
   deportation was for the correction, not the ruin, of the whole nation,
   that there might be no misapplication of the cause.

   8. "And Daniel purposed in his heart." Oh, blessed are they who thus
   kept the covenant of the fathers, and transgressed not the law given by
   Moses, but feared the God proclaimed by him. These, though captives in
   a strange land, were not seduced by delicate meats, nor were they
   slaves to the pleasures of wine, nor were they caught by the bait of
   princely glory. But they kept their mouth holy and pure, that pure
   speech might proceed from pure mouths, and praise with such (mouths)
   the heavenly Father.

   12.  "Prove now thy servants." They teach that it is not earthly meats
   that give to men their beauty and strength, but the grace of God
   bestowed by the Word. "And after a little." Thou hast seen the
   incorruptible faith of the youths, and the unalterable fear of God.
   They asked an interval of ten days, to prove therein that man cannot
   otherwise find grace with God than by believing the word preached by
   the Lord.

   19. "And among them all, was found none like Daniel." These men, who
   were proved faithful witnesses in Babylon, were led by the Word in all
   wisdom, that by their means the idols of the Babylonians should be put
   to shame, and that Nebuchadnezzar should be overcome by three youths,
   and that by their faith the fire in the furnace should be kept at bay,
   and the desire of the wicked elders (or chiefs) proved vain.

   Chap. ii. 3 "I have dreamed a dream." The dream, then, which was seen
   by the king was not an earthly dream, so that it might be interpreted
   by the wise of the world; but it was a heavenly dream, fulfilled in its
   proper times, according to the counsel and foreknowledge of God.  And
   for this reason it was kept secret from men who think of earthly
   things, that to those who seek after heavenly things heavenly mysteries
   might be revealed. And, indeed, there was a similar case in Egypt in
   the time of Pharaoh and Joseph.

   5. "The thing is gone from me."  For this purpose was the vision
   concealed from the king, that he who was chosen of God., viz., Daniel,
   might be shown to be a prophet.  For when things concealed from some
   are revealed by another, he who tells them is of necessity shown to be
   a prophet.

   10. "And they say, There is not a man." Whereas, therefore, they
   declared it to be impossible that what was asked by the king should be
   told by man; God showed them, that what is impossible with man is
   possible with God.

   14. "Arioch, the captain of the king's guard" (literally, "the chief
   slaughterer or cook"). For as the cook slays all animals and cooks
   them, of a similar nature was his occupation. And the rulers of the
   world slay men, butchering them like brute beasts.

   23. "Because Thou hast given me wisdom and might." We ought therefore
   to mark the goodness of God, how He straightway reveals and shows
   (Himself) to the worthy, and to those that fear Him, fulfilling their
   prayers and supplications, as the prophet says: "Who is wise, and he
   shall understand these things? and prudent, and he shall know them?"
   [1336]

   27. "Cannot the wise men, the magicians." He instructs the king not to
   seek an explanation of heavenly mysteries from earthly men, for they
   shall be accomplished in their due time by God.

   29. "As for thee, O king, thy thoughts." For the king, on making
   himself master of the land of Egypt, and getting hold of the country of
   Judea, and carrying off the people, thought upon his bed what should be
   after these things; and He who knows the secrets of all, and searcheth
   the thoughts of the hearts, revealed to him by means of the image the
   things that were to be. And He hid from him the vision, in order that
   the counsels of God might not be interpreted by the wise men of
   Babylon, but that by the blessed Daniel, as a prophet of God, things
   kept secret from all might be made manifest.

   31. "Behold a great image." How, then, should we not mark the things
   prophesied of old in Babylon by Daniel, and now yet in the course of
   fulfilment in the world? For the image shown at that time to
   Nebuchadnezzar furnished a type of the whole world. In these times the
   Babylonians were sovereign over all, and these were the golden head of
   the image. And then, after them, the Persians held the supremacy for
   245 years, and they were represented by the silver. Then the Greeks had
   the supremacy, beginning with Alexander of Macedon, for 300 years, so
   that they were the brass. After them came the Romans, who were the iron
   legs of the image, for they were strong as iron. Then (we have) the
   toes of clay and iron, to signify the democracies that were
   subsequently to rise, partitioned among the ten toes of the image, in
   which shall be iron mixed with clay.

   31. "Thou sawest," etc.  Apollinaris on this: He looked, and behold, as
   it were, an image. For it did not appear to him as an actual object,
   presented to the view of an onlooker, but as an image or semblance. And
   while it contains in it many things together, that is in such a way
   that it is not really one, but manifold. For it comprised a summary of
   all kingdoms; and its exceeding splendour was on account of the glory
   of the kings, and its terrible appearance on account of their power.
   Eusebius Pamphili, and Hippolytus the most holy bishop of Rome, compare
   the dream of Nebuchadnezzar now in question with the vision of the
   prophet Daniel. Since these have given a different interpretation of
   this vision now before us in their expositions, I deemed it necessary
   to transcribe what is said by Eusebius of Cæsarea, who bears the
   surname Pamphili, in the 15th book of his Gospel Demonstration; [1337]
   for he expounds the whole vision in these terms: "I think that this
   (i.e., the vision of Nebuchadnezzar) differs in nothing from the vision
   of the prophet. For as the prophet saw a great sea, so the king saw a
   great image. And again, as the prophet saw four beasts, which he
   interpreted as four kingdoms, so the king was given to understand four
   kingdoms under the gold, and silver, and brass, and iron. And again, as
   the prophet saw the division of the ten horns of the last beast, and
   three horns broken by one; so the king, in like manner, saw in the
   extremities of the image one part iron and another clay. And besides
   this, as the prophet, after the vision of the four kingdoms, saw the
   Son of man receive dominion, and power, and a kingdom; so also the king
   thought he saw a stone smite the whole image, and become a great
   mountain and fill the sea. And rightly so. For it was quite consistent
   in the king, whose view of the spectacle of life was so false, and who
   admired the beauty of the mere sensible colours, so to speak, in the
   picture set up to view, to liken the life of all men to a great image;
   but (it became) the prophet to compare the great and mighty tumult of
   life to a mighty sea. And it was fitting that the king, who prized the
   substances deemed precious among men, gold, and silver, and brass, and
   iron, should liken to these substances the kingdoms that held the
   sovereignty at different times in the life of men; but that the prophet
   should describe these same kingdoms under the likeness of beasts, in
   accordance with the manner of their rule. And again, the king--who was
   puffed up, as it seems, in his own conceit, and plumed himself on the
   power of his ancestors--is shown the vicissitude to which affairs are
   subject, and the end destined for all the kingdoms of earth, with the
   view of teaching him to lay aside his pride in himself, and understand
   that there is nothing stable among men, but only that which is the
   appointed end of all things--the kingdom of God. For after the first
   kingdom of the Assyrians, which was denoted by the gold, there will be
   the second kingdom of the Persians, expressed by the silver; and then
   the third kingdom of the Macedonians, signified by the brass; and after
   it, the fourth kingdom of the Romans will succeed, more powerful than
   those that went before it; for which reason also it was likened to
   iron. For of it is said: "And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as
   iron; as iron breaketh and subdueth all things, so shall it break and
   subdue all things." And after all these kingdoms which have been
   mentioned, the kingdom of God is represented by the stone that breaks
   the whole image. And the prophet, in conformity with this, does not see
   the kingdom which comes at the end of all these things, until he has in
   order described the four dominions mentioned under the four beasts. And
   I think that the visions shown, both to the king and to the prophet,
   were visions of these four kingdoms alone, and of none others, because
   by these the nation of the Jews was held in bondage from the times of
   the prophet."

   33. "His feet," etc.  Hippolytus: In the vision of the prophet, the ten
   horns are the things that are yet to be.

   34. "Thou sawest till that a stone was cut." Thou sawest, as it were, a
   stone cut without hands, and smiting the image upon its feet. For the
   human kingdom was decisively separated from the divine; with reference
   to which it is written, "as it were cut." The stroke, however, smites
   the extremities, and in these it broke all dominion that is upon earth.

   45. "And the dream is certain."  That no one, therefore, may have any
   doubt whether the things announced shall turn out so or not, the
   prophet has confirmed them with the words, "And the dream is certain,
   and the interpretation thereof sure;" I have not erred in the
   interpretation of the vision.

   46. "Then king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face." Nebuchadnezzar
   hearing these things, and being put in remembrance of his vision, knew
   that what was spoken by Daniel was true. How great is the power of the
   grace of God, beloved, that one who a little before was doomed to death
   with the other wise men of Babylon, should now be worshipped by the
   king, not as man, but as God! "He commanded that they should offer
   manaa" [1338] (i.e., in Chaldee, "oblation") "and sweet odours unto
   him." Of old, too, the Lord made a similar announcement to Moses,
   saying, "See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh;" [1339] in order that,
   on account of the signs wrought by him in the land of Egypt, Moses
   might no longer be reckoned a man, but be worshipped as a god by the
   Egyptians.

   48. "Then the king made Daniel a great man." For as he had humbled
   himself, and presented himself as the least among all men, God made him
   great, and the king established him as ruler over the whole land of
   Babylon. Just as also Pharaoh did to Joseph, appointing him then to be
   ruler over the whole land of Egypt.

   49. "And Daniel requested," etc.  For as they had united with Daniel in
   prayer to God that the vision might be revealed to him, so Daniel, when
   he obtained great honour from the king, made mention of them,
   explaining to the king what had been done by them, in order that they
   also should be deemed worthy of some honour as fellow-seers and
   worshippers of God. For when they asked heavenly things from the Lord,
   they received also earthly things from the king.

   Chap. iii. 1 "In the eighteenth year," etc. (These words are wanting in
   the Vulgate, etc.) A considerable space of time having elapsed,
   therefore, and the eighteenth year being now in its course, the king,
   calling to mind his vision, "made an image of gold, whose height was
   threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits."  For as the
   blessed Daniel, in interpreting the vision, had answered the king,
   saying, "Thou art this head of gold in the image," the king, being
   puffed up with this address, and elated in heart, made a copy of this
   image, in order that he might be worshipped by all as God.

   7. "All the people fell." Some (did so) because they feared the king
   himself; but all (or "most"), because they were idolaters, obeyed the
   word commanded by the king.

   16. "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered," etc. These three youths
   are become an example to all faithful men, inasmuch as they did not
   fear the crowd of satraps, neither did they tremble when they heard the
   king's words, nor did they shrink when they saw the flame of the
   blazing furnace, but deemed all men and the whole world as nought, and
   kept the fear of God alone before their eyes. Daniel, though he stood
   at a distance and kept silence, encouraged them to be of good cheer as
   he smiled to them. And he rejoiced also himself at the witness they
   bore, understanding, as he did, that the three youths would receive a
   crown in triumph over the devil.

   19. "And commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times
   more." He bids the vast furnace be heated one seven times more, as if
   he were already overcome by them. In earthly things, then, the king was
   superior; but in faith toward God the three youths were superior. Tell
   me, Nebuchadnezzar, with what purpose you order them to be cast into
   the fire bound? Is it lest they might escape, if they should have their
   feet unbound, and thus be able to extinguish the fire? But thou doest
   not these things of thyself, but there is another who worketh these
   things by thy means.

   47. [1340] "And the flame streamed forth." The fire, he means, was
   driven from within by the angel, and burst forth outwardly. See how
   even the fire appears intelligent, as if it recognised and punished the
   guilty. For it did not touch the servants of God, but it consumed the
   unbelieving and impious Chaldeans. Those who were within were
   besprinkled with a (cooling) dew by the angel, while those who thought
   they stood in safety outside the furnace were destroyed by the fire.
   The men who cast in the youths were burned by the flame, which caught
   them on all sides, as I suppose, when they went to bind the youths.

   92 (i.e., 25). "And the form of the fourth is like the Son of God."
   Tell me, Nebuchadnezzar, when didst thou see the Son of God, that thou
   shouldst confess that this is the Son of God? And who pricked thy
   heart, that thou shouldst utter such a word? And with what eyes wert
   thou able to look into this light? And why was this manifested to thee
   alone, and to none of the satraps about thee? But, as it is written,
   "The heart of a king is in the hand of God:" the hand of God is here,
   whereby the Word pricked his heart, so that he might recognise Him in
   the furnace, and glorify Him. And this idea of ours is not without good
   ground. For as the children of Israel were destined to see God in the
   world, and yet not to believe on Him, the Scripture showed beforehand
   that the Gentiles would recognise Him incarnate, whom, while not
   incarnate, Nebuchadnezzar saw and recognised of old in the furnace, and
   acknowledged to be the Son of God.

   93 (i.e., 26). "And he said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego." The
   three youths he thus called by name. But he found no name by which to
   call the fourth. For He was not yet that Jesus born of the Virgin.

   97 (i.e., 30). "Then the king promoted," etc. For as they honoured God
   by giving themselves up to death, so, too, they were themselves
   honoured not only by God, but also by the king. And they taught strange
   and foreign nations also to worship God.

   Chap. vii. 1   "And he wrote the dream." The things, therefore, which
   were revealed to the blessed prophet by the Spirit in visions, these he
   also recounted fully for others, that he might not appear to prophesy
   of the future to himself alone, but might be proved a prophet to others
   also, who wish to search the divine Scriptures.

   2. "And behold the four winds."  He means created existence in its
   fourfold division.

   3. "And four great beasts." As various beasts then were shown to the
   blessed Daniel, and these different from each other, we should
   understand that the truth of the narrative deals not with certain
   beasts, but, under the type and image of different beasts, exhibits the
   kingdoms that have risen in this world in power over the race of man.
   For by the great sea he means the whole world.

   4. "Till the wings thereof were plucked." For this happened in reality
   in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, as has been shown in the preceding book.
   And he bears witness directly that this very thing was fulfilled in
   himself; for he was driven out of the kingdom, and stripped of his
   glory, and of the greatness which he formerly possessed. "And after a
   little:" the words, "It was made stand upon the feet as a man, and a
   man's heart was given to it," signify that Nebuchadnezzar, when he
   humbled himself, and acknowledged that he was but a man, in subjection
   under the power of God, and made supplication to the Lord, found mercy
   with Him, and was restored to his own kingdom and honour.

   5. "A second beast like to a bear." To represent the kingdom of the
   Persians.  "And it had three ribs." The three nations he calls three
   ribs. The meaning, therefore, is this: that beast had the dominion, and
   these others under it were the Medes, Assyrians, and Babylonians. "And
   they said thus to it, Arise, devour." For the Persians arising in these
   times, devastated every land, and made many men subject to them, and
   slew them. For as this beast, the bear, is a foul animal, and
   carnivorous, tearing with claws and teeth, such also was the kingdom of
   the Persians, who held the supremacy for two hundred and thirty years.

   6. "And, lo, another beast like a leopard." In mentioning a leopard, he
   means the kingdom of the Greeks, over whom Alexander of Macedon was
   king. And he likened them to a leopard, because they were quick and
   inventive in thought, and bitter in heart, just as that animal is
   many-coloured in appearance, and quick in wounding and in drinking
   man's blood.

   "The beast had also four heads." When the kingdom of Alexander was
   exalted, and grew, and acquired a name over the whole world, his
   kingdom was divided into four principalities. For Alexander, when near
   his end, partitioned his kingdom among his four comrades of the same
   race, viz., "Seleucus, Demetrius, Ptolemy, and Philip;" and all these
   assumed crowns, as Daniel prophesies, and as it is written in the first
   book of Maccabees.

   7. "And behold a fourth beast."  Now, that there has arisen no other
   kingdom after that of the Greeks except that which stands sovereign at
   present, is manifest to all. This one has iron teeth, because it
   subdues and reduces all by its strength, just as iron does. And the
   rest it did tread with its feet, for there is no other kingdom
   remaining after this one, but from it will spring ten horns.

   "And it had ten horns." For as the prophet said already of the leopard,
   that the beast had four heads, and that was fulfilled, and Alexander's
   kingdom was divided into four principalities, so also now we ought to
   look for the ten horns which are to spring from it, when the time of
   the beast shall be fulfilled, and the little horn, which is Antichrist,
   shall appear suddenly in their midst, and righteousness shall be
   banished from the earth, and the whole world shall reach its
   consummation. So that we ought not to anticipate the counsel of God,
   but exercise patience and prayer, that we fall not on such times. We
   should not, however, refuse to believe that these things will come to
   pass. For if the things which the prophets predicted in former times
   have not been realized, then we need not look for these things. But if
   those former things did happen in their proper seasons, as was
   foretold, these things also shall certainly be fulfilled.

   8. "I considered the horns."  That is to say, I looked intently at the
   beast, and was astonished at everything about it, but especially at the
   number of the horns.  For the appearance of this beast differed from
   that of the other beasts in kind.

   13. "And came to the Ancient of days." By the Ancient of days he means
   none other than the Lord and God and Ruler of all, and even of Christ
   Himself, who maketh the days old, and yet becometh not old Himself by
   times and days.

   14. "His dominion is an everlasting dominion." The Father, having put
   all things in subjection to His own Son, both things in heaven and
   things on earth, showed Him forth by all as the first-begotten of God,
   in order that, along with the Father, He might be approved the Son of
   God before angels, and be manifested as the Lord also of angels: (He
   showed Him forth also as) the first-begotten of a virgin, that He might
   be seen to be in Himself the Creator anew of the first-formed Adam,
   (and) as the first-begotten from the dead, that He might become Himself
   the first-fruits of our resurrection.

   "Which shall not pass away." He exhibited all the dominion given by the
   Father to His own Son, who is manifested as King of all in heaven and
   on earth, and under the earth, and as Judge of all: of all in heaven,
   because He was born the Word, of the heart of the Father before all;
   and of all in earth, because He was made man, and created Adam anew of
   Himself; and of all under the earth, because He was also numbered among
   the dead, and preached to the souls of the saints, (and) by death
   overcame death.

   17. "Which shall arise." For when the three beasts have finished their
   course, and been removed, and the one still stands in vigour,--if this
   one, too, is removed, then finally earthly things (shall) end, and
   heavenly things begin; that the indissoluble and everlasting kingdom of
   the saints may be brought to view, and the heavenly King manifested to
   all, no longer in figure, like one seen in vision, or revealed in a
   pillar of cloud upon the top of a mountain, but amid the powers and
   armies of angels, as God incarnate and man, Son of God and Son of
   man--coming from heaven as the world's Judge.

   19. "And I inquired about the fourth beast." It is to the fourth
   kingdom, of which we have already spoken, that he here refers:  that
   kingdom, than which no greater kingdom of like nature has arisen upon
   the earth; from which also ten horns are to spring, and to be
   apportioned among ten crowns. And amid these another little horn shall
   rise, which is that of Antichrist. And it shall pluck by the roots the
   three others before it; that is to say, he shall subvert the three
   kings of Egypt, Libya, and Ethiopia, with the view of acquiring for
   himself universal dominion. And after conquering the remaining seven
   horns, he will at last begin, inflated by a strange and wicked spirit,
   to stir up war against the saints, and to persecute all everywhere,
   with the aim of being glorified by all, and being worshipped as God.

   22. "Until the Ancient of days come." That is, when at length the Judge
   of judges and the King of kings comes from heaven, who shall subvert
   the whole dominion and power of the adversary, and shall consume all
   with the eternal fire of punishment. But to His servants, and prophets,
   and martyrs, and to all who fear Him, He will give an everlasting
   kingdom; that is, they shall possess the endless enjoyment of good.

   25. "Until a time, and times, and the dividing of time." This denotes
   three years and a half.

   Chap. ix. 21   "And, behold, the man Gabriel...flying." You see how the
   prophet likens the speed of the angels to a winged bird, on account of
   the light and rapid motion with which these spirits fly so quickly in
   discharge of orders.

   Chap. x. 6   "And the voice of His words." For all we who now believe
   on Him declare the words of Christ, as if we spake by His mouth the
   things enjoined by Him.

   7. "And I saw," etc. For it is to His saints that fear Him, and to them
   alone, that He reveals Himself. For if any one seems to be living now
   in the Church, and yet has not the fear of God, his companionship with
   the saints will avail him nothing.

   12. "Thy words were heard."  Behold how much the piety of a righteous
   man availeth, that to him alone, as to one worthy, things not yet to be
   manifested in the world should be revealed.

   13. "And lo, Michael." Who is Michael but the angel assigned to the
   people? As (God) says to Moses, "I will not go with you in the way,
   because the people are stiff-necked; but my angel shall go with you."

   16. "My inwards are turned" (A.V., "my sorrows are turned upon me").
   For it was meet that, at the appearing of the Lord, what was above
   should be turned beneath, in order that also what was beneath might
   come above.--I require time, he says, to recover myself, and to be able
   to endure the words and to make reply to what is said.--But while I was
   in this position, he continues, I was strengthened beyond my hope. For
   one unseen touched me, and straightway my weakness was removed, and I
   was restored to my former strength. For whenever all the strength of
   our life and its glory pass from us, then are we strengthened by
   Christ, who stretches forth His hand and raises the living from among
   the dead, and as it were from Hades itself, to the resurrection of
   life.

   18. "And he strengthened me."  For whenever the Word has made us of
   good hope with regard to the future, we are able also readily to hear
   His voice.

   20. "To fight with the prince of Persia." For from the day that thou
   didst humble thyself before the Lord thy God thy prayer was heard, and
   I was sent "to fight with the prince of Persia." For there was a design
   not to let the people go. Therefore, that thy prayer might be speedily
   answered, "I stood up against him."

   Chap. xii. 1   "There shall be a time of trouble." For at that time
   there shall be great trouble, such as has not been from the foundation
   of the world, when some in one way, and others in another, shall be
   sent through every city and country to destroy the faithful; and the
   saints shall travel from the west to the east, and shall be driven in
   persecution from the east to the south, while others shall conceal
   themselves in the mountains and caves; and the abomination shall war
   against them everywhere, and shall cut them off by sea and by land by
   his decree, and shall endeavour by every means to destroy them out of
   the world; and they shall not be able any longer to sell their own
   property, nor to buy from strangers, unless one keeps and carries with
   him the name of the beast, or bears its mark upon his forehead.  For
   then they shall all be driven out from every place, and dragged from
   their own homes and haled into prison, and punished with all manner of
   punishment, and cast out from the whole world.

   2. "These shall awake to everlasting life." That is, those who have
   believed in the true life, and who have their names written in the book
   of life. "And these to shame." That is, those who are attached to
   Antichrist, and who are cast with him into everlasting punishment.

   3. "And they that be wise shall shine." And the Lord has said the same
   thing in the Gospel: "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun."
   [1341]

   7. "For a time, times, and an half." By this he indicated the three and
   a half years of Anti-christ. For by a time he means a year; and by
   times, two years; and by an half time, half a year. These are the "one
   thousand two hundred and ninety days" of which Daniel prophesied.

   9. "The words are closed up and sealed." For as a man cannot tell what
   God has prepared for the saints; for neither has eye seen nor ear
   heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man (to conceive) these
   things, into which even the saints, too, shall then eagerly desire to
   look; so He said to him, "For the words are sealed until the time of
   the end; until many shall be chosen and tried with fire." And who are
   they who are chosen, but those who believe the word of truth, so as to
   be made white thereby, and to cast off the filth of sin, and put on the
   heavenly, pure, and glorious Holy Spirit, in order that, when the
   Bridegroom comes, they may go in straightway with Him?

   11. "The abomination of desolation shall be given (set up)." Daniel
   speaks, therefore, of two abominations: the one of destruction, which
   Antiochus set up in its appointed time, and which bears a relation to
   that of desolation, and the other universal, when Antichrist shall
   come. For, as Daniel says, he too shall be set up for the destruction
   of many. [1342]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1335] Mai, Script. vet. collectio nova, i. p. iii. pp. 29-56.

   [1336] Hos. xiv. 9.

   [1337] This book is not now extant, the first ten alone having reached
   our time.

   [1338] [The minchah, that is.]

   [1339] Ex. vii. 1.

   [1340] The verses are numbered according to the Greek translation,
   which incorporates the apocryphal "song of the three holy children."

   [1341] Matt. xiii. 43.

   [1342] "By the most holy Hippolytus, (bishop) of Rome: The Exact
   Account of the Times," etc. From Gallandi. This fragment seems to have
   belonged to the beginning or introduction to the commentary of
   Hippolytus on Daniel.
     __________________________________________________________________

   IV.

   Other Fragments on Daniel. [1343]

   For when the iron legs that now hold the sovereignty have given place
   to the feet and the toes, in accordance with the representation of the
   terrible beast, as has also been signified in the former times, then
   from heaven will come the stone that smites the image, and breaks it;
   and it will subvert all the kingdoms, and give the kingdom to the
   saints of the Most High.  This is the stone which becomes a great
   mountain, and fills the earth, and of which it is written: "I saw in
   the night-visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the
   clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days. And there was given
   Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; and all peoples, nations, and
   languages shall serve Him: His power is an everlasting power, which
   shall not pass away, and His kingdom shall not be destroyed." [1344]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1343] In Anastasius Sinaita, quæst. xlviii. p. 327.

   [1344] Dan. vii. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

   V.

   On the Song of the Three Children. [1345]

   "O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord; O ye apostles,
   prophets, and martyrs of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise Him, and
   exalt Him above all, for ever."

   We may well marvel at the words of the three youths in the furnace, how
   they enumerated all created things, so that not one of them might be
   reckoned free and independent in itself; but, summing up and naming
   them all together, both things in heaven, and things in earth, and
   things under the earth, they showed them to be all the servants of God,
   who created all things by the Word, that no one should boast that any
   of the creatures was without birth and beginning.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1345] From the Catena Patrum in Psalmos et Cantica, vol. iii. ed.
   Corderianæ, pp. 951, ad v. 87.
     __________________________________________________________________

   VI.

   On Susannah. [1346]

   What is narrated here, happened at a later time, although it is placed
   before the first book (at the beginning of the book). For it was a
   custom with the writers to narrate many things in an inverted order in
   their writings. For we find also in the prophets some visions recorded
   among the first and fulfilled among the last; and again, on the other
   hand, some recorded among the last and fulfilled first. And this was
   done by the disposition of the Spirit, that the devil might not
   understand the things spoken in parables by the prophets, and might not
   a second time lay his snares and ruin man.

   Ver. 1. "Called Joacim." This Joacim, being a stranger in Babylon,
   obtains Susannah in marriage. And she was the daughter of Chelcias the
   priest, [1347] who found the book of the law in the house of the Lord,
   when Josiah the king commanded him to purify the holy of holies. His
   brother was Jeremiah the prophet, who was carried, with the remnant
   that was left after the deportation of the people to Babylon, into
   Egypt, and dwelt in Taphnæ; [1348] and, while prophesying there, he was
   stoned to death by the people.

   "A very fair woman, and one that feared the Lord," etc. For by the
   fruit produced, the tree also is easily known. For men who are pious
   and zealous for the law, bring into the world children worthy of God;
   such as he was who became a prophet and witness of Christ, and she who
   was found chaste and faithful in Babylon, whose honour and chastity
   were the occasion of the manifestation of the blessed Daniel as a
   prophet.

   4. "Now Joacim was a great rich man," etc. We must therefore seek the
   explanation of this. For how could those who were captives, and had
   been made subject to the Babylonians, meet together in the same place,
   as if they were their own masters? In this matter, therefore, we should
   observe that Nebuchadnezzar, after their deportation, treated them
   kindly, and permitted them to meet together, and do all things
   according to the law.

   7. "And at noon Susannah went into (her husband's garden)." Susannah
   prefigured the Church; and Joacim, her husband, Christ; and the garden,
   the calling of the saints, who are planted like fruitful trees in the
   Church. And Babylon is the world; and the two elders are set forth as a
   figure of the two peoples that plot against the Church--the one,
   namely, of the circumcision, and the other of the Gentiles. For the
   words, "were appointed rulers of the people and judges," (mean) that in
   this world they exercise authority and rule, judging the righteous
   unrighteously.

   8. "And the two elders saw her."  These things the rulers of the Jews
   wish now to expunge from the book, and assert that these things did not
   happen in Babylon, because they are ashamed of what was done then by
   the elders.

   9. "And they perverted their own mind." For how, indeed, can those who
   have been the enemies and corruptors of the Church judge righteously,
   or look up to heaven with pure heart, when they have become the slaves
   of the prince of this world?

   10. "And they were both wounded with her (love)." This word is to be
   taken in truth; for always the two peoples, being wounded (instigated)
   by Satan working in them, strive to raise persecutions and afflictions
   against the Church, and seek how they may corrupt her, though they do
   not agree with each other.

   12. "And they watched diligently." And this, too, is to be noted. For
   up to the present time both the Gentiles and the Jews of the
   circumcision watch and busy themselves with the dealings of the Church,
   desiring to suborn false witnesses against us, as the apostle says:
   "And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in
   privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus." [1349]

   It is a kind of sin to be anxious to give the mind to women.

   14. "And when they were gone out, they parted the one from the other."
   As to their parting the one from the other at the hour of dinner
   (luncheon), this signifies that in the matter of earthly meats the Jews
   and the Gentiles are not at one; but in their views, and in all worldly
   matters, they are of one mind, and can meet each other.

   14. "And asking one another, they acknowledged their lust." Thus, in
   revealing themselves to each other, they foreshadow the time when they
   shall be proved by their thoughts, and shall have to give account to
   God for all the sin which they have done, as Solomon says: "And
   scrutiny shall destroy the ungodly." [1350] For these are convicted by
   the scrutiny.

   15. "As they watched a fit time." What fit time but that of the
   passover, at which the laver is prepared in the garden for those who
   burn, and Susannah washes herself, and is presented as a pure bride to
   God?

   "With two maids only." For when the Church desires to take the laver
   according to use, she must of necessity have two handmaids to accompany
   her. For it is by faith on Christ and love to God that the Church
   confesses and receives the laver.

   18. "And she said to her maids, Bring me oil." For faith and love
   prepare oil and unguents to those who are washed. But what were these
   unguents, but the commandments of the holy Word? And what was the oil,
   but the power of the Holy Spirit, with which believers are anointed as
   with ointment after the laver of washing? All these things were
   figuratively represented in the blessed Susannah, for our sakes, that
   we who now believe on God might not regard the things that are done now
   in the Church as strange, but believe them all to have been set forth
   in figure by the patriarchs of old, as the apostle also says:  "Now
   these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they were written
   for our instruction, on whom the ends of the world are come." [1351]

   18. "And they went out at privy doors;" showing thus by anticipation,
   that he who desires to partake of the water in the garden must renounce
   the broad gate, and enter by the strait and narrow. [1352]

   "And they saw not the elders." For as of old the devil was concealed in
   the serpent in the garden, so now too, concealed in the elders, he
   fired them with his own lust, that he might again a second time corrupt
   Eve.

   20. "Behold, the garden doors are shut." O wicked rulers, and filled
   with the workings of the devil, did Moses deliver these things to you?
   And while ye read the law yourselves, do ye teach others thus? Thou
   that sayest, "Thou shalt not kill," dost thou kill? Thou that sayest,
   "Thou shalt not covet," dost thou desire to corrupt the wife of thy
   neighbour?

   "And we are in love with thee." Why, ye lawless, do ye strive to gain
   over a chaste and guileless soul by deceitful words, in order to
   satisfy your own lust?

   21. "If thou wilt not, we will bear witness against thee." This wicked
   audacity with which you begin, comes of the deceitfulness that lurks in
   you from the beginning. And there was in reality a young man with her,
   that one [1353] of yours; one from heaven, not to have intercourse with
   her, but to bear witness to her truth.

   22. "And Susannah sighed." The blessed Susannah, then, when she heard
   these words, was troubled in her heart, and set a watch upon her mouth,
   not wishing to be defiled by the wicked elders. Now it is in our power
   also to apprehend the real meaning of all that befell Susannah. For you
   may find this also fulfilled in the present condition of the Church.
   For when the two peoples conspire to destroy any of the saints, they
   watch for a fit time, and enter the house of God while all there are
   praying and praising God, and seize some of them, and carry them off,
   and keep hold of them, saying, Come, consent with us, and worship our
   Gods; and if not, we will bear witness against you. And when they
   refuse, they drag them before the court and accuse them of acting
   contrary to the decrees of Cæsar, and condemn them to death.

   "I am straitened on every side."  Behold the words of a chaste woman,
   and one dear to God: "I am straitened on every side." For the Church is
   afflicted and straitened, not only by the Jews, but also by the
   Gentiles, and by those who are called Christians, but are not such in
   reality. For they, observing her chaste and happy life, strive to ruin
   her.

   "For if I do this thing, it is death to me." For to be disobedient to
   God, and obedient to men, works eternal death and punishment.

   "And if I do it not, I cannot escape your hands." And this indeed is
   said with truth. For they who are brought into judgment for the sake of
   God's name, if they do what is commanded them by men, die to God, and
   shall live in the world. But if they refuse to do what is commanded
   them by men, they escape not the hands of their judges, but are
   condemned by them.

   23. "It is better for me not to do it." For it is better to die by the
   hand of wicked men and live with God, than, by consenting to them, to
   be delivered from them and fall into the hands of God.

   24. "And Susannah cried with a loud voice." And to whom did Susannah
   cry but to God? as Isaiah says: "Then shalt thou call, and the Lord
   shall answer thee; whilst thou art yet speaking, He shall say, Lo, here
   I am." [1354]

   "And the two elders cried out against her." For the wicked never cease
   to cry out against us, and to say: Away with such from off the earth,
   for it is not fit that they should live. In an evangelical sense,
   Susannah despised them who kill the body, in order that she might save
   her soul from death. Now sin is the death of the soul, and especially
   (the sin of) adultery. For when the soul that is united with Christ
   forsakes its faith, it is given over to perpetual death, viz., eternal
   punishment. And in confirmation of this, in the case of the
   transgression and violation of marriage unions in the flesh, the law
   has decreed the penalty of death.

   25. "Then ran the one and opened the gates;" pointing to the broad and
   spacious way on which they who follow such persons perish.

   31. "Now Susannah was a very delicate woman." Not that she had
   meretricious adornments about her person, as Jezebel had, or eyes
   painted with divers colours; but that she had the adornment of faith,
   and chastity, and sanctity.

   34. "And laid their hands upon her head;" that at least by touching her
   they might satisfy their lust.

   35. "And she was weeping." For by her tears she attracted the (regard
   of) the Word from heaven, who was with tears to raise the dead Lazarus.

   41. "Then the assembly believed them." It becomes us, then, to be
   stedfast in every duty, and to give no heed to lies, and to yield no
   obsequious obedience to the persons of rulers, knowing that we have to
   give account to God; but if we follow the truth, and aim at the exact
   rule of faith, we shall be well-pleasing to God.

   44. "And the Lord heard her voice." For those who call upon Him from a
   pure heart, God heareth. But from those who (call upon Him) in deceit
   and hypocrisy, God turneth away His face.

   52. "O thou that art waxen old in wickedness." Now, since at the
   outset, in the introduction, we explained that the two elders are to be
   taken as a type of the two peoples, that of the circumcision and that
   of the Gentiles, which are always enemies of the Church; let us mark
   the words of Daniel, and learn that the Scripture deals falsely with us
   in nothing. For, addressing the first elder, he censures him as one
   instructed in the law; while he addresses the other as a Gentile,
   calling him "the seed of Chanaan," although he was then among the
   circumcision.

   55. "For even now the angel of God." He shows also, that when Susannah
   prayed to God, and was heard, the angel was sent then to help her, just
   as was the case in the instance of Tobias [1355] and Sara. For when
   they prayed, the supplication of both of them was heard in the same day
   and the same hour, and the angel Raphael was sent to heal them both.

   61. "And they arose against the two elders;" that the saying might be
   fulfilled, "Whoso diggeth a pit for his neighbour, shall fall therein."
   [1356]

   To all these things, therefore, we ought to give heed, beloved, fearing
   lest any one be overtaken in any transgression, and risk the loss of
   his soul, knowing as we do that God is the Judge of all; and the Word
   [1357] Himself is the Eye which nothing that is done in the world
   escapes. Therefore, always watchful in heart and pure in life, let us
   imitate Susannah.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1346] This apocryphal story of Susannah is found in the Greek texts of
   the LXX. and Theodotion, in the old Latin and Vulgate, and in the
   Syriac and Arabic versions. But there is no evidence that it ever
   formed part of the Hebrew, or of the original Syriac text. It is
   generally placed at the beginning of the book, as in the Greek mss. and
   the old Latin, but is also sometimes set at the end, as in the Vulgate,
   ed. Compl.

   [1347] 2 Kings xxii. 8.

   [1348] Jer. xliii. 8.

   [1349] Gal. ii. 4.

   [1350] Prov. i. 32; in our version given as, "The prosperity of fools
   shall destroy them."

   [1351] 1 Cor. x. 11.

   [1352] Matt. vii. 13, 14.

   [1353] That is, Daniel, present in the spirit of prophecy.--Combef.

   [1354] Isa. lviii. 9.

   [1355] Tobit iii. 17.

   [1356] Prov. xxvi. 27.

   [1357] Cotelerius reads holos instead of ho logos, and so = and He is
   Himself the whole or universal eye.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   On Matthew. [1358]

   Matt. vi. 11. [1359]

   For this reason we are enjoined to ask what is sufficient for the
   preservation of the substance of the body: not luxury, but food, which
   restores what the body loses, and prevents death by hunger; not tables
   to inflame and drive on to pleasures, nor such things as make the body
   wax wanton against the soul; but bread, and that, too, not for a great
   number of years, but what is sufficient for us to-day.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1358] De Magistris, Acta Martyrum Ostiens., p. 405.

   [1359] He is giving his opinion on the epiousion, i.e., the "daily
   bread."
     __________________________________________________________________

   On Luke. [1360]

   Chap. ii. 7 And if you please, we say that the Word was the first-born
   of God, who came down from heaven to the blessed Mary, and was made a
   first-born man in her womb, in order that the first-born of God might
   be manifested in union with a first-born man.

   22. When they brought Him to the temple to present Him to the Lord,
   they offered the oblations of purification. For if the gifts of
   purification according to the law were offered for Him, in this indeed
   He was made under the law. But the Word was not subject to the law in
   such wise as the sycophants [1361] fancy, since He is the law Himself;
   neither did God need sacrifices of purification, for He purifieth and
   sanctifieth all things at once in a moment.  But though He took to
   Himself the frame of man as He received it from the Virgin, and was
   made under the law, and was thus purified after the manner of the
   first-born, it was not because He needed this ceremonial that He
   underwent its services, but only for the purpose of redeeming from the
   bondage of the law those who were sold under the judgment of the curse.

   Chap. xxiii For this reason the warders of Hades trembled when they saw
   Him; and the gates of brass and the bolts of iron were broken. For, lo,
   the Only-begotten entered, a soul among souls, God the Word with a
   (human) soul. For His body lay in the tomb, not emptied of divinity;
   but as, while in Hades, He was in essential being with His Father, so
   was He also in the body and in Hades. [1362] For the Son is not
   contained in space, just as the Father; and He comprehends all things
   in Himself. But of His own will he dwelt in a body animated by a soul,
   in order that with His soul He might enter Hades, and not with His pure
   divinity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1360] Mai, Script. vet. collectio nova, vol. ix. p. 645, Rome, 1837.

   [1361] hoi sukophantai.

   [1362] Pearson On the Creed, art. iv. p. 355.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Doubtful Fragments on the Pentateuch. [1363]

   Preface.

   In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, one God.
   This is a transcript of the excellent law.  But before beginning to
   give the transcript of the book of the law, it will be worth while to
   instruct you, O brother, as to its excellence, and the dignity of its
   disposition. Its first excellence is, that God delivered it by the hand
   of our most blessed ruler, the chief of the prophets, and first of the
   apostles, or those who were sent to the children of Israel, viz., Moses
   the son of Amram, the son of Kohath, of the sons of Levi. Now he was
   adorned with all manner of wisdom, and endowed with the best genius.
   Illustrious in dignity, remarkable for the integrity of his
   disposition, distinguished for power of reason, he talked with God. And
   He chose him as an instrument of value. By His leader and prophet, God
   Most High sent it down to us, and committed it to us (blessed be His
   name) in the Syriac tongue of the Targum, which the Seventy translated
   into the Hebrew tongue, to wit, into the tongue of the nation, and the
   idiom of the common people. Moses. therefore, received it from the
   eternal Lord, and was the first to whom it was entrusted, and who
   obeyed its rules and ordinances. Then he taught it to the children of
   Israel, who also embraced it. And he explained to them its profound
   mysteries and dark places. And he expounded to them those things which
   were less easy, as God permitted him, and concealed from them those
   secrets of the law, as God forbade him (to reveal them). Nor did there
   rise among them one who was better practised in His judgments and
   decrees, and who communicated more clearly the mysteries of His
   doctrine, until God translated him to Himself, after He had made him
   perfect by forty whole years in the wilderness.

   And these following are the names of the teachers who handed down the
   law in continuous succession after Moses the prophet, until the advent
   of Messiah:--

   Know, then, my brother, whom may God bless, that God delivered the most
   excellent law into the hands of Moses the prophet, the son of Amram.

   And Moses delivered it to Joshua the son of Nun.

   And Joshua the son of Nun delivered it Anathal.

   And Anathal delivered it to Jehud.

   And Jehud delivered it to Samgar.

   And Samgar delivered it to Baruk.

   And Baruk delivered it to Gideon.

   And Gideon delivered it to Abimelech.

   And Abimelech delivered it to Taleg.

   And Taleg delivered it to Babin the Gileadite.

   And Babin delivered it to Jiphtach.

   And Jiphtach delivered it to Ephran.

   And Ephran delivered it to Elul of the tribe Zebulon.

   And Elul delivered it to Abdan.

   And Abdan delivered it to Shimshon the brave.

   And Shimshon delivered it to Helkanah, the son of Jerachmu, the son of
   Jehud. Moreover, he was the father of Samuel the prophet. Of this
   Helkanah mention is made in the beginning of the first book of Kings
   (Samuel).

   And Helkanah delivered it to Eli the priest. And Eli delivered it to
   Samuel the prophet.

   And Samuel delivered it to Nathan the prophet.

   And Nathan delivered it to Gad the prophet.

   And Gad the prophet delivered it to Shemaiah the teacher. And Shemaiah
   delivered it to Iddo the teacher. And Iddo delivered it to Achia.

   And Achia delivered it to Abihu.

   And Abihu delivered it to Elias the prophet.

   And Elias delivered it to his disciple Elisæus.

   And Elisæus delivered it to Malachia the prophet.

   And Malachia delivered it to Abdiahu.

   And Abdiahu delivered it to Jehuda.

   And Jehuda delivered it to Zacharias the teacher.  In those days came
   Bachthansar king of Babel, and laid waste the house of the sanctuary,
   and carried the children of Israel into captivity to Babel.

   And after the captivity of Babel, Zacharia the teacher delivered it to
   Esaia the prophet, the son of Amos.

   And Esaia delivered it to Jeremia the prophet.

   And Jeremia the prophet delivered it to Chizkiel.

   And Chizkiel the prophet delivered it to Hosea the prophet, the son of
   Bazi.

   And Hosea delivered it to Joiel the prophet.

   And Joiel delivered it to Amos the prophet.

   And Amos delivered it to Obadia.

   And Obadia delivered it to Jonan the prophet, the son of Mathi, the son
   of Armelah, who was the brother of Elias the prophet.

   And Jonan delivered it to Micha the Morasthite, who delivered it to
   Nachum the Alcusite. And Nachum delivered it to Chabakuk the prophet.

   And Chabakuk delivered it to Sophonia the prophet.

   And Sophonia delivered it to Chaggæus the prophet.

   And Chaggæus delivered it to Zecharia the prophet, the son of Bershia.

   And Zecharia, when in captivity, delivered it to Malachia. And Malachia
   delivered it to Ezra the teacher.

   [1364] And Ezra delivered it to Shamai the chief priest, and Jadua to
   Samean, (and) Samean delivered it to Antigonus.

   And Antigonus delivered it to Joseph the son of Johezer, (and) Joseph
   the son of Gjuchanan.

   And Joseph delivered it to Jehosua, the son of Barachia.

   And Jehosua delivered it to Nathan the Arbelite.

   And Nathan delivered it to Shimeon, the elder son of Shebach. This is
   he who carried the Messias in his arms.

   Simeon delivered it to Jehuda.

   Jehuda delivered it to Zecharia the priest.

   And Zecharia the priest, the father of John the Baptist, delivered it
   to Joseph, a teacher of his own tribe.

   And Joseph delivered it to Hanan and Caiaphas.  Moreover, from them
   were taken away the priestly, and kingly, and prophetic offices.

   These were teachers at the advent of Messias; and they were both
   priests of the children of Israel. Therefore the whole number of
   venerable and honourable priests put in trust of this most excellent
   law was fifty-six, Hanan (i.e., Annas) and Caiaphas being excepted.

   And those are they who delivered it in the last days to the state of
   the children of Israel; nor did there arise any priests after them.

   This is the account of what took place with regard to the most
   excellent law.

   Armius, author of the book of Times, has said: In the nineteenth year
   of the reign of King Ptolemy, He ordered the elders of the children of
   Israel to be assembled, in order that they might put into his hands a
   copy of the law, and that they might each be at hand to explain its
   meaning.

   The elders accordingly came, bringing with them the most excellent law.
   Then he commanded that every one of them should interpret the book of
   the law to him.

   But he dissented from the interpretation which the elders had given.
   And he ordered the elders to be thrust into prison and chains. And
   seizing the book of the law, he threw it into a deep ditch, and cast
   fire and hot ashes upon it for seven days. Then afterwards he ordered
   them to throw the filth of the city into that ditch in which was the
   book of the law. And the ditch was filled to the very top.

   The law remained seventy years under the filth in that ditch, yet did
   not perish, nor was there even a single leaf of it spoilt.

   In the twenty-first year of the reign of King Apianutus they took the
   book of the law out of the ditch, and not one leaf thereof was spoilt.

   And after the ascension of Christ into heaven, came King Titus, son of
   Aspasianus king of Rome, to Jerusalem, and besieged and took it. And he
   destroyed the edifice of the second house, which the children of Israel
   had built. Titus the king destroyed the house of the sanctuary, and
   slew all the Jews who were in it, and built Tsion (sic) in their blood.
   And after that deportation the Jews were scattered abroad in slavery.
   Nor did they assemble any more in the city of Jerusalem, nor is there
   hope anywhere of their returning.

   After Jerusalem was laid waste, therefore, Shemaia and Antalia
   (Abtalion) delivered the law,--kings of Baalbach, [1365] a city which
   Soliman, son of King David, had built of old, and which was restored
   anew in the days of King Menasse, who sawed Esaia the prophet asunder.

   King Adrian, of the children of Edom, besieged Baalbach, and took it,
   and slew all the Jews who were in it, (and) as many as were of the
   family of David he reduced to slavery. And the Jews were dispersed over
   the whole earth, as God Most High had foretold: "And I will scatter you
   among the Gentiles, and disperse you among the nations."

   And these are the things which have reached us as to the history of
   that most excellent book. The Preface is ended.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1363] These are edited in Arabic and Latin by Fabricius, Opp. Hippol.,
   ii. 33. That these are spurious is now generally agreed. The
   translation is from the Latin version, which alone is given by Migne.

   [1364] See Tsemach David, and Maimon. Præfat. ad Seder Zeraim, in
   Pocockii Porta Moses, p. 36.

   [1365] Heliopolis of Syria.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Law.

   In the name of God eternal, everlasting, most mighty, merciful,
   compassionate.

   By the help of God we begin to describe the book of the law, and its
   interpretation, as the holy, learned, and most excellent fathers have
   interpreted it.

   The following, therefore, is the interpretation of the first book,
   which indeed is the book of the creation (and) of created beings.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Section I.

   Of the Creation of Heaven and Earth. "In the Beginning God Created,"
   Etc.

   An exposition of that which God said.

   And the blessed prophet, indeed, the great Moses, wrote this book, and
   designated and marked it with the title, The Book of Being, i.e., "of
   created beings," etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sections II., III.

   And the Lord Said: "And I Will Bring the Waters of the Flood Upon the
   Earth to Destroy All Flesh," Etc.

   Hippolytus, the Targumist expositor, said:  The names of the wives of
   the sons of Noah are these: the name of the wife of Sem, Nahalath
   Mahnuk; and the name of the wife of Cham, Zedkat Nabu; and the name of
   the wife of Japheth, Arathka. These, moreover, are their names in the
   Syriac Targum. [1366] The name of the wife of Sem was Nahalath Mahnuk;
   the name of the wife of Cham, Zedkat Nabu; the name of the wife of
   Japheth, Arathka.

   Therefore God gave intimation to Noah, and informed him of the coming
   of the flood, and of the destruction of the ruined (wicked).

   And God Most High ordered him to descend from the holy mount, him and
   his sons, and the wives of his sons, and to build a ship of three
   storeys. The lower storey was for fierce, wild, and dangerous beasts.
   Between them there were stakes or wooden beams, to separate them from
   each other, and prevent them from having intercourse with each other.
   The middle storey was for birds, and their different genera. Then the
   upper storey was for Noah himself and his sons--for his own wife and
   his sons' wives.

   Noah also made a door in the ship, on the east side. He also
   constructed tanks of water, and store-rooms of provisions.

   When he had made an end, accordingly, of building the ship, Noah, with
   his sons, Sem, Cham, and Japheth, entered the cave of deposits. [1367]

   And on their first approach, indeed, they happily found the bodies of
   the fathers, Adam, Seth, Enosh, Kainan, Mahaliel, Jared, Mathusalach,
   and Lamech. Those eight bodies were in the place of deposits, viz.,
   those of Adam, Seth, Enosh, Kainan, Mahaliel, Jared, Mathusalach, and
   Lamech.

   Noah, moreover, took the body of Adam. And his sons took with them
   offerings. Sem carried gold, Cham myrrh, and Japheth frankincense.
   Then, leaving the cave of deposits, they transferred the offerings and
   the body of Adam to the holy mount. [1368]

   And when they sat down by the body of Adam, over against paradise, they
   began to lament and weep for the loss of paradise.

   Then, descending from the holy mount, and lifting up their eyes towards
   paradise, they renewed their weeping and wailing, (and) uttered an
   eternal farewell in these terms: Farewell! peace to thee, O paradise of
   God! Farewell, O habitation of religion and purity! Farewell, O seat of
   pleasure and delight!

   Then they embraced the stones and trees of the holy mount, and wept,
   and said:  Farewell, O habitation of the good! Farewell, O abode of
   holy bodies!

   Then, after three days, Noah, with his sons and his sons' wives, came
   down from the holy mount to the base of the holy mount, to the ship's
   place. For the (ark) was under the projecting edge of the holy mount.

   And Noah entered the ship, and deposited the body of Adam, and the
   offerings, in the middle of the ship, upon a bier of wood, which he had
   prepared for the reception of the body.

   And God charged Noah, saying: Make for thyself rattles [1369] of
   boxwood (or cypress). Now sms'r is the wood called Sagh, i.e., Indian
   plane.

   Make also the hammer (bell) thereof of the same wood. And the length of
   the rattle shall be three whole cubits, and its breadth one and a half
   cubit.

   And God enjoined him to strike the rattles three times every day, to
   wit, for the first time at early dawn, for the second time at mid-day,
   and for the third time at sunset.

   And it happened that, as soon as Noah had struck the rattles, the sons
   of Cain and the sons of Vahim ran up straightway to him, and he warned
   and alarmed them by telling of the immediate approach of the flood, and
   of the destruction already hasting on and impending.

   Thus, moreover, was the pity of God toward them displayed, that they
   might be converted and come to themselves again. But the sons of Cain
   did not comply with what Noah proclaimed to them. And Noah brought
   together pairs, male and female, of all birds of every kind; and thus
   also of all beasts, tame and wild alike, pair and pair.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1366] What follows was thus expressed probably in Syriac in some
   Syriac version.

   [1367] Cavernam thesaurorum. [Cant. iv. 6, i.e., Paradise.]

   [1368] Cavernam thesaurorum. [Cant. iv. 6, i.e., Paradise.]

   [1369] Crepitacula.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Section IV.

   On Gen. vii. 6

   Hippolytus, the Syrian expositor of the Targum, has said: We find in an
   ancient Hebrew copy that God commanded Noah to range the wild beasts in
   order in the lower floor or storey, and to separate the males from the
   females by putting wooden stakes between them.

   And thus, too, he did with all the cattle, and also with the birds in
   the middle storey. And God ordered the males thus to be separated from
   the females for the sake of decency and purity, lest they should
   perchance get intermingled with each other.

   Moreover, God said to Moses: Provide victuals for yourself and your
   children. And let them be of wheat, ground, pounded, kneaded with
   water, and dried. And Noah there and then bade his wife, and his sons'
   wives, diligently attend to kneading dough and laying it in the oven.
   They kneaded dough accordingly, and prepared just about as much as
   might be sufficient for them, so that nothing should remain over but
   the very least.

   And God charged Noah, saying to him:  Whosoever shall first announce to
   you the approach of the deluge, him you shall destroy that very moment.
   In the meantime, moreover, the wife of Cham was standing by, about to
   put a large piece of bread into the oven. And suddenly, according to
   the word of the Lord, water rushed forth from the oven, and the flow of
   water penetrated and destroyed the bread. Therefore the wife of Cham
   exclaimed, addressing herself to Noah: Oh, sir, the word of God is come
   good: "that which God foretold is come to pass;" execute, therefore,
   that which the Lord commanded. And when Noah heard the words of the
   wife of Chain, he said to her: Is then the flood already come? The wife
   of Cham said to him: Thou hast said it. God, however, suddenly charged
   Noah, saying:  Destroy not the wife of Cham; for from thy mouth is the
   beginning of destruction--"thou didst first say, The flood is come." At
   the voice of Noah the flood came, and suddenly the water destroyed that
   bread. And the floodgates of heaven were opened, and the rains broke
   upon the earth. And that same voice, in sooth, which had said of old,
   "Let the waters be gathered together into one place, and let the dry
   land appear," [1370] gave permission to the fountain of waters and the
   floods of the seas to break forth of their own accord, and brought out
   the waters.

   Consider what God said about the world: Let all its high places be
   brought low, and they were brought low; and let its low places be
   raised from its depths.

   And the earth was made bare and empty of all existence, as it was at
   the beginning.

   And the rain descended from above, and the earth burst open beneath.
   And the frame of the earth was destroyed, and its primitive order was
   broken. And the world became such as it was when desolated at the
   beginning by the waters which flowed over it. Nor was any one of the
   existences upon it left in its integrity.

   Its former structure went to wreck, and the earth was disfigured by the
   flood of waters that burst upon it, and by the magnitude of its
   inundations, and the multitude of showers, and the eruption from its
   depths, as the waters continually broke forth.  In fine, it was left
   such as it was formerly [1371] .
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1370] Gen. i. 9.

   [1371] Gen. i. 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Section V.

   On Gen. viii. I

   Hippolytus, the expositor of the Targum, and my master, Jacobus
   Rohaviensis, have said: On the twenty-seventh day of the month Jiar,
   which is the second Hebrew month, the ark rose from the base of the
   holy mount; and already the waters bore it, and it was carried upon
   them round about towards the four cardinal points of the world. The ark
   accordingly held off from the holy mount towards the east, then
   returned towards the west, then turned to the south, and finally,
   bearing off eastwards, neared Mount Kardu on the first day of the tenth
   month. And that is the second month Kanun.

   And Noah came out of the ark on the twenty-seventh day of the month
   Jiar, in the second year: for the ark continued sailing five whole
   months, and moved to and fro upon the waters, and in a period of
   fifty-one days neared the land. Nor thereafter did it float about any
   longer. But it only moved successively toward the four cardinal points
   of the earth, and again finally stood toward the east. We say,
   moreover, that that was a sign of the cross.  And the ark was a symbol
   of the Christ who was expected. For that ark was the means of the
   salvation of Noah and his sons, and also of the cattle, the wild
   beasts, and the birds. And Christ, too, when He suffered on the cross,
   delivered us from accusations and sins, and washed us in His own blood
   most pure.

   And just as the ark returned to the east, and neared Mount Kardu, so
   also Christ, when the work was accomplished and finished which He had
   proposed to Himself, returned to heaven to the bosom of His Father, and
   sat down upon the throne of His glory at the Father's right hand.

   As to Mount Kardu, it is in the east, in the land of the sons of Raban,
   and the Orientals call it Mount Godash; [1372] the Arabians and
   Persians call it Ararat. [1373]

   And there is a town of the name Kardu, and that hill is called after
   it, which is indeed very lofty and inaccessible, whose summit no one
   has ever been able to reach, on account of the violence of the winds
   and the storms which always prevail there.  And if any one attempts to
   ascend it, there are demons that rush upon him, and cast him down
   headlong from the ridge of the mountain into the plain, so that he
   dies. No one, moreover, knows what there is on the top of the mountain,
   except that certain relics of the wood of the ark still lie there on
   the surface of the top of the mountain. [1374]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1372] Gordyæum.

   [1373] See Fuller, Misc. Sacr., i. 4; and Bochart, Phaleg., p. 22.

   [1374] [See p. 149, note 10, supra.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Section X.

   On Deut. xxxiii. II

   Hippolytus, the expositor of the Targum, has said that Moses, when he
   had finished this prophecy, also pronounced a blessing upon all the
   children of Israel, by their several tribes, and prayed for them. Then
   God charged Moses, saying to him, Go up to Mount Nebo, which indeed is
   known by the name of the mount of the Hebrews, which is in the land of
   Moab over against Jericho.

   And He said to him: View the land of Chanaan, which I am to give to the
   children of Israel for an inheritance.  Thou, however, shalt never
   enter it; wherefore view it well from afar off. When Moses therefore
   viewed it, he saw that land,--a land green, and abounding with all
   plenty and fertility, planted thickly with trees; and Moses was greatly
   moved, and wept.

   And when Moses descended from Mount Nebo, he called for Joshua the son
   of Nun, and said to him before the children of Israel: Prevail, and be
   strong; for thou art to bring the children of Israel into the land
   which God promised to fathers that He would give their them for an
   inheritance. Fear not, therefore, the people, neither be afraid of the
   nations: for God will be with thee.

   And Moses wrote that Senna [1375] (Hebr. mnsh ="secondary law," or
   "Deuteronomy"), and gave it to the priests the sons of Levi, and
   commanded them, saying: For seven years keep this Senna hid, and show
   it not within the entire course of seven years.  ("And then") in the
   feast of tabernacles, the priests the sons of Levi will read this law
   before the children of Israel, that the whole people, men and women
   alike, may observe the words of God:  Command them to keep the word of
   God, which is in that law. And whosoever shall violate one of its
   precepts, let him be accursed.

   Accordingly, when Moses had finished the writing of the law, he gave it
   to Joshua the son of Nun, and enjoined him to give it to the sons of
   Levi, the priests. Moses also enjoined and charged them to place the
   book of the law again within the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that
   it might remain there for a testimony for ever.

   And when Moses had made an end of his injunctions, God bade him go up
   Mount Nebo, which is over against Jericho. The Lord showed him the
   whole land of promise in its four quarters, from the wilderness to the
   sea, and from sea to sea. And the Lord said to him, Thou hast seen it
   indeed with thine eyes, but thou shalt never enter it. There
   accordingly Moses died, the servant of God, by the command of God. And
   the angels buried him on Mount Nebo, which is over against Beth-Phegor.
   And no one knows of his sepulchre, even to this day. For God concealed
   his grave.

   And Moses lived 120 years; nor was his eye dim, nor was the skin of his
   face wrinkled.

   Moses died on a certain day, at the third hour of the day, on the
   seventh day of the second month, which is the month Jiar.

   And the children of Israel wept for him in the plains of Moab three
   days.

   And Joshua the sun of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom; for
   Moses had laid his hand upon him. And all the children of Israel obeyed
   him. And God charged Joshua the son of Nun on a certain day,--namely,
   the seventh day of the month Nisan.

   And Joshua the son of Nun lived 110 years, and died on the fourth day,
   which was the first day of the month Elul. And they buried him in the
   city Thamnatserach, on Mount Ephraim.

   Praise be to God for the completion of the work.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1375] That is the name the Mohammedans give to their Traditions.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

