# source: Fathers/English/ANF/Volume V.   The Fathers of the Third Century
# series: ANF
# volume: Volume V
# father: Hippolytus
# work: Treatise on Christ and Antichrist
# clavis: CPG-1872
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Salmond / Schaff English translation.
   Treatise on Christ and Antichrist. [1393]

   1. As it was your desire, my beloved brother Theophilus, [1394] to be
   thoroughly informed on those topics which I put summarily before you, I
   have thought it right to set these matters of inquiry clearly forth to
   your view, drawing largely from the Holy Scriptures themselves as from
   a holy fountain, in order that you may not only have the pleasure of
   hearing them on the testimony of men, [1395] but may also be able, by
   surveying them in the light of (divine) authority, to glorify God in
   all. For this will be as a sure supply furnished you by us for your
   journey in this present life, so that by ready argument applying things
   ill understood and apprehended by most, you may sow them in the ground
   of your heart, as in a rich and clean soil. [1396] By these, too, you
   will be able to silence those who oppose and gainsay the word of
   salvation. Only see that you do not give these things over to
   unbelieving and blasphemous tongues, for that is no common danger. But
   impart them to pious and faithful men, who desire to live holily and
   righteously with fear. For it is not to no purpose that the blessed
   apostle exhorts Timothy, and says, "O Timothy, keep that which is
   committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and
   oppositions of science falsely so called; which some professing have
   erred concerning the faith." [1397] And again, "Thou therefore, my son,
   be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that
   thou hast heard of me in many exhortations, the same commit thou to
   faithful men, [1398] who shall be able to teach others also." [1399]
   If, then, the blessed (apostle) delivered these things with a pious
   caution, which could be easily known by all, as he perceived in the
   spirit that "all men have not faith," [1400] how much greater will be
   our danger, if, rashly and without thought, we commit the revelations
   of God to profane and unworthy men?

   2. For as the blessed prophets were made, so to speak, eyes for us,
   they foresaw through faith the mysteries of the word, and became
   ministers of these [1401] things also to succeeding generations, not
   only reporting the past, but also announcing the present and the
   future, so that the prophet might not appear to be one only for the
   time being, but might also predict the future for all generations, and
   so be reckoned a (true) prophet. For these fathers were furnished with
   the Spirit, and largely honoured by the Word Himself; and just as it is
   with instruments of music, so had they the Word always, like the
   plectrum, [1402] in union with them, and when moved by Him the prophets
   announced what God willed. For they spake not of their own power [1403]
   (let there be no mistake as to that [1404] ), neither did they declare
   what pleased themselves. But first of all they were endowed with wisdom
   by the Word, and then again were rightly instructed in the future by
   means of visions. And then, when thus themselves fully convinced, they
   spake those things which [1405] were revealed by God to them alone, and
   concealed from all others. For with what reason should the prophet be
   called a prophet, unless he in spirit foresaw the future? For if the
   prophet spake of any chance event, he would not be a prophet then in
   speaking of things which were under the eye of all. But one who sets
   forth in detail things yet to be, was rightly judged a prophet.
   Wherefore prophets were with good reason called from the very first
   "seers." [1406] And hence we, too, who are rightly instructed in what
   was declared aforetime by them, speak not of our own capacity. For we
   do not attempt to make any change one way or another among ourselves in
   the words that were spoken of old by them, but we make the Scriptures
   in which these are written public, and read them to those who can
   believe rightly; for that is a common benefit for both parties: for him
   who speaks, in holding in memory and setting forth correctly things
   uttered of old; [1407] and for him who hears, in giving attention to
   the things spoken. Since, then, in this there is a work assigned to
   both parties together, viz., to him who speaks, that he speak forth
   faithfully without regard to risk, [1408] and to him who hears, that he
   hear and receive in faith that which is spoken, I beseech you to strive
   together with me in prayer to God.

   3. Do you wish then to know in what manner the Word of God, who was
   again the Son of God, [1409] as He was of old the Word, communicated
   His revelations to the blessed prophets in former times? Well, as the
   Word shows His compassion and His denial of all respect of persons by
   all the saints, He enlightens them [1410] and adapts them to that which
   is advantageous for us, like a skilful physician, understanding the
   weakness of men. And the ignorant He loves to teach, and the erring He
   turns again to His own true way. And by those who live by faith He is
   easily found; and to those of pure eye and holy heart, who desire to
   knock at the door, He opens immediately. For He casts away none of His
   servants as unworthy of the divine mysteries. He does not esteem the
   rich man more highly than the poor, nor does He despise the poor man
   for his poverty. He does not disdain the barbarian, nor does He set the
   eunuch aside as no man. [1411] He does not hate the female on account
   of the woman's act of disobedience in the beginning, nor does He reject
   the male on account of the man's transgression. But He seeks all, and
   desires to save all, wishing to make all the children of God, and
   calling all the saints unto one perfect man. For there is also one Son
   (or Servant) of God, by whom we too, receiving the regeneration through
   the Holy Spirit, desire to come all unto one perfect and heavenly man.
   [1412]

   4. For whereas the Word of God was without flesh, [1413] He took upon
   Himself the holy flesh by the holy Virgin, and prepared a robe which He
   wove for Himself, like a bridegroom, in the sufferings of the cross, in
   order that by uniting His own power with our mortal body, and by mixing
   [1414] the incorruptible with the corruptible, and the strong with the
   weak, He might save perishing man. The web-beam, therefore, is the
   passion of the Lord upon the cross, and the warp on it is the power of
   the Holy Spirit, and the woof is the holy flesh wrought (woven) by the
   Spirit, and the thread is the grace which by the love of Christ binds
   and unites the two in one, and the combs or (rods) are the Word; and
   the workers are the patriarchs and prophets who weave the fair, long,
   perfect tunic for Christ; and the Word passing through these, like the
   combs or (rods), completes through them that which His Father willeth.
   [1415]

   5. But as time now presses for the consideration of the question
   immediately in hand, and as what has been already said in the
   introduction with regard to the glory of God, may suffice, it is proper
   that we take the Holy Scriptures themselves in hand, and find out from
   them what, and of what manner, the coming of Antichrist is; on what
   occasion and at what time that impious one shall be revealed; and
   whence and from what tribe (he shall come); and what his name is, which
   is indicated by the number in the Scripture; and how he shall work
   error among the people, gathering them from the ends of the earth; and
   (how) he shall stir up tribulation and persecution against the saints;
   and how he shall glorify himself as God; and what his end shall be; and
   how the sudden appearing of the Lord shall be revealed from heaven; and
   what the conflagration of the whole world shall be; and what the
   glorious and heavenly kingdom of the saints is to be, when they reign
   together with Christ; and what the punishment of the wicked by fire.

   6. Now, as our Lord Jesus Christ, who is also God, was prophesied of
   under the figure of a lion, [1416] on account of His royalty and glory,
   in the same way have the Scriptures also aforetime spoken of Antichrist
   as a lion, on account of his tyranny and violence. For the deceiver
   seeks to liken himself in all things to the Son of God. Christ is a
   lion, so Antichrist is also a lion; Christ is a king, [1417] so
   Antichrist is also a king. The Saviour was manifested as a lamb; [1418]
   so he too, in like manner, will appear as a lamb, though within he is a
   wolf.  The Saviour came into the world in the circumcision, and he will
   come in the same manner. The Lord sent apostles among all the nations,
   and he in like manner will send false apostles. The Saviour gathered
   together the sheep that were scattered abroad, [1419] and he in like
   manner will bring together a people that is scattered abroad. The Lord
   gave a seal to those who believed on Him, and he will give one in like
   manner. The Saviour appeared in the form of man, and he too will come
   in the form of a man. The Saviour raised up and showed His holy flesh
   like a temple, [1420] and he will raise a temple of stone in Jerusalem.
   And his seductive arts we shall exhibit in what follows. But for the
   present let us turn to the question in hand.

   7. Now the blessed Jacob speaks to the following effect in his
   benedictions, testifying prophetically of our Lord and Saviour: "Judah,
   let thy brethren praise thee: thy hand shall be on the neck of thine
   enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a
   lion's whelp: from the shoot, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped
   down, he couched as a lion, and as a lion's whelp; who shall rouse him
   up? A ruler shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader from his thighs,
   until he come for whom it is reserved; and he shall be the expectation
   of the nations. Binding his ass to a vine, and his ass's colt to the
   vine tendril; he shall wash his garment in wine, and his clothes in the
   blood of the grapes. His eyes shall be gladsome as with wine, and his
   teeth shall be whiter than milk." [1421]

   8. Knowing, then, as I do, how to explain these things in detail, I
   deem it right at present to quote the words themselves. But since the
   expressions themselves urge us to speak of them. I shall not omit to do
   so. For these are truly divine and glorious things, and things well
   calculated to benefit the soul. The prophet, in using the expression, a
   lion's whelp, means him who sprang from Judah and David according to
   the flesh, who was not made indeed of the seed of David, but was
   conceived by the (power of the) Holy Ghost, and came forth [1422] from
   the holy shoot of earth. For Isaiah says, "There shall come forth a rod
   out of the root of Jesse, and a flower shall grow up out of it." [1423]
   That which is called by Isaiah a flower, Jacob calls a shoot. For first
   he shot forth, and then he flourished in the world. And the expression,
   "he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as a lion's whelp," refers
   to the three days' sleep (death, couching) of Christ; as also Isaiah
   says, "How is faithful Sion become an harlot! it was full of judgment;
   in which righteousness lodged (couched); but now murderers." [1424] And
   David says to the same effect, "I laid me down (couched) and slept; I
   awaked: for the Lord will sustain me;" [1425] in which words he points
   to the fact of his sleep and rising again. And Jacob says, "Who shall
   rouse him up?" And that is just what David and Paul both refer to, as
   when Paul says, "and God the Father, who raised Him from the dead."
   [1426]

   9. And in saying, "A ruler shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader
   from his thighs, until he come for whom it is reserved; and he shall be
   the expectation of the nations," he referred the fulfilment (of that
   prophecy) to Christ. For He is our expectation. For we expect Him,
   (and) by faith we behold Him as He comes from heaven with power.

   10. "Binding his ass to a vine:" that means that He unites His people
   of the circumcision with His own calling (vocation). For He was the
   vine. [1427]   "And his ass's colt to the vine-tendril:" that denotes
   the people of the Gentiles, as He calls the circumcision and the
   uncircumcision unto one faith.

   11. "He shall wash his garment in wine," that is, according to that
   voice of His Father which came down by the Holy Ghost at the Jordan.
   [1428] "And his clothes in the blood of the grape." In the blood of
   what grape, then, but just His own flesh, which hung upon the tree like
   a cluster of grapes?--from whose side also flowed two streams, of blood
   and water, in which the nations are washed and purified, which
   (nations) He may be supposed to have as a robe about Him. [1429]

   12. "His eyes gladsome with wine." And what are the eyes of Christ but
   the blessed prophets, who foresaw in the Spirit, and announced
   beforehand, the sufferings that were to befall Him, and rejoiced in
   seeing Him in power with spiritual eyes, being furnished (for their
   vocation) by the word Himself and His grace?

   13. And in saying, "And his teeth (shall be) whiter than milk," he
   referred to the commandments that proceed from the holy mouth of
   Christ, and which are pure (purify) as milk.

   14. Thus did the Scriptures preach before-time of this lion and lion's
   whelp. And in like manner also we find it written regarding Antichrist.
   For Moses speaks thus: "Dan is a lion's whelp, and he shall leap from
   Bashan." [1430] But that no one may err by supposing that this is said
   of the Saviour, let him attend carefully to the matter. "Dan," he says,
   "is a lion's whelp;" and in naming the tribe of Dan, he declared
   clearly the tribe from which Antichrist is destined to spring. For as
   Christ springs from the tribe of Judah, so Antichrist is to spring from
   the tribe of Dan. [1431] And that the case stands thus, we see also
   from the words of Jacob:  "Let Dan be a serpent, lying upon the ground,
   biting the horse's heel." [1432] What, then, is meant by the serpent
   but Antichrist, that deceiver who is mentioned in Genesis, [1433] who
   deceived Eve and supplanted Adam (pternisas, bruised Adam's heel)? But
   since it is necessary to prove this assertion by sufficient testimony,
   we shall not shrink from the task.

   15. That it is in reality out of the tribe of Dan, then, that that
   tyrant and king, that dread judge, that son of the devil, is destined
   to spring and arise, the prophet testifies when he says, "Dan shall
   judge his people, as (he is) also one tribe in Israel." [1434] But some
   one may say that this refers to Samson, who sprang from the tribe of
   Dan, and judged the people twenty years. Well, the prophecy had its
   partial fulfilment in Samson, but its complete fulfilment is reserved
   for Antichrist. For Jeremiah also speaks to this effect: "From Dan we
   are to hear the sound of the swiftness of his horses: the whole land
   trembled at the sound of the neighing, of the driving of his horses."
   [1435] And another prophet says:  "He shall gather together all his
   strength, from the east even to the west. They whom he calls, and they
   whom he calls not, shall go with him. He shall make the sea white with
   the sails of his ships, and the plain black with the shields of his
   armaments. And whosoever shall oppose him in war shall fall by the
   sword." [1436] That these things, then, are said of no one else but
   that tyrant, and shameless one, and adversary of God, we shall show in
   what follows.

   16. But Isaiah also speaks thus:  "And it shall come to pass, that when
   the Lord hath performed His whole work upon Mount Zion and on
   Jerusalem, He will punish (visit) the stout mind, the king of Assyria,
   and the greatness (height) of the glory of his eyes. For he said, By my
   strength will I do it, and by the wisdom of my understanding I will
   remove the bounds of the peoples, and will rob them of their strength:
   and I will make the inhabited cities tremble, and will gather the whole
   world in my hand like a nest, and I will lift it up like eggs that are
   left. And there is no one that shall escape or gainsay me, and open the
   mouth and chatter. Shall the axe boast itself without him that heweth
   therewith? or shall the saw magnify itself without him that shaketh
   (draweth) it? As if one should raise a rod or a staff, and the staff
   should lift itself up: and not thus. But the Lord shall send dishonour
   unto thy honour; and into thy glory a burning fire shall burn. And the
   light of Israel shall be a fire, and shall sanctify him in flame, and
   shall consume the forest like grass." [1437]

   17. And again he says in another place: "How hath the exactor ceased,
   and how hath the oppressor ceased! [1438] God hath broken the yoke of
   the rulers of sinners, He who smote the people in wrath, and with an
   incurable stroke: He that strikes the people with an incurable stroke,
   which He did not spare. He ceased (rested) confidently: the whole earth
   shouts with rejoicing. The trees of Lebanon rejoiced at thee, and the
   cedar of Lebanon, (saying), Since thou art laid down, no feller is come
   up against us. Hell from beneath is moved at meeting thee: all the
   mighty ones, the rulers of the earth, are gathered together--the lords
   from their thrones. All the kings of the nations, all they shall answer
   together, and shall say, And thou, too, art taken as we; and thou art
   reckoned among us. Thy pomp is brought down to earth, thy great
   rejoicing: they will spread decay under thee; and the worm shall be thy
   covering. [1439] How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the
   morning! [1440] He is cast down to the ground who sends off to all the
   nations. And thou didst say in thy mind, I will ascend into heaven, I
   will set my throne above the stars of heaven: I will sit down upon the
   lofty mountains towards the north: I will ascend above the clouds: I
   will be like the Most High. Yet now thou shalt be brought down to hell,
   and to the foundations of the earth! They that see thee shall wonder at
   thee, and shall say, This is the man that excited the earth, that did
   shake kings, that made the whole world a wilderness, and destroyed the
   cities, that released not those in prison. [1441] All the kings of the
   earth did lie in honour, every one in his own house; but thou shalt be
   cast out on the mountains like a loathsome carcase, with many who fall,
   pierced through with the sword, and going down to hell. As a garment
   stained with blood is not pure, so neither shalt thou be comely (or
   clean); because thou hast destroyed my land, and slain my people. Thou
   shalt not abide, enduring for ever, a wicked seed. Prepare thy children
   for slaughter, for the sins of thy father, that they rise not, neither
   possess my land." [1442]

   18. Ezekiel also speaks of him to the same effect, thus: "Thus saith
   the Lord God, Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I
   am God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the sea; yet art thou
   a man, and not God, (though) thou hast set thine heart as the heart of
   God. Art thou wiser than Daniel? Have the wise not instructed thee in
   their wisdom?  With thy wisdom or with thine understanding hast thou
   gotten thee power, and gold and silver in thy treasures? By thy great
   wisdom and by thy traffic [1443] hast thou increased thy power? Thy
   heart is lifted up in thy power. Therefore thus saith the Lord God:
   Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of God:  behold,
   therefore I will bring strangers [1444] upon thee, plagues from the
   nations: and they shall draw their swords against thee, and against the
   beauty of thy wisdom; and they shall level thy beauty to destruction;
   and they shall bring thee down; and thou shalt die by the death of the
   wounded in the midst of the sea. Wilt thou yet say before them that
   slay thee, I am God? But thou art a man, and no God, in the hand of
   them that wound thee. Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by
   the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord." [1445]

   19. These words then being thus presented, let us observe somewhat in
   detail what Daniel says in his visions. For in distinguishing the
   kingdoms that are to rise after these things, he showed also the coming
   of Antichrist in the last times, and the consummation of the whole
   world. In expounding the vision of Nebuchadnezzar, then, he speaks
   thus: "Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image standing before
   thy face:  the head of which was of fine gold, its arms and shoulders
   of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass, and its legs of iron,
   (and) its feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest, then, till
   that a stone was cut out without hands, and smote the image upon the
   feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to an end. Then were
   the clay, the iron, the brass, the silver, (and) the gold broken, and
   became like the chaff from the summer threshing-floor; and the strength
   (fulness) of the wind carried them away, and there was no place found
   for them. And the stone that smote the image became a great mountain,
   and filled the whole earth." [1446]

   20. Now if we set Daniel's own visions also side by side with this, we
   shall have one exposition to give of the two together, and shall (be
   able to) show how concordant with each other they are, and how true.
   For he speaks thus: "I Daniel saw, and behold the four winds of the
   heaven strove upon the great sea. And four great beasts came up from
   the sea, diverse one from another. The first (was) like a lioness, and
   had wings as of an eagle. I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked,
   and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a
   man, and a man's heart was given to it. And behold a second beast like
   to a bear, and it was made stand on one part, and it had three ribs in
   the mouth of it. [1447] I beheld, and lo a beast like a leopard, and it
   had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl, and the beast had four
   heads. After this I saw, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and
   terrible, and strong exceedingly; it had iron teeth and claws of brass,
   [1448] which devoured and brake in pieces, and it stamped the residue
   with the feet of it; and it was diverse from all the beasts that were
   before it, and it had ten horns. I considered its horns, and behold
   there came up among them another little horn, and before it there were
   three of the first horns plucked up by the roots; and behold in this
   horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great
   things." [1449]

   21. "I beheld till the thrones were set, and the Ancient of days did
   sit: and His garment was white as snow, and the hair of His head like
   pure wool: His throne was a flame of fire, His wheels were a burning
   fire. A stream of fire flowed before Him. Thousand thousands ministered
   unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood around Him: the
   judgment was set, and the books were opened. I beheld then, because of
   the voice of the great words which the horn spake, till the beast was
   slain and perished, and his body given to the burning of fire. And the
   dominion of the other beasts was taken away." [1450]

   22. "I saw in the night vision, and, behold, one like the Son of man
   was coming with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days,
   and was brought near before Him.  And there was given Him dominion, and
   honour, and the kingdom; and all peoples, tribes, and tongues shall
   serve Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not
   pass away, and His kingdom shall not be destroyed." [1451]

   23. Now since these things, spoken as they are with a mystical meaning,
   may seem to some hard to understand, we shall keep back nothing fitted
   to impart an intelligent apprehension of them to those who are
   possessed of a sound mind. He said, then, that a "lioness came up from
   the sea," and by that he meant the kingdom of the Babylonians in the
   world, which also was the head of gold on the image. In saying that "it
   had wings as of an eagle," he meant that Nebuchadnezzar the king was
   lifted up and was exalted against God. Then he says, "the wings thereof
   were plucked," that is to say, his glory was destroyed; for he was
   driven out of his kingdom. And the words, "a man's heart was given to
   it, and it was made stand upon the feet as a man," refer to the fact
   that he repented and recognised himself to be only a man, and gave the
   glory to God.

   24. Then, after the lioness, he sees a "second beast like a bear," and
   that denoted the Persians. For after the Babylonians, the Persians held
   the sovereign power. And in saying that there were "three ribs in the
   mouth of it," he pointed to three nations, viz., the Persians, and the
   Medes, and the Babylonians; which were also represented on the image by
   the silver after the gold. Then (there was) "the third beast, a
   leopard," which meant the Greeks. For after the Persians, Alexander of
   Macedon obtained the sovereign power on subverting Darius, as is also
   shown by the brass on the image. And in saying that it had "four wings
   of a fowl," he taught us most clearly how the kingdom of Alexander was
   partitioned. For in speaking of "four heads," he made mention of four
   kings, viz., those who arose out of that (kingdom). [1452] For
   Alexander, when dying, partitioned out his kingdom into four divisions.

   25. Then he says: "A fourth beast, dreadful and terrible; it had iron
   teeth and claws of brass." And who are these but the Romans? which
   (kingdom) is meant by the iron--the kingdom which is now established;
   for the legs of that (image) were of iron. And after this, what
   remains, beloved, but the toes of the feet of the image, in which part
   is iron and part clay, mixed together? And mystically by the toes of
   the feet he meant the kings who are to arise from among them; as Daniel
   also says (in the words), "I considered the beast, and lo there were
   ten horns behind it, among which shall rise another (horn), an
   offshoot, and shall pluck up by the roots the three (that were) before
   it." And under this was signified none other than Antichrist, who is
   also himself to raise the kingdom of the Jews.  He says that three
   horns are plucked up by the root by him, viz., the three kings of
   Egypt, and Libya, and Ethiopia, whom he cuts off in the array of
   battle. And he, after gaining terrible power over all, being
   nevertheless a tyrant, [1453] shall stir up tribulation and persecution
   against men, exalting himself against them. For Daniel says: "I
   considered the horn, and behold that horn made war with the saints, and
   prevailed against them, till the beast was slain and perished, and its
   body was given to the burning of fire." [1454]

   26. After a little space the stone [1455] will come from heaven which
   smites the image and breaks it in pieces, and subverts all the
   kingdoms, and gives the kingdom to the saints of the Most High. This is
   the stone which becomes a great mountain, and fills the whole earth, of
   which Daniel says: "I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the
   Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of
   days, and was brought near before Him. And there was given Him
   dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; and all peoples, tribes, and
   languages shall serve Him: and His dominion is an everlasting dominion,
   which shall not pass away, and His kingdom shall not be destroyed."
   [1456] He showed all power given by the Father to the Son, [1457] who
   is ordained Lord of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things
   under the earth, and Judge of all: [1458] of things in heaven, because
   He was born, the Word of God, before all (ages); and of things on
   earth, because He became man in the midst of men, to re-create our Adam
   through Himself; and of things under the earth, because He was also
   reckoned among the dead, preaching the Gospel to the souls of the
   saints, [1459] (and) by death overcoming death.

   27. As these things, then, are in the future, and as the ten toes of
   the image are equivalent to (so many) democracies, [1460] and the ten
   horns of the fourth beast are distributed over ten kingdoms, let us
   look at the subject a little more closely, and consider these matters
   as in the clear light of a personal survey. [1461]

   28. The golden head of the image and the lioness denoted the
   Babylonians; the shoulders and arms of silver, and the bear,
   represented the Persians and Medes; the belly and thighs of brass, and
   the leopard, meant the Greeks, who held the sovereignty from
   Alexander's time; the legs of iron, and the beast dreadful and
   terrible, expressed the Romans, who hold the sovereignty at present;
   the toes of the feet which were part clay and part iron, and the ten
   horns, were emblems of the kingdoms that are yet to rise; the other
   little horn that grows up among them meant the Antichrist in their
   midst; the stone that smites the earth and brings judgment upon the
   world was Christ.

   29. These things, beloved, we impart to you with fear, and yet readily,
   on account of the love of Christ, which surpasseth all. For if the
   blessed prophets who preceded us did not choose to proclaim these
   things, though they knew them, openly and boldly, lest they should
   disquiet the souls of men, but recounted them mystically in parables
   and dark sayings, speaking thus, "Here is the mind which hath wisdom,"
   [1462] how much greater risk shall we run in venturing to declare
   openly things spoken by them in obscure terms! Let us look, therefore,
   at the things which are to befall this unclean harlot in the last days;
   and (let us consider) what and what manner of tribulation is destined
   to visit her in the wrath of God before the judgment as an earnest of
   her doom.

   30. Come, then, O blessed Isaiah; arise, tell us clearly what thou
   didst prophesy with respect to the mighty Babylon. For thou didst speak
   also of Jerusalem, and thy word is accomplished. For thou didst speak
   boldly and openly:  "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned
   with fire; your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is
   desolate as overthrown by many strangers. [1463] The daughter of Sion
   shall be left as a cottage in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a garden of
   cucumbers, as a besieged city." [1464] What then? Are not these things
   come to pass? Are not the things announced by thee fulfilled? Is not
   their country, Judea, desolate? Is not the holy place burned with fire?
   Are not their walls cast down? Are not their cities destroyed? Their
   land, do not strangers devour it? Do not the Romans rule the country?
   And indeed these impious people hated thee, and did saw thee asunder,
   and they crucified Christ. Thou art dead in the world, but thou livest
   in Christ.

   31. Which of you, then, shall I esteem more than thee? Yet Jeremiah,
   too, is stoned. But if I should esteem Jeremiah most, yet Daniel too
   has his testimony. Daniel, I commend thee above all; yet John too gives
   no false witness. With how many mouths and tongues would I praise you;
   or rather the Word who spake in you! Ye died with Christ; and ye will
   live with Christ. Hear ye, and rejoice; behold the things announced by
   you have been fulfilled in their time. For ye saw these things
   yourselves first, and then ye proclaimed them to all generations.  Ye
   ministered the oracles of God to all generations. Ye prophets were
   called, that ye might be able to save all. For then is one a prophet
   indeed, when, having announced beforetime things about to be, he can
   afterwards show that they have actually happened. Ye were the disciples
   of a good Master. These words I address to you as if alive, and with
   propriety. For ye hold already the crown of life and immortality which
   is laid up for you in heaven. [1465]

   32. Speak with me, O blessed Daniel.  Give me full assurance, I beseech
   thee. Thou dost prophesy concerning the lioness in Babylon; [1466] for
   thou wast a captive there. Thou hast unfolded the future regarding the
   bear; for thou wast still in the world, and didst see the things come
   to pass. Then thou speakest to me of the leopard; and whence canst thou
   know this, for thou art already gone to thy rest? Who instructed thee
   to announce these things, but He who formed [1467] thee in (from) thy
   mother's womb? [1468] That is God, thou sayest. Thou hast spoken
   indeed, and that not falsely. The leopard has arisen; the he-goat is
   come; he hath smitten the ram; he hath broken his horns in pieces; he
   hath stamped upon him with his feet. He has been exalted by his fall;
   (the) four horns have come up from under that one. [1469] Rejoice,
   blessed Daniel! thou hast not been in error: all these things have come
   to pass.

   33. After this again thou hast told me of the beast dreadful and
   terrible. "It had iron teeth and claws of brass: it devoured and brake
   in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it." [1470] Already
   the iron rules; already it subdues and breaks all in pieces; already it
   brings all the unwilling into subjection; already we see these things
   ourselves. Now we glorify God, being instructed by thee.

   34. But as the task before us was to speak of the harlot, be thou with
   us, O blessed Isaiah. Let us mark what thou sayest about Babylon. "Come
   down, sit upon the ground, O virgin daughter of Babylon; sit, O
   daughter of the Chaldeans; thou shalt no longer be called tender and
   delicate. Take the millstone, grind meal, draw aside thy veil, [1471]
   shave the grey hairs, make bare the legs, pass over the rivers. Thy
   shame shall be uncovered, thy reproach shall be seen: I will take
   justice of thee, I will no more give thee over to men. As for thy
   Redeemer, (He is) the Lord of hosts, the Holy One of Israel is his
   name. Sit thou in compunction, get thee into darkness, O daughter of
   the Chaldeans: thou shalt no longer be called the strength of the
   kingdom.

   35. "I was wroth with my people; I have polluted mine inheritance, I
   have given them into thine hand: and thou didst show them no mercy; but
   upon the ancient (the elders) thou hast very heavily laid thy yoke. And
   thou saidst, I shall be a princess for ever: thou didst not lay these
   things to thy heart, neither didst remember thy latter end. Therefore
   hear now this, thou that art delicate; that sittest, that art
   confident, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and there is none else; I
   shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children.
   But now these two things shall come upon thee in one day, widowhood and
   the loss of children: they shall come upon thee suddenly in thy
   sorcery, in the strength of thine enchantments mightily, in the hope of
   thy fornication. For thou hast said, I am, and there is none else. And
   thy fornication shall be thy shame, because thou hast said in thy
   heart, I am. And destruction shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not
   know it. (And there shall be) a pit, and thou shalt fall into it; and
   misery shall fall upon thee, and thou shalt not be able to be made
   clean; and destruction shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not know
   it. Stand now with thy enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
   sorceries, which thou hast learned from thy youth; if so be thou shalt
   be able to be profited. Thou art wearied in thy counsels. Let the
   astrologers of the heavens stand and save thee; let the star-gazers
   announce to thee what shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall all be
   as sticks for the fire; so shall they be burned, and they shall not
   deliver their soul from the flame. Because thou hast coals of fire, sit
   upon them; so shall it be for thy help. Thou art wearied with change
   from thy youth. Man has gone astray (each one) by himself; and there
   shall be no salvation for thee." [1472] These things does Isaiah
   prophesy for thee. Let us see now whether John has spoken to the same
   effect.

   36. For he sees, when in the isle Patmos, a revelation of awful
   mysteries, which he recounts freely, and makes known to others. Tell
   me, blessed John, apostle and disciple of the Lord, what didst thou see
   and hear concerning Babylon? Arise, and speak; for it sent thee also
   into banishment. [1473] "And there came one of the seven angels which
   had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I
   will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon
   many waters; with whom the kings of the earth have committed
   fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with
   the wine of her fornication. And he carried me away in the spirit into
   the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-coloured beast,
   full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. And the
   woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold,
   and precious stone, [1474] and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand,
   full of abominations and filthiness [1475] of the fornication of the
   earth.  Upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the
   Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth.

   37. "And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with
   the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with
   great admiration. And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou
   marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast
   that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and the ten horns. The
   beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the
   bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth
   shall wonder (whose name was not written in the book of life from the
   foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is
   not, and yet shall be. [1476]

   38. "And here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven
   mountains, on which the woman sitteth. And there are seven kings: five
   are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he
   cometh, he must continue a short space. And the beast that was and is
   not, (even he is the eighth,) and is of the seven, and goeth into
   perdition.  And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which
   have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour
   with the beast. These have one mind, and shall give their power and
   strength unto the beast. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the
   Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings;
   and they that are with Him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

   39. "And he saith to me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore
   sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And the
   ten horns which thou sawest, and [1477] the beast, these shall hate the
   whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
   and burn her with fire. For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil His
   will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the
   words of God shall be fulfilled. And the woman which thou sawest is
   that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.

   40. "After these things I saw another angel come down from heaven,
   having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory. And he
   cried mightily [1478] with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
   fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold
   of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For
   all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
   the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the
   merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her
   delicacies. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of
   her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
   receive not of her plagues:  for her sins did cleave even unto heaven,
   [1479] and God hath remembered her iniquities.

   41. "Reward her even as she rewarded (you), and double unto her double,
   according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her
   double. How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so
   much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a
   queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her
   plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall
   be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth
   her. And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and
   lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when
   they shall see the smoke of her burning, standing afar off for the fear
   of her torment, saying, Alas, alas! that great city Babylon, that
   mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come. And the merchants of
   the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man shall buy their
   merchandise [1480] any more. The merchandise of gold, and silver, and
   precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk,
   and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and
   all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and
   marble, and cinnamon, and spices, [1481] and odours, and ointments, and
   frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts,
   and sheep, and goats, [1482] and horses, and chariots, and slaves
   (bodies), and souls of men. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after
   are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly
   have perished [1483] from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at
   all. The merchants of these things, which were made rich [1484] by her,
   shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,
   and saying, Alas, alas! that great city, that was clothed in fine
   linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious
   stones, and pearls! for in one hour so great riches is come to nought.
   And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as
   many as trade by sea, stood afar off, and cried, when they saw the
   smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city?
   And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing,
   saying, Alas, alas! that great city, wherein were made rich all that
   had ships in the sea by reason of her fatness! [1485] for in one hour
   is she made desolate.

   42. "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye angels, [1486] and apostles,
   and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her. And a mighty angel took
   up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying,
   Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and
   shall be found no more at all. And the voice of harpers and musicians,
   and of pipers and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee;
   and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in
   thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in
   thee; and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and
   the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at
   all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by
   thy sorceries were all nations deceived.  And in her was found the
   blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the
   earth." [1487]

   43. With respect, then, to the particular judgment in the torments that
   are to come upon it in the last times by the hand of the tyrants who
   shall arise then, the clearest statement has been given in these
   passages. But it becomes us further diligently to examine and set forth
   the period at which these things shall come to pass, and how the little
   horn shall spring up in their midst. For when the legs of iron have
   issued in the feet and toes, according to the similitude of the image
   and that of the terrible beast, as has been shown in the above, (then
   shall be the time) when the iron and the clay shall be mingled
   together. Now Daniel will set forth this subject to us. For he says,
   "And one week will make [1488] a covenant with many, and it shall be
   that in the midst (half) of the week my sacrifice and oblation shall
   cease." [1489] By one week, therefore, he meant the last week which is
   to be at the end of the whole world of which week the two prophets
   Enoch and Elias will take up the half. For they will preach 1, 260 days
   clothed in sackcloth, proclaiming repentance to the people and to all
   the nations.

   44. For as two advents of our Lord and Saviour are indicated in the
   Scriptures, the one being His first advent in the flesh, which took
   place without honour by reason of His being set at nought, as Isaiah
   spake of Him aforetime, saying, "We saw Him, and He had no form nor
   comeliness, but His form was despised (and) rejected (lit. = deficient)
   above all men; a man smitten and familiar with bearing infirmity, (for
   His face was turned away); He was despised, and esteemed not." [1490]
   But His second advent is announced as glorious, when He shall come from
   heaven with the host of angels, and the glory of His Father, as the
   prophet saith, "Ye shall see the King in glory;" [1491] and, "I saw one
   like the Son of man coming with the clouds of heaven; and he came to
   the Ancient of days, and he was brought to Him. And there were given
   Him dominion, and honour, and glory, and the kingdom; all tribes and
   languages shall serve Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion,
   which shall not pass away." [1492] Thus also two forerunners were
   indicated. The first was John the son of Zacharias, who appeared in all
   things a forerunner and herald of our Saviour, preaching of the
   heavenly light that had appeared in the world. He first fulfilled the
   course of forerunner, and that from his mother's womb, being conceived
   by Elisabeth, in order that to those, too, who are children from their
   mother's womb he might declare the new birth that was to take place for
   their sakes by the Holy Ghost and the Virgin.

   45.  He, on hearing the salutation addressed to Elisabeth, leaped with
   joy in his mother's womb, recognising God the Word conceived in the
   womb of the Virgin. Thereafter he came forward preaching in the
   wilderness, proclaiming the baptism of repentance to the people, (and
   thus) announcing prophetically salvation to the nations living in the
   wilderness of the world. After this, at the Jordan, seeing the Saviour
   with his own eye, he points Him out, and says, "Behold the Lamb of God,
   that taketh away the sin of the world!" [1493] He also first preached
   to those in Hades, [1494] becoming a forerunner there when he was put
   to death by Herod, that there too he might intimate that the Saviour
   would descend to ransom the souls of the saints from the hand of death.

   46. But since the Saviour was the beginning of the resurrection of all
   men, it was meet that the Lord alone should rise from the dead, by whom
   too the judgment is to enter for the whole world, that they who have
   wrestled worthily may be also crowned worthily by Him, by the
   illustrious Arbiter, to wit, who Himself first accomplished the course,
   and was received into the heavens, and was set down on the right hand
   of God the Father, and is to be manifested again at the end of the
   world as Judge. It is a matter of course that His forerunners must
   appear first, as He says by Malachi and the angel, [1495] "I will send
   to you Elias the Tishbite before the day of the Lord, the great and
   notable day, comes; and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the
   children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, lest I come
   and smite the earth utterly." [1496] These, then, shall come and
   proclaim the manifestation of Christ that is to be from heaven; and
   they shall also perform signs and wonders, in order that men may be put
   to shame and turned to repentance for their surpassing wickedness and
   impiety.

   47. For John says, "And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and
   they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed
   in sackcloth." [1497] That is the half of the week whereof Daniel
   spake. "These are the two olive trees and the two candlesticks standing
   before the Lord of the earth. And if any man will hurt them, fire will
   proceed out of their mouth, and devour their enemies; and if any man
   will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to
   shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy; and have
   power over waters, to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with
   all plagues as often as they will. And when they shall have finished
   their course and their testimony," what saith the prophet? "the beast
   that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them,
   and shall overcome them, and kill them," [1498] because they will not
   give glory to Antichrist. For this is meant by the little horn that
   grows up. He, being now elated in heart, begins to exalt himself, and
   to glorify himself as God, persecuting the saints and blaspheming
   Christ, even as Daniel says, "I considered the horn, and, behold, in
   the horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great
   things; and he opened his mouth to blaspheme God. And that born made
   war against the saints, and prevailed against them until the beast was
   slain, and perished, and his body was given to be burned." [1499]

   48. But as it is incumbent on us to discuss this matter of the beast
   more exactly, and in particular the question how the Holy Spirit has
   also mystically indicated his name by means of a number, we shall
   proceed to state more clearly what bears upon him. John then speaks
   thus: "And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he
   had two horns, like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. And he exercised
   all the power of the first beast before him; and he made the earth and
   them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound
   was healed. And he did great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down
   from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that
   dwell on the earth by means of those miracles which he had power to do
   in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that
   they should make an image to the beast which had the wound by a sword
   and did live. And he had power to give life unto the image of the
   beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as
   many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed. And
   he caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
   receive a mark in their right hand or in their forehead; and that no
   man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, the name of the
   beast, or the number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath
   understanding count the number of the beast; for if is the number of a
   man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six." [1500]

   49. By the beast, then, coming up out of the earth, he means the
   kingdom of Antichrist; and by the two horns he means him and the false
   prophet after him. [1501] And in speaking of "the horns being like a
   lamb," he means that he will make himself like the Son of God, and set
   himself forward as king. And the terms, "he spake like a dragon," mean
   that he is a deceiver, and not truthful. And the words, "he exercised
   all the power of the first beast before him, and caused the earth and
   them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound
   was healed," signify that, after the manner of the law of Augustus, by
   whom the empire of Rome was established, he too will rule and govern,
   sanctioning everything by it, and taking greater glory to himself. For
   this is the fourth beast, whose head was wounded and healed again, in
   its being broken up or even dishonoured, and partitioned into four
   crowns; and he then (Antichrist) shall with knavish skill heal it, as
   it were, and restore it. For this is what is meant by the prophet when
   he says, "He will give life unto the image, and the image of the beast
   will speak." For he will act with vigour again, and prove strong by
   reason of the laws established by him; and he will cause all those who
   will not worship the image of the beast to be put to death. Here the
   faith and the patience of the saints will appear, for he says: "And he
   will cause all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
   receive a mark in their right hand or in their forehead; that no man
   might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, the name of the beast, or
   the number of his name." For, being full of guile, and exalting himself
   against the servants of God, with the wish to afflict them and
   persecute them out of the world, because they give not glory to him, he
   will order incense-pans [1502] to be set up by all everywhere, that no
   man among the saints may be able to buy or sell without first
   sacrificing; for this is what is meant by the mark received upon the
   right hand. And the word--"in their forehead"--indicates that all are
   crowned, and put on a crown of fire, and not of life, but of death. For
   in this wise, too, did Antiochus Epiphanes the king of Syria, the
   descendant of Alexander of Macedon, devise measures against the Jews.
   He, too, in the exaltation of his heart, issued a decree in those
   times, that "all should set up shrines before their doors, and
   sacrifice, and that they should march in procession to the honour of
   Dionysus, waving chaplets of ivy;" and that those who refused obedience
   should be put to death by strangulation and torture. But he also met
   his due recompense at the hand of the Lord, the righteous Judge and
   all-searching God; for he died eaten up of worms. And if one desires to
   inquire into that more accurately, he will find it recorded in the
   books of the Maccabees. [1503]

   50. But now we shall speak of what is before us. For such measures will
   he, too, devise, seeking to afflict the saints in every way. For the
   prophet and apostle says:  "Here is wisdom, Let him that hath
   understanding count the number of the beast; for it is the number of a
   man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six." With respect to
   his name, it is not in our power to explain it exactly, as the blessed
   John understood it and was instructed about it, but only to give a
   conjectural account of it; [1504] for when he appears, the blessed one
   will show us what we seek to know. Yet as far as our doubtful
   apprehension of the matter goes, we may speak. Many names indeed we
   find, [1505] the letters of which are the equivalent of this number:
   such as, for instance, the word Titan, [1506] an ancient and notable
   name; or Evanthas, [1507] for it too makes up the same number; and many
   others which might be found. But, as we have already said, [1508] the
   wound of the first beast was healed, and he (the second beast) was to
   make the image speak, [1509] that is to say, he should be powerful; and
   it is manifest to all that those who at present still hold the power
   are Latins. If, then, we take the name as the name of a single man, it
   becomes Latinus. Wherefore we ought neither to give it out as if this
   were certainly his name, nor again ignore the fact that he may not be
   otherwise designated.  But having the mystery of God in our heart, we
   ought in fear to keep faithfully what has been told us by the blessed
   prophets, in order that when those things come to pass, we may be
   prepared for them, and not deceived. For when the times advance, he
   too, of whom these thing are said, will be manifested. [1510]

   51. But not to confine ourselves to these words and arguments alone,
   for the purpose of convincing those who love to study the oracles of
   God, we shall demonstrate the matter by many other proofs. For Daniel
   says, "And these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and
   the chief of the children of Ammon." [1511] Ammon and Moab [1512] are
   the children born to Lot by his daughters, and their race survives even
   now.  And Isaiah says: "And they shall fly in the boats of strangers,
   plundering the sea together, and (they shall spoil) them of the east:
   and they shall lay hands upon Moab first; and the children of Ammon
   shall first obey them." [1513]

   52. In those times, then, he shall arise and meet them. And when he has
   overmastered three horns out of the ten in the array of war, and has
   rooted these out, viz., Egypt, and Libya, and Ethiopia, and has got
   their spoils and trappings, and has brought the remaining horns which
   suffer into subjection, he will begin to be lifted up in heart, and to
   exalt himself against God as master of the whole world. And his first
   expedition will be against Tyre and Berytus, and the circumjacent
   territory. For by storming these cities first he will strike terror
   into the others, as Isaiah says, "Be thou ashamed, O Sidon; the sea
   hath spoken, even the strength of the sea hath spoken, saying, I
   travailed not, nor brought forth children; neither did I nurse up young
   men, nor bring up virgins. But when the report comes to Egypt, pain
   shall seize them for Tyre." [1514]

   53. These things, then, shall be in the future, beloved; and when the
   three horns are cut off, he will begin to show himself as God, as
   Ezekiel has said aforetime:  "Because thy heart has been lifted up, and
   thou hast said, I am God." [1515] And to the like effect Isaiah says:
   "For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will
   exalt my throne above the stars of heaven: I will be like the Most
   High. Yet now thou shalt be brought down to hell (Hades), to the
   foundations of the earth." [1516] In like manner also Ezekiel: "Wilt
   thou yet say to those who slay thee, I am God? But thou (shalt be) a
   man, and no God." [1517]

   54. As his tribe, then, and his manifestation, and his destruction,
   have been set forth in these words, and as his name has also been
   indicated mystically, let us look also at his action. For he will call
   together all the people to himself, out of every country of the
   dispersion, making them his own, as though they were his own children,
   and promising to restore their country, and establish again their
   kingdom and nation, in order that he may be worshipped by them as God,
   as the prophet says: "He will collect his whole kingdom, from the
   rising of the sun even to its setting: they whom he summons and they
   whom he does not summon shall march with him." [1518] And Jeremiah
   speaks of him thus in a parable: "The partridge cried, (and) gathered
   what he did not hatch, making himself riches without judgment: in the
   midst of his days they shall leave him, and at his end he shall be a
   fool." [1519]

   55. It will not be detrimental, therefore, to the course of our present
   argument, if we explain the art of that creature, and show that the
   prophet has not spoken [1520] without a purpose in using the parable
   (or similitude) of the creature. For as the partridge is a vainglorious
   creature, when it sees near at hand the nest of another partridge with
   young in it, and with the parent-bird away on the wing in quest of
   food, it imitates the cry of the other bird, and calls the young to
   itself; and they, taking it to be their own parent, run to it. And it
   delights itself proudly in the alien pullets as in its own. But when
   the real parent-bird returns, and calls them with its own familiar cry,
   the young recognise it, and forsake the deceiver, and betake themselves
   to the real parent. This thing, then, the prophet has adopted as a
   simile, applying it in a similar manner to Antichrist. For he will
   allure mankind to himself, wishing to gain possession of those who are
   not his own, and promising deliverance to all, while he is unable to
   save himself.

   56. He then, having gathered to himself the unbelieving everywhere
   throughout the world, comes at their call to persecute the saints,
   their enemies and antagonists, as the apostle and evangelist says:
   "There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded
   man: and there was a widow in that city, who came unto him, saying,
   Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would not for a while: but
   afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard
   man; yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her." [1521]

   57. By the unrighteous judge, who fears not God, neither regards man,
   he means without doubt Antichrist, as he is a son of the devil and a
   vessel of Satan. For when he has the power, he will begin to exalt
   himself against God, neither in truth fearing God, nor regarding the
   Son of God, who is the Judge of all. And in saying that there was a
   widow in the city, he refers to Jerusalem itself, which is a widow
   indeed, forsaken of her perfect, heavenly spouse, God. She calls Him
   her adversary, and not her Saviour; for she does not understand that
   which was said by the prophet Jeremiah: "Because they obeyed not the
   truth, a spirit of error shall speak then to this people and to
   Jerusalem." [1522] And Isaiah also to the like effect: "Forasmuch as
   the people refuseth to drink the water of Siloam that goeth softly, but
   chooseth to have Rasin and Romeliah's son as king over you: therefore,
   lo, the Lord bringeth up upon you the water of the river, strong and
   full, even the king of Assyria." [1523] By the king he means
   metaphorically Antichrist, as also another prophet saith: "And this man
   shall be the peace from me, when the Assyrian shall come up into your
   land, and when he shall tread in your mountains." [1524]

   58. And in like manner Moses, knowing beforehand that the people would
   reject and disown the true Saviour of the world, and take part with
   error, and choose an earthly king, and set the heavenly King at nought,
   says: "Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
   treasures? In the day of vengeance I will recompense (them), and in the
   time when their foot shall slide." [1525] They did slide, therefore, in
   all things, as they were found to be in harmony with the truth in
   nothing: neither as concerns the law, because they became
   transgressors; nor as concerns the prophets, because they cut off even
   the prophets themselves; nor as concerns the voice of the Gospels,
   because they crucified the Saviour Himself; nor in believing the
   apostles, because they persecuted them. At all times they showed
   themselves enemies and betrayers of the truth, and were found to be
   haters of God, and not lovers of Him; and such they shall be then when
   they find opportunity: for, rousing themselves against the servants of
   God, they will seek to obtain vengeance by the hand of a mortal man.
   And he, being puffed up with pride by their subserviency, will begin to
   despatch missives against the saints, commanding to cut them all off
   everywhere, on the ground of their refusal to reverence and worship him
   as God, according to the word of Esaias: "Woe to the wings of the
   vessels of the land, [1526] beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: (woe to him)
   who sendeth sureties by the sea, and letters of papyrus (upon the
   water; for nimble messengers will go) to a nation [1527] anxious and
   expectant, and a people strange and bitter against them; a nation
   hopeless and trodden down." [1528]

   59. But we who hope for the Son of God are persecuted and trodden down
   by those unbelievers. For the wings of the vessels are the churches;
   and the sea is the world, in which the Church is set, like a ship
   tossed in the deep, but not destroyed; for she has with her the skilled
   Pilot, Christ. And she bears in her midst also the trophy (which is
   erected) over death; for she carries with her the cross of the Lord.
   [1529] For her prow is the east, and her stern is the west, and her
   hold [1530] is the south, and her tillers are the two Testaments; and
   the ropes that stretch around her are the love of Christ, which binds
   the Church; and the net [1531] which she bears with her is the laver of
   the regeneration which renews the believing, whence too are these
   glories. As the wind the Spirit from heaven is present, by whom those
   who believe are sealed: she has also anchors of iron accompanying her,
   viz., the holy commandments of Christ Himself, which are strong as
   iron.  She has also mariners on the right and on the left, assessors
   like the holy angels, by whom the Church is always governed and
   defended.  The ladder in her leading up to the sailyard is an emblem of
   the passion of Christ, which brings the faithful to the ascent of
   heaven. And the top-sails [1532] aloft [1533] upon the yard are the
   company of prophets, martyrs, and apostles, who have entered into their
   rest in the kingdom of Christ.

   60. Now, concerning the tribulation of the persecution which is to fall
   upon the Church from the adversary, John also speaks thus: "And I saw a
   great and wondrous sign in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and
   the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. And
   she, being with child, cries, travailing in birth, and pained to be
   delivered. And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
   delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born. And she
   brought forth a man-child, who is to rule all the nations: and the
   child was caught up unto God and to His throne. And the woman fled into
   the wilderness, where she hath the place prepared of God, that they
   should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. And
   then when the dragon saw it, he persecuted the woman which brought
   forth the man-child. And to the woman were given two wings of the great
   eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, where she is nourished
   for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.
   And the serpent cast (out of his mouth water as a flood after the
   woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. And the
   earth helped the woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the
   flood which the dragon cast) out of his mouth. And the dragon was wroth
   with the woman, and went to make war with the saints of her seed, which
   keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus." [1534]

   61. By the woman then clothed with the sun," he meant most manifestly
   the Church, endued with the Father's word, [1535] whose brightness is
   above the sun. And by the "moon under her feet" he referred to her
   being adorned, like the moon, with heavenly glory. And the words, "upon
   her head a crown of twelve stars," refer to the twelve apostles by whom
   the Church was founded. And those, "she, being with child, cries,
   travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered," mean that the Church
   will not cease to bear from her heart [1536] the Word that is
   persecuted by the unbelieving in the world. "And she brought forth," he
   says, "a man-child, who is to rule all the nations;" by which is meant
   that the Church, always bringing forth Christ, the perfect man-child of
   God, who is declared to be God and man, becomes the instructor of all
   the nations. And the words, "her child was caught up unto God and to
   His throne," signify that he who is always born of her is a heavenly
   king, and not an earthly; even as David also declared of old when he
   said, "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand, until I
   make Thine enemies Thy footstool." [1537]   "And the dragon," he says,
   "saw and persecuted the woman which brought forth the man-child. And to
   the woman were given two wings of the great eagle, that she might fly
   into the wilderness, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and
   half a time, from the face of the serpent." [1538] That refers to the
   one thousand two hundred and threescore days (the half of the week)
   during which the tyrant is to reign and persecute the Church, [1539]
   which flees from city to city, and seeks concealment in the wilderness
   among the mountains, possessed of no other defence than the two wings
   of the great eagle, that is to say, the faith of Jesus Christ, who, in
   stretching forth His holy hands on the holy tree, unfolded two wings,
   the right and the left, and called to Him all who believed upon Him,
   and covered them as a hen her chickens. For by the mouth of Malachi
   also He speaks thus:  "And unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
   righteousness arise with healing in His wings." [1540]

   62. The Lord also says, "When ye shall see the abomination of
   desolation stand in the holy place (whoso readeth, let him understand),
   then let them which be in Judea flee into the mountains, and let him
   which is on the housetop not come down to take his clothes; neither let
   him which is in the field return back to take anything out of his
   house. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
   suck, in those days! for then shall be great tribulation, such as was
   not since the beginning of the world.  And except those days should be
   shortened, there should no flesh be saved." [1541] And Daniel says,
   "And they shall place the abomination of desolation a thousand two
   hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the
   thousand two hundred and ninety-five days." [1542]

   63. And the blessed Apostle Paul, writing to the Thessalonians, says:
   "Now we beseech you, brethren, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, and our gathering together at it, [1543] that ye be not soon
   shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by
   letters as from us, as that the day of the Lord is at hand. Let no man
   deceive you by any means; for (that day shall not come) except there
   come the falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son
   of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is
   called God, or that is worshipped: so that he sitteth in the temple of
   God, showing himself that he is God.  Remember ye not, that when I was
   yet with you, I told you these things? And now ye know what
   withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of
   iniquity doth already work; only he who now letteth (will let), until
   he be taken out of the way. And then shall that wicked be revealed,
   whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the Spirit of His mouth, and
   shall destroy with the brightness of His coming: (even him) whose
   coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
   lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them
   that perish; because they received not the love of the truth. And for
   this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
   believe a lie:  that they all might be damned who believed not the
   truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." [1544] And Esaias says,
   "Let the wicked be cut off, that he behold not the glory of the Lord."
   [1545]

   64. These things, then, being to come to pass, beloved, and the one
   week being divided into two parts, and the abomination of desolation
   being manifested then, and the two prophets and forerunners of the Lord
   having finished their course, and the whole world finally approaching
   the consummation, what remains but the coming of our Lord and Saviour
   Jesus Christ from heaven, for whom we have looked in hope? who shall
   bring the conflagration and just judgment upon all who have refused to
   believe on Him. For the Lord says, "And when these things begin to come
   to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption
   draweth nigh." [1546] "And there shall not a hair of your head perish."
   [1547] "For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even
   unto the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For
   wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered
   together." [1548] Now the fall [1549] took place in paradise; for Adam
   fell there. And He says again, "Then shall the Son of man send His
   angels, and they shall gather together His elect from the four winds of
   heaven." [1550] And David also, in announcing prophetically the
   judgment and coming of the Lord, says, "His going forth is from the end
   of the heaven, and His circuit unto the end of the heaven: and there is
   no one hid from the heat thereof." [1551] By the heat he means the
   conflagration. And Esaias speaks thus:  "Come, my people, enter thou
   into thy chamber, (and) shut thy door: hide thyself as it were for a
   little moment, until the indignation of the Lord be overpast." [1552]
   And Paul in like manner:  "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
   against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth
   of God in unrighteousness." [1553]

   65. Moreover, concerning the resurrection and the kingdom of the
   saints, Daniel says, "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the
   earth shall arise, some to everlasting life, (and some to shame and
   everlasting contempt)." [1554] Esaias says, "The dead men shall arise,
   and they that are in their tombs shall awake; for the dew from thee is
   healing to them." [1555] The Lord says, "Many in that day shall hear
   the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live." [1556] And
   the prophet says, "Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead,
   and Christ shall give thee light." [1557] And John says, "Blessed and
   holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second
   death hath no power." [1558] For the second death is the lake of fire
   that burneth. And again the Lord says, "Then shall the righteous shine
   forth as the sun shineth in his glory." [1559] And to the saints He
   will say, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
   for you from the foundation of the world." [1560] But what saith He to
   the wicked? "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
   for the devil and his angels, which my Father hath prepared." And John
   says, "Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
   murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever maketh and loveth a lie; for
   your part is in the hell of fire." [1561] And in like manner also
   Esaias:  "And they shall go forth and look upon the carcases of the men
   that have transgressed against me. And their worm shall not die,
   neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be for a spectacle
   to all flesh." [1562]

   66. Concerning the resurrection of the righteous, Paul also speaks thus
   in writing to the Thessalonians:  "We would not have you to be ignorant
   concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others
   which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
   even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. For
   this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive
   (and) remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which
   are asleep. For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a
   shout, with the voice and trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall
   rise first. Then we which are alive (and) remain shall be caught up
   together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so
   shall we ever be with the Lord." [1563]

   67. These things, then, I have set shortly before thee, O Theophilus,
   drawing them from Scripture itself, [1564] in order that, maintaining
   in faith what is written, and anticipating the things that are to be,
   thou mayest keep thyself void of offence both toward God and toward
   men, "looking for that blessed hope and appearing of our God and
   Saviour," [1565] when, having raised the saints among us, He will
   rejoice with them, glorifying the Father. To Him be the glory unto the
   endless ages of the ages. Amen.

   ------------------------
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1393] Gallandi, Bibl. vet. Patr., ii. p. 417, Venice, 1765.

   [1394] Perhaps the same Theophilus whom Methodius, a contemporary of
   Hippolytus, addresses as Epiphanius. [See vol. vi., this series.] From
   this introduction, too, it is clear that they are in error who take
   this book to be a homily. (Fabricius.)

   [1395] In the text the reading is ton onton, for which ton oton = of
   the ears, is proposed by some, and anthropon = of men, by others. In
   the manuscripts the abbreviation anon is often found for anthropon.

   [1396] In the text we find hos pion kathara ge, for which grammar
   requires hos pioni kathara ge.  Combefisius proposes hosper oun kathara
   ge = as in clean ground. Others would read hos puron, etc., = like a
   grain in clean ground.

   [1397] 1 Tim. vi. 20, 21.

   [1398] This reading, parakleseon for marturon (= witnesses), which is
   peculiar to Hippolytus alone, is all the more remarkable as so
   thoroughly suiting Paul's meaning in the passage.

   [1399] 2 Tim. ii. 1, 2.

   [1400] 2 Thess. iii. 2.

   [1401] The text reads hatina = which. Gudius proposes tina = some.

   [1402] The plectrum was the instrument with which the lyre was struck.
   The text is in confusion here. Combefisius corrects it, as we render
   it, organon diken henomenon echontes en heautois.

   [1403] 2 Pet. i. 21.

   [1404] The text reads me plano (= that I may not deceive). Some propose
   hos planoi = as deceivers.

   [1405] This is according to the emendation of Combefisius. [And note
   this primitive theory of inspiration as illustrating the words, "who
   spake by the prophets," in the Nicene Symbol.]

   [1406] 1 Sam. ix. 9.

   [1407] In the text it is prokeimena (= things before us or proposed to
   us), for which Combefisius proposes, as in our rendering, proeiremena.

   [1408] The original is akindunon.

   [1409] Isa. xlii. 1; Matt. xii. 18. The text is autos palin ho tou
   theou pais.  See Macarius, Divinitas D. N. S. C., book iv. ch. xiii. p.
   460, and Grabe on Bull's Defens. Fid. Nic., p. 101.

   [1410] Reading autous for auton.

   [1411] [Isa. lvi. 3, 4.]

   [1412] Eph. iv. 13.

   [1413] The text has on = being, for which read en = was.

   [1414] mixas. Thomassin, De Incarnatione Verbi, iii. 5, cites the most
   distinguished of the Greek and Latin Fathers, who taught that a
   mingling (commistio), without confusion indeed, but yet most thorough,
   of the two natures, is the bond and nexus of the personal unity.

   [1415] [This analogy of weaving is powerfully employed by Gray ("Weave
   the warp, and weave the woof," etc.). See his Pindaric ode, The Bard.]

   [1416] Rev. v. 5; [also Gen. xlix. 8. See below, 7, 8].

   [1417] John xviii. 37.

   [1418] John i. 29.

   [1419] John xi. 52.

   [1420] John ii. 19.

   [1421] Gen. xlix. 8-12.

   [1422] The text has toutou--proerchomenou, for which we read, with
   Combefisius, proerchomenon.

   [1423] Isa. xi. 1.

   [1424] Isa. i. 21.

   [1425] Ps. iii. 5.

   [1426] Gal. i. 1.

   [1427] John xv. 1.

   [1428] The text gives simply, ten tou hagiou, etc., = the paternal
   voice of the Holy Ghost, etc. As this would seem to represent the Holy
   Ghost as the Father of Christ, Combefisius proposes, as in our
   rendering, kata ten dia tou hagiou, etc. The wine, therefore, is taken
   as a figure of His deity, and the garment as a figure of His humanity;
   and the sense would be, that He has the latter imbued with the former
   in a way peculiar to Himself--even as the voice at the Jordan declared
   Him to be the Father's Son, not His Son by adoption, but His own Son,
   anointed as man with divinity itself.

   [1429] The nations are compared to a robe about Christ, as something
   foreign to Himself, and deriving all their gifts from Him.

   [1430] Deut. xxxiii. 22.

   [1431] [See Irenæus, vol. i. p. 559. Dan's name is excepted in Rev.
   vii., and this was always assigned as the reason. The learned Calmet
   (sub voce Dan) makes a prudent reflection on this idea. The history
   given in Judg. xviii. is more to the purpose.]

   [1432] Gen. xlix. 17.

   [1433] Gen. iii. 1.

   [1434] Gen. xlix. 16.

   [1435] Jer. viii. 16.

   [1436] Perhaps from an apocryphal book, as also below in ch. liv.

   [1437] Isa. x. 12-17.

   [1438] epispoudastes.

   [1439] katakalumma; other reading, kataleimma = remains.

   [1440] Lit., that risest early.

   [1441] The text gives epagoge.  Combefisius prefers apagoge = trial.

   [1442] Isa. xiv. 4-21.

   [1443] i.e., according to the reading, emporia. The text is empeiria =
   experience.

   [1444] There is another reading, limous (= famines) ton ethnon.

   [1445] Ezek. xxviii. 2-10.

   [1446] Dan. ii. 31-35.

   [1447] Combefisius adds, "between the teeth of it; and they said thus
   to it, Arise, devour much flesh."

   [1448] Combefisius inserted these words, because he thought that they
   must have been in the vision, as they occur subsequently in the
   explanation of the vision (v. 19).

   [1449] Dan. vii. 2-8.

   [1450] Dan. vii. 9-12.

   [1451] Dan. vii. 13, 14.

   [1452] See Curtius, x. 10. That Alexander himself divided his kingdom
   is asserted by Josephus Gorionides (iii.) and Cyril of Jerusalem
   (Catech., 4, De Sacra Scriptura) and others.

   [1453] For homos = nevertheless, Gudius suggests omos = savage.

   [1454] Dan. vii. 21, 11.

   [1455] Dan. ii. 34, 45.

   [1456] Dan. vii. 13, 14.

   [1457] Matt. xxviii. 18.

   [1458] Phil. ii. 10.

   [1459] 1 Pet. iii. 19.

   [1460] [Deserving of especial note. Who could have foreseen the
   universal spirit of democracy in this century save by the light of this
   prophecy? Comp. 2 Tim. iii. 1-3.]

   [1461] ophthalmophanos.

   [1462] Rev. xvii. 9.

   [1463] For hupo pollon Combefisius has hupo laon = by peoples.

   [1464] Isa. i. 7, 8.

   [1465] 2 Tim. iv. 8.

   [1466] Dan. vii. 4.

   [1467] For plasas Gudius proposes hagiasas (sanctified) or kalesas
   (called).

   [1468] Jer. i. 5.

   [1469] Dan. viii. 2-8.

   [1470] Dan. vii. 6.

   [1471] For anaxurison others read anakalupsai = uncover.

   [1472] Isa. xlvii. 1-15.

   [1473] [Note this token, that, with all his prudence, he identifies
   "Babylon" with Rome.]

   [1474] "Stones," rather.

   [1475] ta akatharta, for the received akathartotetos.

   [1476] kai parestai, for the received kaiper esti.

   [1477] kai, for the received epi.

   [1478] ischura for en ischui.

   [1479] ekollethesan, for the received ekolouthesan.

   [1480] agorasei, for the received agorazei.

   [1481] amomon, omitted in the received text.

   [1482] kai tragous, omitted in the received text.

   [1483] apoleto, for the received apelthen.

   [1484] ploutisantes, for the received ploutesantes.

   [1485] piotetos, for the received timiotetos.

   [1486] kai hoi angeloi, which the received omits.

   [1487] Rev. xvii.; xviii.

   [1488] diathesei = will make; others, dunamosei = will confirm.

   [1489] Dan. ix. 27.

   [1490] Isa. liii. 2-5.

   [1491] Isa. xxxiii. 17.

   [1492] Dan. vii. 13, 14.

   [1493] John i. 29.

   [1494] It was a common opinion among the Greeks, that the Baptist was
   Christ's forerunner also among the dead. See Leo Allatius, De libris
   Eccles. Græcorum, p. 303.

   [1495] Or it may be, "Malachi, even the messenger."   'Angelou is the
   reading restored by Combefisius instead of 'Angaiou. The words of the
   angel in Luke i. 17 ("and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just")
   are thus inserted in the citation from Malachi; and to that Hippolytus
   may refer in the addition "and the angel." Or perhaps, as Combefisius
   rather thinks, the addition simply refers to the meaning of the name
   Malachi, viz., messenger.

   [1496] Mal. iv. 5, 6.

   [1497] Rev. xi. 3.

   [1498] Rev. xi. 4-6.

   [1499] Dan. vii. 8, 9.

   [1500] Rev. xiii. 11-18.

   [1501] The text is simply kai ton met' auton = the false prophet after
   him. Gudius and Combefisius propose as above, kai auton te kai ton met'
   auton, or met' autou = him and the false prophet with him.

   [1502] pureia = censers, incense-pans, or sacrificial tripods. This
   offering of incense was a test very commonly proposed by the pagans to
   those whose religion they suspected.

   [1503] [Not referred to as Scripture, but as authentic history.]

   [1504] hoson monon huponoesai.

   [1505] isopsepha.

   [1506] Teitan.  Hippolytus here follows his master Irenæus, who in his
   Contra Hæres., v. 30, § 3, has the words," Titan...et antiquum et fide
   dignum et regale...nomen" = Titan...both an ancient and good and
   royal...name. [See this series, vol. i. p. 559.]

   [1507] Euanthas, mentioned also by Irenæus in the passage already
   referred to.

   [1508] proephthemen, the reading proposed by Fabricius instead of
   proephemen.

   [1509] poiesei, Combef. epoiese.

   [1510] [Let us imitate the wisdom of our author, whose modest
   commentary upon his master Irenæus cannot be too much applauded. The
   mystery, however, does seem to turn upon something in the Latin race
   and its destiny.]

   [1511] Dan. xi. 41.

   [1512] Gen. xix. 37, 38.

   [1513] Isa. xi. 14.

   [1514] Isa. xxiii. 4, 5.

   [1515] Ezek. xxviii. 2.

   [1516] Isa. xiv. 13-15.

   [1517] Ezek. xxviii. 9.

   [1518] Quoted already in chap. xv. as from one of the prophets.

   [1519] Jer. xvii. 11.

   [1520] Reading apephenato for apekrinato.

   [1521] Luke xviii. 2-5.

   [1522] Jer. iv. 11.

   [1523] Isa. viii. 6, 7.

   [1524] Mic. v. 5. The Septuagint reads aute = And (he) shall be the
   peace to it. Hippolytus follows the Hebrew, but makes the pronoun
   feminine, haute referring to the peace.  Again Hippolytus reads ore =
   mountains, where the Septuagint has choran = land, and where the Hebrew
   word = fortresses or palaces. [He must mean that "the Assyrian" =
   Antichrist.  "The peace" is attributable only to the "Prince of peace."
   So the Fathers generally.]

   [1525] Deut. xxxii. 34, 35.

   [1526] ouai ges ploion pteruges.

   [1527] meteoron.

   [1528] Isa. xviii. 1, 2.

   [1529] Wordsworth, reading hos histon for hos ton, would add, like a
   mast. See his Commentary on Acts xxvii. 40.

   [1530] kutos, a conjecture of Combefisius for kuklon.

   [1531] linon, proposed by the same for ploion, boat.

   [1532] psepharoi, a term of doubtful meaning. May it refer to the
   karchesia?

   [1533] The text reads here ainoumenoi, for which hairoumenoi is
   proposed, or better, eoroumenoi.

   [1534] Rev. xii. 1-6, etc.

   [1535] ton Logon ton Patroon.

   [1536] gennosa ek kardias.

   [1537] Ps. cx. 1.

   [1538] Rev. xi. 3.

   [1539] [Concerning Antichrist, two advents, etc., see vol. iv. p. 219,
   this series.]

   [1540] Mal. iv. 2.

   [1541] Matt. xxiv. 15-22; Mark xiii. 14-20; Luke xxi. 20-23.

   [1542] Dan. xi. 31; xii. 11, 12. The Hebrew has 1,335 as the number in
   the second verse.

   [1543] Hippolytus reads here ep' autes instead of ep' auton, and makes
   the pronoun therefore refer to the coming.

   [1544] 2 Thess. ii. 1-11.

   [1545] Isa. xxvi. 10.

   [1546] Luke xxi. 28.

   [1547] Luke xxi. 18.

   [1548] Matt. xxiv. 27, 28.

   [1549] The word ptoma, used in the Greek as = carcase, is thus
   interpreted by Hippolytus as = fall, which is its literal sense.

   [1550] Matt. xxiv. 31.

   [1551] Ps. xix. 6.

   [1552] Isa. xxvi. 20.

   [1553] Rom. i. 17.

   [1554] Dan. xii. 2.

   [1555] Isa. xxvi. 19.

   [1556] John v. 25.

   [1557] Eph. v. 14. Epiphanius and others suppose that the words thus
   cited by Paul are taken from the apocryphal writings of Jeremiah:
   others that they are a free version of Isa. lx. 1. [But their metrical
   form justifies the criticism that they are a quotation from a hymn of
   the Church, based, very likely, on the passage from Isaiah.]

   [1558] Rev. xx. 6.

   [1559] Matt. xiii. 43.

   [1560] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [1561] Rev. xxii. 15.

   [1562] Isa. lxvi. 24.

   [1563] 1 Thess. iv. 12.

   [1564] [The immense value of these quotations, authenticating the
   Revelations and other Scriptures, must be apparent. Is not this
   treatise a voice to our own times of vast significance?]

   [1565] Tit. ii. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

