# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume IX.   Hilary of Poitiers, John of Damascus
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume IX
# father: hilary
# work: On the Trinity
# clavis: CPL-433
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Schaff English translation of De Trinitate (Books I-XII).

Introduction to the De Trinitate.

   ------------------------

   Since the circumstances in which the De Trinitate was written, and the
   character and object of the work, are discussed in the general
   Introduction, it will suffice to give here a brief summary of its
   contents, adapted, in the main, from the Benedictine edition.

   Book I. The treatise begins with St. Hilary's own spiritual history,
   the events of which are displayed, no doubt, more logically and
   symmetrically in the narrative than they had occurred in the writer's
   experience. He tells of the efforts of a pure and noble soul, impeded,
   so far as we hear, neither by unworthy desires nor by indifference, to
   find an adequate end and aim of life. He rises first to the conception
   of the old philosophers, and then by successive advances, as he learns
   more and more of the Divine revelation in Scripture, he attains the
   object of his search in the apprehension of God as revealed in the
   Catholic Faith. But this happiness is not the result of a mere
   intellectual knowledge, but of belief as well. In §§ 1-14 we have this
   advance from ignorance and fear to knowledge and peace. And here he
   might have rested, had he not been charged with the sacerdotal (i.e.,
   in the language of that time, the episcopal) office, which laid upon
   him the duty of caring for the salvation of others. And such care was
   needed, for (§§ 15, 16) heresies were abroad, and chiefly two; the
   Sabellian which said that Father and Son were mere names or aspects of
   one Divine Person, and therefore there had been no true birth of the
   Son; and the Arian (which, however, Hilary rarely calls by the name of
   its advocate, preferring to style it the new heresy') asserting more or
   less openly that the Son is created and not born, and therefore is
   different in kind from the Father, and not, in the true sense, God.
   Hilary declares (§ 17) that his purpose is to refute these heresies and
   to demonstrate the true faith by the evidence of Scripture. He demands
   from his hearers a loyal belief in the Scriptures which he will cite;
   without such faith his arguments will not profit them (§ 18); and in §
   19 he warns them of the limits of the argument from analogy, which he
   must employ, inadequate as it is in respect of the finite illustrations
   which he must use to express the infinite. Then in § 20 he speaks with
   a modest pride of his careful marshalling of the arguments which shall
   lead his readers to the right conclusion, and in §§ 21-36 he gives a
   summary of the contents of the work. He concludes the first Book (§§
   37, 38) with a prayer which expresses his certainty that what he holds
   is the truth, and entreats the Father and the Son that he may have the
   eloquence of language and the cogency of reasoning needed for the
   worthy presentation of the truth concerning Them.

   Book II. He begins with the command to baptize all nations (St. Matt.
   xxviii. 19) as a summary of the faith; this by itself would suffice
   were not explanations rendered necessary by heretical
   misrepresentations of its meaning. For (§§ 3, 4) heresy is the result
   of Scripture misunderstood; and here we must notice that Scripture is
   regarded as ground common to both sides. All accept it as literally
   true, and combine its texts as will best serve their own purposes.
   Hilary, regarding all heresies as one combined opposition to the truth,
   makes the two objections that their arguments are mutually destructive,
   and that they are modern. Then in § 5 he expresses the awe with which
   he approaches the subject. The language which he must use is utterly
   inadequate, and yet he is compelled to use it. In §§ 6, 7 he begins
   with the notion of God as Father; in §§ 8-11 he proceeds to that of God
   the Son. He states the faith as it must be believed; it is not enough
   (§§ 12, 13) to accept the truth of Christ's miracles. The mystery, as
   it is revealed in St. John i. 1-4, must be the object of faith. In §§
   14-21 he expounds this passage in the face of current objections, and
   then triumphantly asserts that all the efforts of heresy are vain (§
   22). He advances proof-texts in § 23 against each objector, and then
   points out in §§ 24, 25 our indebtedness to the infinite Divine
   condescension thus revealed. For, in all the humiliation to which
   Christ stooped the Divine Majesty was still inseparably His, and was
   manifested both in the circumstances of His birth and in His life on
   earth (§§ 26-28). The book concludes (§§ 29-35) with a statement of the
   doctrine of the Holy Ghost, as perfect as in the undeveloped state of
   that doctrine was possible.

   Book III. In §§ 1-4, the words, I in the Father and the Father in Me,
   are taken as typical. Man cannot comprehend, but only apprehend them.
   So far as they are explicable Hilary explains them. But God's self
   revelation is always mysterious. The miracles of Christ are
   inexplicable (§§ 5-8); this is God's way, and meant to check
   presumption. Human wisdom is limited, and when it passes its bounds,
   and invades the realm of faith, it becomes folly. Next, in §§ 9-17, the
   passage, St. John xvii. 1 ff., is explained as proving that in the One
   God there are the Persons of Father and of Son, and as revealing God in
   the aspect of the Father. Then, in §§ 18-21, the wonderful deeds of
   Christ are put forth as an evidence of His wonderful birth. We must not
   ask how He can be coeternal with the Father, for it is in vain that we
   should ask how He could pass through the closed door. Either question
   is mere presumption. The revelation which Christ makes (§§ 22, 23) is
   that of God as His Father; Unum sunt, non Unus. And finally, in §§ 25,
   26, he returns to the futility of reasoning. True wisdom is to believe
   where we cannot comprehend; we must trust to faith, not to proof.

   Book IV. This book is in a sense the beginning of the treatise, and is
   sometimes cited later on as the first. Its three predecessors, he says
   in § 1, had been written some time before. They had contained a
   statement of the truth concerning the Divinity of Christ, and a summary
   refutation of the various heresies. He now commences his main attack
   upon Arianism. First (§ 2) he repeats what his difficulty is; that
   human language and thought cannot cope with the Infinite. Then (§ 3) he
   tells how the Arians explain away the eternal Sonship of Christ. As a
   defence against this tampering with the truth, the Church has adopted
   the term Homoousion (§§ 4-7); Hilary explains and defends its use. In §
   8 he shews, by a collection of the passages of Scripture which they
   wrest to their own purposes, that such a definition is necessary, and
   in §§ 9, 10 that their use of these passages is dishonest. In § 11 he
   tells us exactly what the Arian teaching is, and sets it forth in one
   of their own formularies, the Epistola Arii ad Alexandrum (§§ 12, 13).
   In § 14 this doctrine is denounced; it does not explain, but explains
   away. The proclamation made through Moses, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy
   God is One, upon which the Arians take their stand, reveals only one
   aspect of the truth (§ 15). It does not exhaust the truth; for God is
   represented as not one solitary Person in the history of creation (§§
   16-22), in the life of Abraham (§§ 23-31), and in that of Moses (§§
   32-34). And this again is the teaching of the Prophets, as is shewn by
   passages selected from Isaiah, Hosea, and Jeremiah (§§ 35-42). All the
   evidence thus collected shews that in the Godhead there is both Father
   and Son, and that the Son is God.

   Book V. Hilary now points out (§ 1) the controversial strength of the
   Arian position. If he is silent in face of their assertion, they will
   claim that he agrees with them that the Son is God only in some
   inferior sense. On the other hand, if he opposes them, he will seem to
   be contradicting the Mosaic revelation of the Divine unity. In § 2 he
   recapitulates the argument of Book IV., that the witness of Scripture
   proves that God is not a solitary Person; that, as he says, there is
   God and God. But the Arians had a further loophole; their creed
   asserted (§ 3) one true God. They might argue that Christ is indeed
   God, but of a nature different from that of the Father. In refutation
   of this Hilary goes once more through the history of creation (§§
   4-10), proving that the narrative reveals not only the Son's share in
   that work, but also His equality and oneness of nature with the Father;
   in other words, that He is not only God but true God. The same truth is
   demonstrated from the life of Abraham (§§ 11-16). Moreover, these
   self-revelations of the Son (as the Angel, on various occasions) are
   anticipations of the Incarnation. He was first seen in flesh,
   afterwards born in flesh. The Arians concentrate their attention on the
   humble conditions of Christ's human life, and so, from want of a
   comprehensive view, fail to discern His true Godhead. But Hilary will
   not anticipate the evidence of the Gospels (§§ 17, 18). He returns to
   the Old Testament, and proves his point from Jacob's visions (§§ 19,
   20), and by the revelations made to Moses (§§ 21-23). After a summary
   and an enforcement of the preceding arguments (§§ 24, 25), he proceeds
   to prove from certain passages of Isaiah that the Prophet recognised
   the Son as true God (§§ 26-31), and that St. Paul understood him in
   that sense (§§ 32, 33). Then, in §§ 34, 35, the result which has been
   attained is dwelt upon. Hilary shews that it is the Arians who fail to
   recognise the one true God; for Christ is true God, yet not a second
   God. Finally, in §§ 36-39, Moses, Isaiah, and Jeremiah are adduced as
   testifying that Christ is God from God, and God in God.

   Book VI. Hilary begins by lamenting the wide extension of Arianism; his
   love for souls leads him to combat the heresy, whose insidiousness
   makes it the more dangerous (§§ 1-4). He repeats in §§ 5, 6 the same
   Arian creed which he had given in Book IV. The heretics here gain the
   appearance of orthodoxy by condemning errors inconsistent with their
   own; and this condemnation is designed to cast upon the Catholic faith
   the suspicion of complicity in such errors. Hence he must postpone his
   appeal to the New Testament till he has examined them (§§ 7, 8).
   Accordingly in §§ 9-12 he explains successively the doctrines of
   Valentinus, Manichæus, Sabellius and Hieracas, and shews that the
   Church rejects them all, as she does (§ 13) the doctrine which the
   Arians in their creed have falsely assigned to her. Their object is to
   deny that the Son is coeternal with the Father and of one substance
   with Him (§§ 14, 15); but this denial is clean contrary to Scripture,
   which it is blasphemy to oppose (§§ 16, 17). The Arians would make a
   creature of Christ (§ 18), to Whom, in §§ 19-21, Hilary turns with an
   impassioned declaration of certainty that He is very God. He then
   resumes the argument, and proves that Christ is Son by birth, not by
   adoption, from the words both of Father and of Son as recorded in the
   Gospel (§§ 22-25). This is confirmed (§§ 26, 27) by the Gospel account
   of His acts, which are otherwise inexplicable. The argument is clenched
   by a discussion of St. John vii. 28, 29, and viii. 42 (§§ 28-31). The
   true Sonship of Christ is further proved by the faith of the Apostles,
   whose certainty increased with their knowledge (§§ 31-35), and
   especially by that of St. Peter (§§ 36-38), of St. John (§§ 39-43), and
   of St. Paul (§§ 44, 45). To reject such a weight of testimony is to
   prefer Antichrist to Christ (§ 46). And, moreover, we have the witness
   of those for whom He wrought miracles, of devils, of the Jews, the
   Apostles in peril on the sea, of the centurion by the Cross, that
   Christ is truly the Son of God (§§ 47-52).

   Book VII. The Arians are adepts at concealing their meaning; at the use
   of Scripture terms in unscriptural senses (§ 1). They have already been
   refuted by the proof that Christ is the true and coeternal Son; and
   Hilary now advances to the proof of the true Divinity of Christ, which
   is logically inseparable from His true Sonship (§ 2). But the danger is
   great lest, in attacking one heresy, he should use language which would
   sanction others (§ 3). Yet the truth is one, while heresies are
   manifold. Each of them can be trusted to demolish the others, while
   none can establish its own case. He illustrates this by the mutually
   destructive arguments of Sabellius, Arius and Photinus (§§ 5-7). Christ
   is proved to be God by the name God which is given Him in Scripture:
   The Word was God (§§ 8, 9). The name is His in the strict sense, and
   not any derivative meaning (§§ 10, 11). Yet Father and Son are not two,
   but one God (§ 13). Being the Son of God, He has the nature of God, and
   therefore is God (§§ 14-17), and yet not one Person with the Father (§
   18). Again, His power, manifested in His works, proves His Godhead (§
   19), as does the fact that all judgment has been given Him by the
   Father (§ 20). Christ's own words display the truth (§ 21). The Arians
   are blind to the plain sense of Scripture, and are more blasphemous
   than the Jews; Christ's reply to the latter meets the objections of the
   former (§§ 22-24). He asserts His unity with the Father (§ 25), and
   makes His works the proof (§ 26). The Father is in the Son and the Son
   is in the Father (§ 27): this is illustrated by the transmission of
   physical properties from parent to child and from flame to flame (§§
   28-30). In fact, the Catholic is the only rational explanation of the
   words of Scripture (§§ 31, 32). Again (§§ 33-38), the way to the Father
   is through the Son, and knowledge of the Son is knowledge of the
   Father. This would be impossible, were not the Son God in the same
   sense in which the Father is God. Thus the contrary doctrines of
   Sabellius and of Arius are confuted; there is neither one Person, nor
   yet two Gods (§§ 39, 40). Christ calls upon us to believe the truth,
   and belief is not only possible but reasonable (§ 41).

   Book VIII. Piety is necessary in a Bishop, but he needs also knowledge
   and dialectical skill in the face of such heresies as were rampant in
   Hilary's day; for the heretics outdo the orthodox in zeal, and are
   masters in the art of devising pitfalls for the unwary reasoner (§§
   1-3). He maintains (§ 4) that hitherto he has established his case; and
   now turns, in § 5, to the Arian interpretation of I and the Father are
   One, as meaning that They are one in will, not in nature. The fallacy
   of this is shewn by a comparison of the unity of Christians in Christ
   (§§ 7-9); a unity which is confessedly one of nature, yet is not more
   natural than that of Father and Son, of which it is a type (§ 10). And
   indeed the words, I and the Father are One, are ill-adapted to express
   a mere harmony of will (§ 11). This gift of unity of nature could not
   be given, as it is, through the Incarnation and the Eucharist, to
   Christians, unless the Givers Themselves possessed it; i.e. unless
   Father and Son were One God (§§ 12-14). As a matter of fact, we have a
   perfect union, through the mediation of Christ, with the Father; and it
   is a unity of nature, a permanent abiding; an assurance to us of the
   indwelling of Father in Son and Son in Father, and of the fact that
   Christ is not a creature, one in will with the Father, but a Son, one
   in nature with Him (§§ 15-18). For, again (§§ 19-21), the Mission of
   the Holy Ghost is jointly from the Father and the Son; He is called
   sometimes the Spirit of the Father, sometimes the Spirit of the Son,
   and this is a further proof of the unity in nature of Father and Son.
   Hilary now enquires (§§ 22-25) into the senses in which Scripture
   speaks of the Holy Spirit. Sometimes this title is given to the Father,
   sometimes to the Son, in both cases to save us from corporeal
   conceptions of God. But it is also used, in the strict sense, of the
   Paraclete, as on the day of Pentecost. Now the Divine Spirit dwells in
   Christians; but this Spirit, whether styled the Spirit of God, or the
   Spirit of Christ, or the Spirit of Truth, proceeding from the Father
   and sent by the Son, is only one Spirit. Hence the Godhead is One, and
   the nature of the Persons within that Godhead one also (§§ 26, 27). He
   next points out (§ 28) that the Arians are inconsistent in worshipping
   Christ, and yet styling Him a creature; for thus they fall under the
   curse of the Law, and forfeit the Holy Spirit. Again (§§ 29-34) the
   powers and graces bestowed by God are described indiscriminately as
   gifts of one or another Person in the Godhead. The Son, therefore, as a
   Giver, must be one with the Father, Who is also a Giver, and one with
   the Spirit. There is One God and One Lord (§ 35); if we deny that the
   Son is God, we must also deny that the Father is Lord; which is absurd.
   They are One God, with one Spirit, but not one Person (§ 36). St. Paul
   expressly says that Christ is God over all; an expression which must,
   like all the Apostle's teaching, bear the Catholic sense, and is
   incompatible with Arianism (§§ 37-39). The supporters of Arianism are
   thus alien from the faith (§ 40). After a restatement of the truth (§
   41), Hilary proceeds to deduce the Divine nature of the Son from the
   fact that He has been sealed by the Father (§§ 42-45). This sealing
   makes Him the Father's counterpart, Whose Image He thus becomes, though
   in the form of a servant. If He were thus the Image of God after His
   Incarnation, how much more before that condescension (§ 46). In § 47 he
   again denies that this teaching reduces the Father and the Son to one
   Person; and then (§§ 48-50) works out the sense in which Christ is the
   Image of God. It means that They are of one nature and of one power,
   and that the Son is the Firstborn, through Whom all things were
   created. But creation and also reconciliation is the joint work of
   Father and Son (§ 51). Christ could not have stated more explicitly
   than He has done His unity with the Father; the recognition of this
   truth is the test of the true Church (§ 52). Heresy is blind to the
   essential difference between the life-giving Christ and the created
   universe, which owes its life to Him (§ 53). In Him dwells the whole
   fulness of the Godhead bodily. The Indweller and the Indwelt are Both
   Persons, yet are One God; and the whole Godhead dwells in Each (§§
   54-56).

   Book IX. After a summary (§ 1) of the results already obtained, Hilary
   returns, in § 2, to certain of the Arian proof-texts, and warns his
   readers that their life depends on the recognition in Christ of true
   God and true man, for it is this twofold nature which makes Him the
   Mediator (§ 3). Universal analogy and our consciousness of the capacity
   to rise to the life in God convince us of these two natures in Him, Who
   makes this rise possible (§ 4). But heresy lays hold of words spoken by
   Christ Incarnate, appropriate to His humility as Man, and assigns them
   to Him in His previous state; thus they make Him deny His true Godhead.
   But His utterances before the Incarnation, during His life on earth,
   and after His return to glory, must be carefully distinguished (§§ 5,
   6). Hilary now examines the aims and achievements of Christ Incarnate,
   and shews that His work for men was a Divine work, accomplished by Him
   for us only because He was throughout both God and Man, the two natures
   in Him being inseparable (§§ 7-14). After reaching this conclusion from
   a general survey of Christ's life on earth, he examines in the light of
   it the Arian arguments from isolated words. They assert that Christ
   refused to be called Good or Master. He refused neither title, and yet
   declared that both belong to God only (§§ 15-18). And, indeed, He could
   not have associated Himself more closely than He did with the Father,
   while yet He kept His Person distinct (§ 19). The Father Himself bears
   witness to the Son; and the sin and loss of the Jews is this, that,
   seeing the Father's works done by Christ, they did not see in Him the
   Son (§§ 20, 21). The honour and glory of Christ is inseparable from
   that of God (§§ 22, 23). The Scribe did well to confess the Divine
   unity, but was still outside the Kingdom because He did not believe in
   Christ as God (§§ 24-27). Next, the Arian argument from the words, This
   is life eternal, that they may know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus
   Christ Whom Thou hast sent, is refuted by comparison with cognate
   passages (§§ 28-35). For, indeed, if the Father be the only true God,
   the Son must also be the only true God (§ 36). That Divine nature which
   is common to Father and Son is subject to no limitations, and the
   eternal generation can be illustrated by no analogy of created things
   (§ 37). Christ took humanity, and, since the Father's nature did not
   share in this, the unity was so far impaired. But humanity has been
   raised in Christ to God; and this could only be because His unity in
   the Divine nature with the Father was perfect. Otherwise the flesh
   which Christ took could not have entered into the Divine glory (§ 38).
   There is but one glory of Father and of Son; the Son sought in the
   Incarnation not glory for the Word but for the flesh (§§ 39, 40). The
   glory of Father and Son is one; in that unity the Son bestows, as well
   as receives, glory (§§ 41, 42), and this glory, common to Both, is
   evidence that the Divine nature also is common to Both (§ 42). Again,
   the Arians allege the words, The Son can do nothing of Himself, which
   Hilary shews, by an examination of the context, to be a support of the
   Catholic cause (§§ 43-46). The Son does the Father's work, not under
   compulsion as an inferior, but because They are One. His will is free,
   yet in perfect harmony with that of the Father, because of their unity
   of nature (§§ 47-50). The Arians also appeal to the text, The Father is
   greater than I. The Father is, in fact, greater, first as being the
   Unbegotten, and secondly inasmuch as the Son has condescended to the
   state of man, yet without forfeiting His Godhead (§ 51). But He is not
   greater in nature than the Son, Who is His Image; or rather, the
   Begetter is the greater, while the Son, as the Begotten, is not less
   than He, for, although begotten, He had no beginning of existence (§§
   52-57). Next, the allegation of ignorance, based on St. Mark xiii. 32,
   and therefore of difference in nature from God Omniscient is refuted
   (§§ 58-62), both by express statements of Scripture and by a
   consideration of the Divine character. It is only in figurative senses
   that God is stated in the Old Testament sometimes to come to know,
   sometimes to be ignorant of, particular facts (§§ 63, 64). And so it is
   with Christ; His ignorance is but a wise and merciful concealment of
   knowledge (§§ 65-67). Yet the Arians, though they admit that Christ,
   being superior to man, knows all the secrets of humanity, assert that
   He cannot penetrate the mysteries of God (§ 68). But Christ expressly
   declares that He can and does, for Each is in the Other and is mirrored
   in the Other (§ 69). The ignorance can be nothing but concealment. Only
   the Father knows, i.e. He has told none but the Son; the Son does not
   know, i.e. He wills not to reveal His knowledge (§§ 70, 71). God is
   unlimited; unlimited therefore in knowledge. The nature of Father and
   Son being one, it is impossible that the Son should be ignorant of what
   the Father knows. As in will, so in knowledge, They are One (§§ 72-74).
   And the Apostles, by repeating their question after the Resurrection,
   shew that they were aware that His ignorance meant reserve. And Christ
   did not, this time, speak of ignorance, though He withheld the
   knowledge which they asked (§ 75).

   Book X. Theological differences are not the result of honest reasoning,
   but of reasoning distorted, as in the case of the Arians, by
   preconceived opinions, whose cause is sin and their result hypocrisy
   (§§ 1-3). Hilary has fallen on the evil times foretold by the Apostle;
   truth is banished and so is he, yet his sufferings do not affect his
   joy in the Lord (§ 4). In the preceding books he has stated the exact
   truth, of which he now gives a summary (§§ 5-8). But the further
   objection is raised that, while God is impassible, Christ in His
   Passion suffered fear and pain (§ 9). But He Who taught others not to
   fear death could not fear it Himself (§ 10). He died of His own free
   will, knowing that in three days His Body and Spirit would rise again
   (§§ 11, 12). Nor did He fear bodily tortures, for pain is an affection
   of the weak human soul, which inhabits our body, and is not felt by the
   body itself (§§ 13, 14). And, although the Virgin fulfilled entirely
   the part of a human mother, yet the Begetter was Divine. Christ, when
   He took the form of a servant, remained still in the form of God, and
   was born perfect even as the Begetter was perfect, for Mary was not the
   cause, but only the means, of His human life (§§ 15, 16). St. Paul
   draws a clear distinction between the First Man, who was earthy, and
   the Second Man, Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and in Whom what
   is Flesh, in one aspect, is Bread from heaven in another (§§ 17, 18).
   He is therefore perfect Man as well as perfect God, and did not inherit
   the flesh or the soul of Adam. His whole human nature is derived from
   the Holy Ghost, by Whom the Virgin conceived (§§ 19, 20). Again (§ 21)
   the Arians argue that the Word was in Jesus in the same sense in which
   the Spirit was in the Prophets, and reproach the Catholics with denying
   the true humanity of Christ. Hilary replies that just as Christ was the
   cause of the birth of His own human Body, so He was the Author of His
   own human Soul: for no soul is transmitted. Thus His human nature is
   complete; He has taken the form of a servant, but all the while He is
   in the form of God, i.e. He Who is God and also Man is one Christ, Who
   was born and died and rose (§ 22). In all this He endured passion but
   not pain, even as air or water, if pierced by a blow, is unaffected by
   it. The blow is real, and the Passion was real; but it was not
   inflicted on our limited humanity but on a human nature which could
   walk on water and pass through locked doors (§ 23). If it be argued
   that He wept, hungered, thirsted, Hilary answers that He could wipe
   away tears and supply needs, and therefore was not subject to them;
   that though He endured them, as true Man, He was not affected by them.
   Such sufferings are habitual with men, and He endured them to shew that
   He had a true Body (§ 24). For such a Body He had, although (since He
   was not conceived in sin) one free from the defects of our bodies; not
   sinful flesh, but only the likeness of sinful flesh. For He was the
   Word made Flesh, and continued to be true God as He had been before (§§
   25, 26). The Lord of glory suffered neither fear nor pain in His
   Passion, as is shewn by the powers which He exercised on the verge of
   death (§§ 27, 28). His utterances in the Garden and on the Cross are
   not evidences of pain or fear, for they may be matched by lofty
   expressions of calmness and hope (§§ 29-32). Thus no proof of fear or
   pain or weakness can be drawn from the circumstances of the Passion.
   Nor was the Cross a shame, for it was His road from humiliation to
   glory (§ 33), nor the descent to hell a degradation, for all the while
   He was in heaven. How different the faith of the Thief on the cross to
   that of the Arian! (§ 34). The argument is summed up in § 35. Next the
   Agony is considered. Christ does not say that He is sorrowful on
   account of death, but unto death. It is anxiety on the Apostles'
   account, lest their faith should fail; a fear which reached to His
   death, not beyond, for He knew that after His death His glory would
   revive their faith. This was the fear in which He was comforted by the
   Angel; for Himself He was fearless, being conscious of His Godhead (§§
   36-43). He was free from pain and fear, for it is the sinful body which
   transmits these affections to the soul. Yet even human bodies rise
   sometimes superior to them, e.g. Daniel and other heroes of faith: how
   much more Christ (§§ 44-46). In the same way we must understand His
   bearing our suffering and our sin (§ 47), for, as St. Paul says, His
   Passion was itself a triumph (§ 48). The complaint that He was forsaken
   by the Father is similarly explained (§ 49). The purpose of the Arian
   arguments is to displace the truth of Christ as very God and very man
   in favour of one or other heretical hypothesis, all of which the Church
   rejects (§§ 50-52). Our reason must recognise its limitations and be
   content to believe, without understanding, apparently contradictory
   truths (§§ 53, 54). Christ weeping over Jerusalem and at the grave of
   Lazarus is equally inexplicable, yet certain (§§ 55, 56). His laying
   down and taking again His life is accounted for by the two natures
   inseparably united in one Person (§§ 57-62). After a short summary (§
   63) he returns to the union of two natures, which is the
   stumbling-block of worldly wisdom (§ 64), and shews it to be the only
   reasonable explanation of the facts (§§ 65, 66). As St. Paul says, our
   belief must be according to the Scriptures; the necessity and the
   rewards of faith (§§ 67-70). The seeming infirmity of Christ was
   assumed for our instruction and for our salvation.

   Book XI. The Faith is one, even as God is One; but the faiths of
   heretics are many (§§ 1, 2). Hilary has now demonstrated the truth
   about Christ, so that it cannot be denied; it is attested also by
   miracles even in his own day (§ 3). The Arians preach another, a
   created Christ; and in making Christ a creature they proclaim another
   God, not a Father but a Creator (§ 4). The Son, as the Image, is of one
   nature with the Father; if He is inferior He is not the Image (§ 5).
   But the Arians explain the oneness away by arguments from His
   condescension to our estate (§ 6), and, even after His Resurrection,
   plead that He confesses His inequality. They argue thus from 1 Cor. xv.
   24-28, a passage to which the rest of this book is devoted (§§ 7, 8).
   But we must recognise the mysteriousness of the truth, accepting the
   two sides of it, both clearly revealed though we cannot reconcile them
   (§ 9). They regard only one aspect; Hilary in reply proves once more
   that Christ is both born from God, and Himself God (§§ 10-12). But at
   His Incarnation He began to have as Lord the God Who had been His
   Father eternally (§ 13), and when He said that He was ascending to His
   God, He spoke as when He calls us His brethren (§§ 14, 15). Thus there
   are two senses in which God is the Father of Christ; and He Who is
   Father to Christ the Son is Lord to Christ the Servant (§§ 16, 17). And
   it was to Him as Servant that the Psalmist said, Thy God hath anointed
   Thee, the words would have no meaning if addressed to Him as Son (§§
   18, 19). It is through this lower nature that He is our Brother and God
   our Father, and He the Mediator (§ 20). But it is argued that His
   subjection at the last and the delivery of the kingdom to the Father is
   a proof of inequality. The passage must be taken as a whole (§§ 21,
   22). There are some truths which it is difficult for man to grasp, and
   if we misunderstand them we must not be ashamed to confess our error
   (§§ 23, 24). In this passage the Arians aid their case by changing the
   order of the prophecy (§§ 25-27). The end means a final and enduring
   state, not the coming to an end (§ 28), and though He delivers up the
   kingdom He does not cease to reign (§ 29). His subjection to the Father
   and the subjection of all things to Him is next considered; in one
   sense it is figurative language, in another it proves the unity of
   Father and Son. The subjection of the Son means His partaking in the
   glory of the Father (§§ 30-36). The Transfiguration shews the glory of
   Christ's Body; a glory which the faithful shall share (§§ 37, 38). The
   righteous are His kingdom, which He, as Man, shall deliver to the
   Father, for By man came also the resurrection of the dead (§ 39). And
   at last God shall be all in all, humanity in Christ not being
   discarded, but glorified and received into the Godhead (§ 40). Christ,
   as well as St. Paul, has foretold this (§§ 41, 42). The Arian
   misrepresentation of this truth is mere folly (§ 43). Any rational
   explanation must assume that God's majesty cannot be augmented, even as
   it cannot be measured (§§ 44, 45), while our reason is limited, and so
   contrasted with the Divine infinity. God cannot become greater than He
   was in becoming All in all. Father and Son, after as before, must Each
   be as He was (§§ 46-48). All was done for us that we might be
   glorified, being conformed to the likeness of Him Who is the Image of
   the Father (§ 49).

   Book XII. Hilary gives a final explanation of the great Arian text, The
   Lord created me for a beginning of His ways; the words must not be
   taken literally. Christ is not created, but Creator (§§ 1-5). If He is
   a creature, the Father also is a creature, for They are One in nature
   and in honour (§§ 6, 7). The similar passage, I begat Thee from the
   womb, is figurative; elsewhere God's Hands and Eyes are spoken of. The
   sense is that the Son is God from God (§§ 8-10). Nor was Christ made;
   He is the Son, not the handiwork, of the Father (§§ 11, 12). And His
   Sonship is immediate, not derivative like ours, or like that of Israel
   His firstborn. This latter kind of sonship has a definite beginning of
   existence, and an origin out of nothing (§§ 13-16). The Arian arguments
   fail to prove that the Sonship of Christ has either of these characters
   (§§ 17, 18). Truth is to be attained not by self-confident arguing but
   by faith (§ 19), yet it is not enough for us to avoid their reasonings;
   we must overthrow them (§ 20). The Son was born from eternity, being
   the Son of the eternal Father (§ 21). The objection that sonship
   involves beginning does not hold in His case (§§ 22, 23). The Son has
   all that the Father has; He has therefore eternity and an unconditioned
   existence (§ 24). He is from the Eternal, and therefore eternal
   Himself; from the Eternal, and therefore not from nothing. Reason
   cannot grasp, and therefore cannot refute, this. We must not assert
   that there was a time before He was born, a time when He was not (§§
   25-27). We must not argue, from the analogy of our own birth, that the
   truth is impossible (§ 28), nor that, because of His eternal existence,
   the Son was not born (§§ 29-32). Again, the Arians deny the eternal
   Fatherhood of God; He always existed, they say, but was not always the
   Father. This contradicts Scripture (§§ 33, 34). They argue that Wisdom
   is said to be the first of God's creatures; but creation, in this
   sense, is a synonym for generation, and Wisdom was antecedent to
   creation (§§ 35-38). Wisdom is coeternal with God (§ 39), and shared
   His eternal purpose of creation (§§ 40, 41). Nor may we believe that
   Christ was begotten simply in order to perform the creative work, as
   God's Minister, for Wisdom took part in the design as well as in the
   execution (§§ 42, 43). And again, Wisdom is spoken of as created, as an
   indication of Her control over created things (§ 44). The creation to
   be a beginning of God's ways is a separate event from the eternal
   generation. It means that Christ, as the Way of Life, under the Old
   Covenant took the semblance, under the New Covenant the substance, of
   the creature man, to lead us into the way. The two senses must not be
   confused (§§ 45-49). Yet mere inaccuracy of speech, without heretical
   intent, is not unpardonable (§ 50). After a final assertion (§ 51) of
   faith in Christ as God from God, the eternal Son, Hilary appeals to the
   Almighty Father, declaring his creed, his consciousness of human
   infirmity and of the need of faith (§§ 52, 53). The Son is the
   Only-begotten of God, the Second because He is the Son (§ 54). The Holy
   Ghost proceeds from the Father and is sent by the Son. He also is no
   creature, but of one nature with the God Whose mysteries He knows, and
   ineffable like Him Whose Spirit He is (§ 55). Finally, Hilary prays
   that, as he was baptized, so he may remain in the faith of Three
   Persons in One God.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   On the Trinity.

   ------------------------

   Book I.

   1. When I was seeking an employment adequate to the powers of human
   life and righteous in itself, whether prompted by nature or suggested
   by the researches of the wise, whereby I might attain to some result
   worthy of that Divine gift of understanding which has been given us,
   many things occurred to me which in general esteem were thought to
   render life both useful and desirable. And especially that which now,
   as always in the past, is regarded as most to be desired, leisure
   combined with wealth, came before my mind. The one without the other
   seemed rather a source of evil than an opportunity for good, for
   leisure in poverty is felt to be almost an exile from life itself,
   while wealth possessed amid anxiety is in itself an affliction,
   rendered the worse by the deeper humiliation which he must suffer who
   loses, after possessing, the things that most are wished and sought.
   And yet, though these two embrace the highest and best of the luxuries
   of life, they seem not far removed from the normal pleasures of the
   beasts which, as they roam through shady places rich in herbage, enjoy
   at once their safety from toil and the abundance of their food. For if
   this be regarded as the best and most perfect conduct of the life of
   man, it results that one object is common, though the range of feelings
   differ, to us and the whole unreasoning animal world, since all of
   them, in that bounteous provision and absolute leisure which nature
   bestows, have full scope for enjoyment without anxiety for possession.

   2. I believe that the mass of mankind have spurned from themselves and
   censured in others this acquiescence in a thoughtless, animal life, for
   no other reason than that nature herself has taught them that it is
   unworthy of humanity to hold themselves born only to gratify their
   greed and their sloth, and ushered into life for no high aim of
   glorious deed or fair accomplishment, and that this very life was
   granted without the power of progress towards immortality; a life,
   indeed, which then we should confidently assert did not deserve to be
   regarded as a gift of God, since, racked by pain and laden with
   trouble, it wastes itself upon itself from the blank mind of infancy to
   the wanderings of age. I believe that men, prompted by nature herself,
   have raised themselves through teaching and practice to the virtues
   which we name patience and temperance and forbearance, under the
   conviction that right living means right action and right thought, and
   that Immortal God has not given life only to end in death; for none can
   believe that the Giver of good has bestowed the pleasant sense of life
   in order that it may be overcast by the gloomy fear of dying.

   3. And yet, though I could not tax with folly and uselessness this
   counsel of theirs to keep the soul free from blame, and evade by
   foresight or elude by skill or endure with patience the troubles of
   life, still I could not regard these men as guides competent to lead me
   to the good and happy Life. Their precepts were platitudes, on the mere
   level of human impulse; animal instinct could not fail to comprehend
   them, and he who understood but disobeyed would have fallen into an
   insanity baser than animal unreason. Moreover, my soul was eager not
   merely to do the things, neglect of which brings shame and suffering,
   but to know the God and Father Who had given this great gift, to Whom,
   it felt, it owed its whole self, Whose service was its true honour, on
   Whom all its hopes were fixed, in Whose lovingkindness, as in a safe
   home and haven, it could rest amid all the troubles of this anxious
   life. It was inflamed with a passionate desire to apprehend Him or to
   know Him.

   4. Some of these teachers brought forward large households of dubious
   deities, and under the persuasion that there is a sexual activity in
   divine beings narrated births and lineages from god to god. Others
   asserted that there were gods greater and less, of distinction
   proportionate to their power. Some denied the existence of any gods
   whatever, and confined their reverence to a nature which, in their
   opinion, owes its being to chance-led vibrations and collisions. On the
   other hand, many followed the common belief in asserting the existence
   of a God, but proclaimed Him heedless and indifferent to the affairs of
   men. Again, some worshipped in the elements of earth and air the actual
   bodily and visible forms of created things; and, finally, some made
   their gods dwell within images of men or of beasts, tame or wild, of
   birds or of snakes, and confined the Lord of the universe and Father of
   infinity within these narrow prisons of metal or stone or wood. These,
   I was sure, could be no exponents of truth, for though they were at one
   in the absurdity, the foulness, the impiety of their observances, they
   were at variance concerning the essential articles of their senseless
   belief. My soul was distracted amid all these claims, yet still it
   pressed along that profitable road which leads inevitably to the true
   knowledge of God. It could not hold that neglect of a world created by
   Himself was worthily to be attributed to God, or that deities endowed
   with sex, and lines of begetters and begotten, were compatible with the
   pure and mighty nature of the Godhead. Nay, rather, it was sure that
   that which is Divine and eternal must be one without distinction of
   sex, for that which is self-existent cannot have left outside itself
   anything superior to itself. Hence omnipotence and eternity are the
   possession of One only, for omnipotence is incapable of degrees of
   strength or weakness, and eternity of priority or succession. In God we
   must worship absolute eternity and absolute power.

   5. While my mind was dwelling on these and on many like thoughts, I
   chanced upon the books which, according to the tradition of the Hebrew
   faith, were written by Moses and the prophets, and found in these words
   spoken by God the Creator testifying of Himself I Am that I Am, and
   again, He that is hath sent me unto you [508] .' I confess that I was
   amazed to find in them an indication concerning God so exact that it
   expressed in the terms best adapted to human understanding an
   unattainable insight into the mystery of the Divine nature. For no
   property of God which the mind can grasp is more characteristic of Him
   than existence, since existence, in the absolute sense, cannot be
   predicated of that which shall come to an end, or of that which has had
   a beginning, and He who now joins continuity of being with the
   possession of perfect felicity could not in the past, nor can in the
   future, be non-existent; for whatsoever is Divine can neither be
   originated nor destroyed. Wherefore, since God's eternity is
   inseparable from Himself, it was worthy of Him to reveal this one
   thing, that He is, as the assurance of His absolute eternity.

   6. For such an indication of God's infinity the words I Am that I Am'
   were clearly adequate; but, in addition, we needed to apprehend the
   operation of His majesty and power. For while absolute existence is
   peculiar to Him Who, abiding eternally, had no beginning in a past
   however remote, we hear again an utterance worthy of Himself issuing
   from the eternal and Holy God, Who says, Who holdeth the heaven in His
   palm and the earth in His hand [509] , and again, The heaven is My
   throne and the earth is the footstool of My feet. What house will ye
   build Me or what shall be the place of My rest [510] ? The whole heaven
   is held in the palm of God, the whole earth grasped in His hand. Now
   the word of God, profitable as it is to the cursory thought of a pious
   mind, reveals a deeper meaning to the patient student than to the
   momentary hearer. For this heaven which is held in the palm of God is
   also His throne, and the earth which is grasped in His hand is also the
   footstool beneath His feet. This was not written that from throne and
   footstool, metaphors drawn from the posture of one sitting, we should
   conclude that He has extension in space, as of a body, for that which
   is His throne and footstool is also held in hand and palm by that
   infinite Omnipotence. It was written that in all born and created
   things God might be known within them and without, overshadowing and
   indwelling, surrounding all and interfused through all, since palm and
   hand, which hold, reveal the might of His external control, while
   throne and footstool, by their support of a sitter, display the
   subservience of outward things to One within Who, Himself outside them,
   encloses all in His grasp, yet dwells within the external world which
   is His own. In this wise does God, from within and from without,
   control and correspond to the universe; being infinite He is present in
   all things, in Him Who is infinite all are included. In devout thoughts
   such as these my soul, engrossed in the pursuit of truth, took its
   delight. For it seemed that the greatness of God so far surpassed the
   mental powers of His handiwork, that however far the limited mind of
   man might strain in the hazardous effort to define Him, the gap was not
   lessened between the finite nature which struggled and the boundless
   infinity that lay beyond its ken [511] , I had come by reverent
   reflection on my own part to understand this, but I found it confirmed
   by the words of the prophet, Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit? Or
   whither shall I flee from Thy face? If I ascend up into heaven, Thou
   art there; if I go down into hell, Thou art there also; if I have taken
   my wings before dawn and made my dwelling in the uttermost parts of the
   sea (Thou art there). For thither Thy hand shall guide me and Thy right
   hand shall hold me [512] . There is no space where God is not; space
   does not exist apart from Him. He is in heaven, in hell, beyond the
   seas; dwelling in all things and enveloping all. Thus He embraces, and
   is embraced by, the universe, confined to no part of it but pervading
   all.

   7. Therefore, although my soul drew joy from the apprehension of this
   august and unfathomable Mind, because it could worship as its own
   Father and Creator so limitless an Infinity, yet with a still more
   eager desire it sought to know the true aspect of its infinite and
   eternal Lord, that it might be able to believe that that immeasurable
   Deity was apparelled in splendour befitting the beauty of His wisdom.
   Then, while the devout soul was baffled and astray through its own
   feebleness, it caught from the prophet's voice this scale of comparison
   for God, admirably expressed, By the greatness of His works and the
   beauty of the things that He hath made the Creator of worlds is rightly
   discerned [513] . The Creator of great things is supreme in greatness,
   of beautiful things in beauty. Since the work transcends our thoughts,
   all thought must be transcended by the Maker. Thus heaven and air and
   earth and seas are fair: fair also the whole universe, as the Greeks
   agree, who from its beautiful ordering call it kosmos, that is, order.
   But if our thought can estimate this beauty of the universe by a
   natural instinct--an instinct such as we see in certain birds and
   beasts whose voice, though it fall below the level of our
   understanding, yet has a sense clear to them though they cannot utter
   it, and in which, since all speech is the expression of some thought,
   there lies a meaning patent to themselves--must not the Lord of this
   universal beauty be recognised as Himself most beautiful amid all the
   beauty that surrounds Him? For though the splendour of His eternal
   glory overtax our mind's best powers, it cannot fail to see that He is
   beautiful. We must in truth confess that God is most beautiful, and
   that with a beauty which, though it transcend our comprehension, forces
   itself upon our perception.

   8. Thus my mind, full of these results which by its own reflection and
   the teaching of Scripture it had attained, rested with assurance, as on
   some peaceful watch-tower, upon that glorious conclusion, recognising
   that its true nature made it capable of one homage to its Creator, and
   of none other, whether greater or less; the homage namely of conviction
   that His is a greatness too vast for our comprehension but not for our
   faith. For a reasonable faith is akin to reason and accepts its aid,
   even though that same reason cannot cope with the vastness of eternal
   Omnipotence.

   9. Beneath all these thoughts lay an instinctive hope, which
   strengthened my assertion of the faith, in some perfect blessedness
   hereafter to be earned by devout thoughts concerning God and upright
   life; the reward, as it were, that awaits the triumphant warrior. For
   true faith in God would pass unrewarded, if the soul be destroyed by
   death, and quenched in the extinction of bodily life. Even unaided
   reason pleaded that it was unworthy of God to usher man into an
   existence which has some share of His thought and wisdom, only to await
   the sentence of life withdrawn and of eternal death; to create him out
   of nothing to take his place in the World, only that when he has taken
   it he may perish. For, on the only rational theory of creation, its
   purpose was that things non-existent should come into being, not that
   things existing should cease to be.

   10. Yet my soul was weighed down with fear both for itself and for the
   body. It retained a firm conviction, and a devout loyalty to the true
   faith concerning God, but had come to harbour a deep anxiety concerning
   itself and the bodily dwelling which must, it thought, share its
   destruction. While in this state, in addition to its knowledge of the
   teaching of the Law and Prophets, it learned the truths taught by the
   Apostle in the Gospel;--In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
   with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.
   All things were made through Him, and without Him was not anything
   made. That which was made in Him is life [514] , and the life was the
   light of men, and the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness
   apprehended it not. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
   He came for witness, that he might bear witness of the light. That was
   the true light, which lighteneth every man that cometh into this world.
   He was in the world, and the world was made through Him, and the world
   knew Him not. He came unto His own things, and they that were His own
   received Him not. But to as many as received Him He gave power to
   become sons of God, even to them that believe on His Name; which were
   born, not of blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the
   flesh, but of God. And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we
   beheld His glory, glory as of the Only-begotten from the Father, full
   of grace and truth [515] . Here the soul makes an advance beyond the
   attainment of its natural capacities, is taught more than it had
   dreamed concerning God. For it learns that its Creator is God of God;
   it hears that the Word is God and was with God in the beginning. It
   comes to understand that the Light of the world was abiding in the
   world and that the world knew Him not; that He came to His own
   possession and that they that were His own received Him not; but that
   they who do receive Him by virtue of their faith advance to be sons of
   God, being born not of the embrace of the flesh nor of the conception
   of the blood nor of bodily desire, but of God; finally, it learns that
   the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and that His glory was seen,
   which, as of the Only-begotten from the Father, is perfect through
   grace and truth.

   11. Herein my soul, trembling and distressed, found a hope wider than
   it had imagined. First came its introduction to the knowledge of God
   the Father. Then it learnt that the eternity and infinity and beauty
   which, by the light of natural reason, it had attributed to its Creator
   belonged also to God the Only-begotten. It did not disperse its faith
   among a plurality of deities, for it heard that He is God of God; nor
   did it fall into the error of attributing a difference of nature to
   this God of God, for it learnt that He is full of grace and truth. Nor
   yet did my soul perceive anything contrary to reason in God of God,
   since He was revealed as having been in the beginning God with God. It
   saw that there are very few who attain to the knowledge of this saving
   faith, though its reward be great, for even His own received Him not
   though they who receive Him are promoted to be sons of God by a birth,
   not of the flesh but of faith. It learnt also that this sonship to God
   is not a compulsion but a possibility, for, while the Divine gift is
   offered to all, it is no heredity inevitably imprinted but a prize
   awarded to willing choice. And lest this very truth that whosoever will
   may become a son of God should stagger the weakness of our faith (for
   most we desire, but least expect, that which from its very greatness we
   find it hard to hope for), God the Word became flesh, that through His
   Incarnation our flesh might attain to union with God the Word. And lest
   we should think that this incarnate Word was some other than God the
   Word, or that His flesh was of a body different from ours, He dwelt
   among us that by His dwelling He might be known as the indwelling God,
   and, by His dwelling among us, known as God incarnate in no other flesh
   than our own, and moreover, though He had condescended to take our
   flesh, not destitute of His own attributes; for He, the Only-begotten
   of the Father, full of grace and truth, is fully possessed of His own
   attributes and truly endowed with ours.

   12. This lesson in the Divine mysteries was gladly welcomed by my soul,
   now drawing near through the flesh to God, called to new birth through
   faith, entrusted with liberty and power to win the heavenly
   regeneration, conscious of the love of its Father and Creator, sure
   that He would not annihilate a creature whom He had summoned out of
   nothing into life. And it could estimate how high are these truths
   above the mental vision of man; for the reason which deals with the
   common objects of thought can conceive of nothing as existent beyond
   what it perceives within itself or can create out of itself. My soul
   measured the mighty workings of God, wrought on the scale of His
   eternal omnipotence, not by its own powers of perception but by a
   boundless faith; and therefore refused to disbelieve, because it could
   not understand, that God was in the beginning with God, and that the
   Word became flesh and dwelt among us, but bore in mind the truth that
   with the will to believe would come the power to understand.

   13. And lest the soul should stray and linger in some delusion of
   heathen philosophy, it receives this further lesson of perfect loyalty
   to the holy faith, taught by the Apostle in words inspired:--Beware
   lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
   tradition of men, after the rudiments of the word, and not after
   Christ; for in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and
   ye are made full in Him, Which is the Head of all principality and
   power; in Whom ye were also circumcised with a circumcision not made
   with hands, in putting off the body, of the flesh, but with the
   circumcision of Christ; buried with Him in Baptism, wherein also ye
   have risen again through faith in the working of God, Who raised Him
   from the dead. And you, when ye were dead in sins and in the
   uncircumcision of your flesh, He hath quickened with Him, having
   forgiven you all your sins, blotting out the bond which was against us
   by its ordinances, which was contrary to us; and He hath taken it out
   of the way, nailing it to the Cross; and having put off the flesh He
   made a show of powers openly, triumphing over them through confidence
   in Himself [516] . Steadfast faith rejects the vain subtleties of
   philosophic enquiry; truth refuses to be vanquished by these
   treacherous devices of human folly, and enslaved by falsehood. It will
   not confine God within the limits which barred our common reason, nor
   judge after the rudiments of the world concerning Christ, in Whom
   dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and in such wise that
   the utmost efforts of the earthly mind to comprehend Him are baffled by
   that immeasurable Eternity and Omnipotence. My soul judged of Him as
   One Who, drawing us upward to partake of His own Divine nature, has
   loosened henceforth the bond of bodily observances Who, unlike the
   Symbolic Law, has initiated us into no rites of mutilating the flesh,
   but Whose purpose is that our spirit, circumcised from vice, should
   purify all the natural faculties of the body by abstinence from sin,
   that we being buried with His Death in Baptism may return to the life
   of eternity (since regeneration to life is death to the former life),
   and dying to our sins be born again to immortality, that even as He
   abandoned His immortality to die for us, so should we awaken from death
   to immortality with Him. For He took upon Him the flesh in which we
   have sinned that by wearing our flesh He might forgive sins; a flesh
   which He shares with us by wearing it, not by sinning in it. He blotted
   out through death the sentence of death, that by a new creation of our
   race in Himself He might sweep away the penalty appointed by the former
   Law. He let them nail Him to the cross that He might nail to the curse
   of the cross and abolish all the curses to which the world is
   condemned. He suffered as man to the utmost that He might put powers to
   shame. For Scripture had foretold that He Who is God should die; that
   the victory and triumph of them that trust in Him lay in the fact that
   He, Who is immortal and cannot be overcome by death, was to die that
   mortals might gain eternity. These deeds of God, wrought in a manner
   beyond our comprehension, cannot, I repeat, be understood by our
   natural faculties, for the work of the Infinite and Eternal can only be
   grasped by an infinite intelligence. Hence, just as the truths that God
   became man, that the Immortal died that the Eternal was buried, do not
   belong to the rational order but are an unique work of power, so on the
   other hand it is an effect not of intellect but of omnipotence that He
   Who is man is also God, that He Who died is immortal, that He Who was
   buried is eternal. We, then, are raised together by God in Christ
   through His death. But, since in Christ there is the fulness of the
   Godhead, we have herein a revelation of God the Father joining to raise
   us in Him Who died; and we must confess that Christ Jesus is none other
   than God in all the fulness of the Deity.

   14. In this calm assurance of safety did my soul gladly and hopefully
   take its rest, and feared so little the interruption of death, that
   death seemed only a name for eternal life. And the life of this present
   body was so far from seeming a burden or affliction that it was
   regarded as children regard their alphabet, sick men their draught,
   shipwrecked sailors their swim, young men the training for their
   profession, future commanders their first campaign; that is, as an
   endurable submission to present necessities, bearing the promise of a
   blissful immortality. And further, I began to proclaim those truths in
   which my soul had a personal faith, as a duty of the episcopate which
   had been laid upon me, employing my office to promote the salvation of
   all men.

   15. While I was thus engaged there came to light certain fallacies of
   rash and wicked men, hopeless for themselves and merciless towards
   others, who made their own feeble nature the measure of the might of
   God's nature. They claimed, not that they had ascended to an infinite
   knowledge of infinite things, but that they had reduced all knowledge,
   undefined before, within the scope of ordinary reason, and fixed the
   limits of the faith. Whereas the true work of religion is a service of
   obedience; and these were men heedless of their own weakness, reckless
   of Divine realities, who undertook to improve upon the teaching of God.

   16. Not to touch upon the vain enquiries of other heretics--concerning
   whom however, when the course of my argument gives occasion, I will not
   be silent--there are those who tamper with the faith of the Gospel by
   denying, under the cloak of loyalty to the One God, the birth of God
   the Only-begotten. They assert that there was an extension of God into
   man, not a descent; that He, Who for the season that He took our flesh
   was Son of Man, had not been previously, nor was then, Son of God; that
   there was no Divine birth in His case, but an identity of Begetter and
   Begotten; and (to maintain what they consider a perfect loyalty to the
   unity of God) that there was an unbroken continuity in the Incarnation,
   the Father extending Himself into the Virgin, and Himself being born as
   His own Son. Others, on the contrary (heretics, because there is no
   salvation apart from Christ, Who in the beginning was God the Word with
   God), deny that He was born and declare that He was merely created.
   Birth, they hold, would confess Him to be true God, while creation
   proves His Godhead unreal; and though this explanation be a fraud
   against the faith in the unity of God, regarded as an accurate
   definition, yet they think it may pass muster as figurative language.
   They degrade, in name and in belief, His true birth to the level of a
   creation, to cut Him off from the Divine unity, that, as a creature
   called into being, He may not claim the fulness of the Godhead, which
   is not His by a true birth.

   17. My soul has been burning to answer these insane attacks. I call to
   mind that the very centre of a saving faith is the belief not merely in
   God, but in God as a Father; not merely in Christ, but in Christ as the
   Son of God; in Him, not as a creature, but as God the Creator, born of
   God. My prime object is by the clear assertions of prophets and
   evangelists to refute the insanity and ignorance of men who use the
   unity of God (in itself a pious and profitable confession) as a cloak
   for their denial either that in Christ God was born, or else that He is
   very God. Their purpose is to isolate a solitary God at the heart of
   the faith by making Christ, though mighty, only a creature; because, so
   they allege, a birth of God widens the believer's faith into a trust in
   more gods than one. But we, divinely taught to confess neither two Gods
   nor yet a solitary God, will adduce the evidence of the Gospels and the
   prophets for our confession of God the Father and God the Son, united,
   not confounded, in our faith. We will not admit Their identity nor
   allow, as a compromise, that Christ is God in some imperfect sense; for
   God, born of God, cannot be the same as His Father, since He is His
   Son, nor yet can He be different in nature.

   18. And you, whose warmth of faith and passion for a truth unknown to
   the world and its philosophers shall prompt to read me, must remember
   to eschew the feeble and baseless conjectures of earthly minds, and in
   devout willingness to learn must break down the barriers of prejudice
   and half-knowledge. The new faculties of the regenerate intellect are
   needed; each must have his understanding enlightened by the heavenly
   gift imparted to the soul. First he must take his stand upon the sure
   ground [substantia = hupostasei] of God, as holy Jeremiah says [517] ,
   that since he is to hear about that nature [substantia] he may expand
   his thoughts till they are worthy of the theme, not fixing some
   arbitrary standard for himself, but judging as of infinity. And again,
   though he be aware that he is partaker of the Divine nature, as the
   holy apostle Peter says in his second Epistle [518] , yet he must not
   measure the Divine nature by the limitations of his own, but gauge
   God's assertions concerning Himself by the scale of His own glorious
   self-revelation. For he is the best student who does not read his
   thoughts into the book, but lets it reveal its own; who draws from it
   its sense, and does not import his own into it, nor force upon its
   words a meaning which he had determined was the right one before he
   opened its pages. Since then we are to discourse of the things of God,
   let us assume that God has full knowledge of Himself, and bow with
   humble reverence to His words. For He Whom we can only know through His
   own utterances is the fitting witness concerning Himself.

   19. If in our discussion of the nature and birth of God we adduce
   certain analogies, let no one suppose that such comparisons are perfect
   and complete. There can be no comparison between God and earthly
   things, yet the weakness of our understanding forces us to seek for
   illustrations from a lower sphere to explain our meaning about loftier
   themes. The course of daily life shews how our experience in ordinary
   matters enables us to form conclusions on unfamiliar subjects. We must
   therefore regard any comparison as helpful to man rather than as
   descriptive of God, since it suggests, rather than exhausts, the sense
   we seek. Nor let such a comparison be thought too bold when it sets
   side by side carnal and spiritual natures, things invisible and things
   palpable, since it avows itself a necessary aid to the weakness of the
   human mind, and deprecates the condemnation due to an imperfect
   analogy. On this principle I proceed with my task, intending to use the
   terms supplied by God, yet colouring my argument with illustrations
   drawn from human life.

   20. And first, I have so laid out the plan of the whole work as to
   consult the advantage of the reader by the logical order in which its
   books are arranged. It has been my resolve to publish no half-finished
   and ill-considered treatise, lest its disorderly array should resemble
   the confused clamour of a mob of peasants. And since no one can scale a
   precipice unless there be jutting ledges to aid his progress to the
   summit, I have here set down in order the primary outlines of our
   ascent leading our difficult course of argument up the easiest path;
   not cutting steps in the face of the rock, but levelling it to a gentle
   slope, that so the traveller, almost without a sense of effort may
   reach the heights.

   21. Thus, after the present first book, the second expounds the mystery
   of the Divine birth, that those who shall be baptized in the Name of
   the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost may know the true
   Names, and not be perplexed about their sense but accurately informed
   as to fact and meaning, and so receive full assurance that in the words
   which are used they have the true Names, and that those Names involve
   the truth.

   22. After this short and simple discourse concerning the Trinity, the
   third book makes further progress, sure though slow. Citing the
   greatest instances of His power, it brings within the range of faith's
   understanding that saying, in itself beyond our comprehension, I in the
   Father and the Father in Me [519] , which Christ utters concerning
   Himself. Thus truth beyond the dull wit of man is the prize of faith
   equipped with reason and knowledge; for neither may we doubt God's Word
   concerning Himself, nor can we suppose that the devout reason is
   incapable of apprehending His might.

   23. The fourth book starts with the doctrines of the heretics, and
   disowns complicity in the fallacies whereby they are traducing the
   faith of the Church. It publishes that infidel creed which a number of
   them have lately promulgated [520] , and exposes the dishonesty, and
   therefore the wickedness, of their arguments from the Law for what they
   call the unity of God. It sets out the whole evidence of Law and
   Prophets to demonstrate the impiety of asserting the unity of God to
   the exclusion of the Godhead of Christ, and the treason of alleging
   that if Christ be God the Only-begotten, then God is not one.

   24. The fifth book follows in reply the sequence of heretical
   assertion. They had falsely declared that they followed the law in the
   sense which they assigned to the unity of God, and that they had proved
   from it that the true God is of one Person; and this in order to rob
   the Lord Christ of His birth by their conclusion concerning the One
   true God, for birth is the evidence of origin. In answer I assert, step
   by step, what they deny; for from the Law and the Prophets I
   demonstrate that there are not two gods, nor one isolated true God,
   neither perverting the faith in the Divine unity nor denying the birth
   of Christ. And since they say that the Lord Jesus Christ, created
   rather than born, bears the Divine Name by gift and not by right, I
   have proved His true Divinity from the Prophets in such a way that, He
   being acknowledged very God, the assurance of His inherent Godhead
   shall hold us fast to the certainty that God is One.

   25. The sixth book reveals the full deceitfulness of this heretical
   teaching. To win credit for their assertions they denounce the impious
   doctrine of heretics:--of Valentinus, to wit, and Sabellius and
   Manichæus and Hieracas, and appropriate the godly language of the
   Church as a cover for their blasphemy. They reprove and alter the
   language of these heretics, correcting it into a vague resemblance to
   orthodoxy, in order to suppress the holy faith while apparently
   denouncing heresy. But we state clearly what is the language and what
   the doctrine of each of these men, and acquit the Church of any
   complicity or fellowship with condemned heretics. Their words which
   deserve condemnation we condemn, and those which claim our humble
   acceptance we accept. Thus that Divine Sonship of Jesus Christ, which
   is the object of their most strenuous denial, we prove by the witness
   of the Father, by Christ's own assertion, by the preaching of Apostles,
   by the faith of believers, by the cries of devils, by the contradiction
   of Jews, in itself a confession, by the recognition of the heathen who
   had not known God; and all this to rescue from dispute a truth of which
   Christ had left us no excuse for ignorance.

   26. Next the seventh book, starting from the basis of a true faith now
   attained, delivers its verdict in the great debate. First, armed with
   its sound and incontrovertible proof of the impregnable faith, it takes
   part in the conflict raging between Sabellius and Hebion and these
   opponents of the true Godhead. It joins issue with Sabellius on his
   denial of the pre-existence of Christ, and with his assailants on their
   assertion that He is a creature. Sabellius overlooked the eternity of
   the Son, but believed that true God worked in a human body. Our present
   adversaries deny that He was born, assert that He was created, and fail
   to see in His deeds the works of very God. What both sides dispute, we
   believe. Sabellius denies that it was the Son who was working, and he
   is wrong; but he proves his case triumphantly when he alleges that the
   work done was that of true God. The Church shares his victory over
   those who deny that in Christ was very God. But when Sabellius denies
   that Christ existed before the worlds, his adversaries prove to
   conviction that Christ's activity is from everlasting, and we are on
   their side in this confutation of Sabellius, who recognises true God,
   but not God the Son, in this activity. And our two previous adversaries
   join forces to refute Hebion, the second demonstrating the eternal
   existence of Christ, while the first proves that His work is that of
   very God. Thus the heretics overthrow one another, while the Church, as
   against Sabellius, against those who call Christ a creature, against
   Hebion, bears witness that the Lord Jesus Christ is very God of very
   God, born before the worlds and born in after times as man.

   27. No one can doubt that we have taken the course of true reverence
   and of sound doctrine when, after proving from Law and Prophets first
   that Christ is the Son of God, and next that He is true God, and this
   without breach of the mysterious unity, we proceed to support the Law
   and the Prophets by the evidence of the Gospels, and prove from them
   also that He is the Son of God and Himself very God. It is the easiest
   of tasks, after demonstrating His right to the Name of Son, to shew
   that the Name truly describes His relation to the Father; though indeed
   universal usage regards the granting of the name of son as convincing
   evidence of sonship. But, to leave no loophole for the trickery and
   deceit of these traducers of the true birth of God the Only-begotten,
   we have used His true Godhead as evidence of His true Sonship; to shew
   that He Who (as is confessed by all) bears the Name of Son of God is
   actually God, we have adduced His Name, His birth, His nature, His
   power, His assertions. We have proved that His Name is an accurate
   description of Himself, that the title of Son is an evidence of birth,
   that in His birth He retained His Divine Nature, and with His nature
   His power, and that that power manifested itself in conscious and
   deliberate self-revelation. I have set down the Gospel proofs of each
   several point, shewing how His self-revelation displays His power, how
   His power reveals His nature, how His nature is His by birthright, and
   from His birth comes His title to the name of Son. Thus every whisper
   of blasphemy is silenced, for the Lord Jesus Christ Himself by the
   witness of His own mouth has taught us that He is, as His Name, His
   birth, His nature, His power declare, in the true sense of Deity, very
   God of very God.

   28. While its two predecessors have been devoted to the confirmation of
   the faith in Christ as Son of God and true God, the eighth book is
   taken up with the proof of the unity of God, shewing that this unity is
   consistent with the birth of the Son, and that the birth involves no
   duality in the Godhead. First it exposes the sophistry with which these
   heretics have attempted to avoid, though they could not deny, the
   confession of the real existence of God, Father and Son; it demolishes
   their helpless and absurd plea that in such passages as, And the
   multitude of them that believed were one soul and heart [521] , and
   again, He that planteth and He that watereth are one [522] , and
   Neither for these only do I pray, but for them also that shall believe
   on Me through their word, that they may all be one, even as Thou,
   Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be in Us [523] , a
   unity of will and mind, not of Divinity, is expressed. From a
   consideration of the true sense of these texts we shew that they
   involve the reality of the Divine birth; and then, displaying the whole
   series of our Lord's self-revelations, we exhibit, in the language of
   Apostles and in the very words of the Holy Spirit, the whole and
   perfect mystery of the glory of God as Father and as Only-begotten Son.
   Because there is a Father we know that there is a Son; in that Son the
   Father is manifested to us, and hence our certainty that He is born the
   Only-begotten and that He is very God.

   29. In matters essential to salvation it is not enough to advance the
   proofs which faith supplies and finds sufficient. Arguments which we
   have not tested may delude us into a misapprehension of the meaning of
   our own words, unless we take the offensive by exposing the hollowness
   of the enemy's proofs, and so establish our own faith upon the
   demonstrated absurdity of his. The ninth book, therefore, is employed
   in refuting the arguments by which the heretics attempt to invalidate
   the birth of God the Only-begotten;--heretics who ignore the mystery of
   the revelation hidden from the beginning of the world, and forget that
   the Gospel faith proclaims the union of God and man. For their denial
   that our Lord Jesus Christ is God, like unto God and equal with God as
   Son with Father, born of God and by right of His birth subsisting as
   very Spirit, they are accustomed to appeal to such words of our Lord
   as, Why callest thou Me good? None is good save One, even God [524] .
   They argue that by His reproof of the man who called Him good, and by
   His assertion of the goodness of God only, He excludes Himself from the
   goodness of that God Who alone is good and from that true Divinity
   which belongs only to One. With this text their blasphemous reasoning
   connects another, And this is life eternal that they should know Thee
   the only true God, and Him Whom Thou didst send, Jesus Christ [525] .
   Here, they say, He confesses that the Father is the only true God, and
   that He Himself is neither true nor God, since this recognition of an
   only true God is limited to the Possessor of the attributes assigned.
   And they profess to be quite clear about His meaning in this passage,
   since He also says, The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He hath
   seen the Father doing [526] . The fact that He can only copy is said to
   be evidence of the limitation of His nature. There can be no comparison
   between Omnipotence and One whose action is dependent upon the previous
   activity of Another; reason itself draws an absolute line between power
   and the want of power. That line is so clear that He Himself has avowed
   concerning God the Father, The Father is greater than I [527] . So
   frank a confession silences all demur; it is blasphemy and madness to
   assign the dignity and nature of God to One who disclaims them. So
   utterly devoid is He of the qualities of true God that He actually
   bears witness concerning Himself, But of that day and hour knoweth no
   one, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but God only [528] . A
   son who knows not his father's secret must, from his ignorance, be
   alien from the father who knows; a nature limited in knowledge cannot
   partake of that majesty and might which alone is exempt from the
   tyranny of ignorance.

   30. We therefore expose the blasphemous misunderstanding at which they
   have arrived by distortion and perversion of the meaning of Christ's
   words. We account for those words by stating what manner of questions
   He was answering, at what times He was speaking, what partial knowledge
   He was deigning to impart; we make the circumstances explain the words,
   and do not force the former into consistency with the latter. Thus each
   case of variance, that for instance between The Father is greater than
   I [529] , and I and the Father are One [530] , or between None is good
   save One, even God [531] , and He that hath seen Me hath seen the
   Father also [532] , or a difference so wide as that between Father, all
   things that are Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine [533] , and That
   they may know Thee, the only true God [534] , or between I in the
   Father and the Father in Me [535] , and But of the day and hour knoweth
   no one, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but the Father only
   [536] , is explained by a discrimination between gradual revelation and
   full expression of His nature and power. Both are utterances of the
   same Speaker, and an exposition of the real force of each group will
   shew that Christ's true Godhead is no whit impaired because, to form
   the mystery of the Gospel faith, the birth and Name [537] of Christ
   were revealed gradually, and under conditions which He chose of
   occasion and time.

   31. The purpose of the tenth book is one in harmony with the faith. For
   since, in the folly which passes with them for wisdom, the heretics
   have twisted some of the circumstances and utterances of the Passion
   into an insolent contradiction of the Divine nature and power of the
   Lord Jesus Christ, I am compelled to prove that this is a blasphemous
   misinterpretation, and that these things were put on record by the Lord
   Himself as evidences of His true and absolute majesty. In their parody
   of the faith they deceive themselves with words such as, My soul is
   sorrowful even unto death [538] . He, they think, must be far removed
   from the blissful and passionless life of God, over Whose soul brooded
   this crushing fear of an impending woe, Who under the pressure of
   suffering even humbled Himself to pray, Father, if it be possible, let
   this cup pass away from Me [539] , and assuredly bore the appearance of
   fearing to endure the trials from which He prayed for release; Whose
   whole nature was so overwhelmed by agony that in those moments on the
   Cross He cried, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me [540] ?
   forced by the bitterness of His pain to complain that He was forsaken:
   Who, destitute of the Father's help, gave up the ghost with the words,
   Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit [541] . The fear, they say,
   which beset Him at the moment of expiring made Him entrust His Spirit
   to the care of God the Father: the very hopelessness of His own
   condition forced Him to commit His Soul to the keeping of Another.

   32. Their folly being as great as their blasphemy, they fail to mark
   that Christ's words, spoken under similar circumstances, are always
   consistent; they cleave to the letter and ignore the purpose of His
   words. There is the widest difference between My soul is sorrowful even
   unto death [542] , and Henceforth ye shall see the Son of Man sitting
   at the right hand of power [543] ; so also between Father, if it be
   possible, let this cup pass away, from Me [544] , and The cup which the
   Father hath given Me, shall I not drink it [545] ? and further between
   My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me [546] ? and Verily I say unto
   thee, Today shalt thou be with Me in Paradise [547] , and between
   Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit [548] , and Father, forgive
   them, for they know not what they do [549] ; and their narrow minds,
   unable to grasp the Divine meaning, plunge into blasphemy in the
   attempt at explanation. There is a broad distinction between anxiety
   and a mind at ease, between haste and the prayer for delay, between
   words of anguish and words of encouragement, between despair for self
   and confident entreaty for others; and the heretics display their
   impiety by ignoring the assertions of Deity and the Divine nature of
   Christ, which account for the one class of His words, while they
   concentrate their attention upon the deeds and words which refer only
   to His ministry on earth. I have therefore set out all the elements
   contained in the mystery of the Soul and Body of the Lord Jesus Christ;
   all have been sought out, none suppressed. Next, casting the calm light
   of reason upon the question, I have referred each of His sayings to the
   class to which its meaning attaches it, and so have shewn that He had
   also a confidence which never wavered, a will which never faltered, an
   assurance which never murmured, that, when He commended His own soul to
   the Father, in this was involved a prayer for the pardon of others
   [550] . Thus a complete presentment of the teaching of the Gospel
   interprets and confirms all (and not some only) of the words of Christ.

   33. And so--for not even the glory of the Resurrection has opened the
   eyes of these lost men and kept them within the manifest bounds of the
   faith--they have forged a weapon for their blasphemy out of a pretended
   reverence, and even perverted the revelation of a mystery into an
   insult to God. From the words, I ascend unto My Father and your Father,
   to My God and your God [551] , they argue that since that Father is
   ours as much as His, and that God also ours and His, His own confession
   that He shares with us in that relation to the Father and to God
   excludes Him from true Divinity, and subordinates Him to God the
   Creator Whose creature and inferior He is, as we are, although He has
   received the adoption of a Son. Nay more, we must not suppose that He
   possesses any of the characters of the Divine nature, since the Apostle
   says, But when He saith, all things are put in subjection, this is
   except Him Who did subject all things unto Him, for when all things
   shall have been subjected unto Him, then shall also He Himself be
   subjected to Him that did subject all things unto Him, that God may be
   all in all [552] . For, so they say, subjection is evidence of want of
   power in the subject and of its possession by the sovereign. The
   eleventh book is employed in a reverent discussion of this argument; it
   proves from these very words of the Apostle not only that subjection is
   no evidence of want of power in Christ but that it actually is a sign
   of His true Divinity as God the Son; that the fact that His Father and
   God is also our Father and God is an infinite advantage to us and no
   degradation to Him, since He Who has been born as Man and suffered all
   the afflictions of our flesh has gone up on high to our God and Father,
   to receive His glory as Man our Representative.

   34. In this treatise we have followed the course which we know is
   pursued in every branch of education. First come easy lessons and a
   familiarity, slowly attained by practice, with the groundwork of the
   subject; then the student may make proof, in the business of life, of
   the training which he has received. Thus the soldier, when he is
   perfect in his exercises, can go out to battle; the advocate ventures
   into the conflicts of the courts when he is versed in the pleadings of
   the school of rhetoric; the sailor who has learned to navigate his ship
   in the land-locked harbour of his home may be trusted amid the storms
   of open seas and distant climes. Such has been our proceeding in this
   most serious and difficult science in which the whole faith is taught.
   First came simple instruction for the untaught believer in the birth,
   the name, the Divinity, the true Divinity of Christ; since then we have
   quietly and steadily advanced till our readers can demolish every plea
   of the heretics; and now at last we have pitted them against the
   adversary in the present great and glorious conflict. The mind of men
   is powerless with the ordinary resources of unaided reason to grasp the
   idea of an eternal birth, but they attain by study of things Divine to
   the apprehension of mysteries which lie beyond the range of common
   thought. They can explode that paradox concerning the Lord Jesus, which
   derives all its strength and semblance of cogency from a purblind pagan
   philosophy: the paradox which asserts, There was a time when He was
   not, and He was not before He was born, and He was made out of nothing;
   as though His birth were proof that He had previously been non-existent
   and at a given moment came into being, and God the Only-begotten could
   thus be subjected to the conception of time, as if the faith itself [by
   conferring the title of Son'] and the very nature of birth proved that
   there was a time when He was not. Accordingly they argue that He was
   born out of nothing, on the ground that birth implies the grant of
   being to that which previously had no being. We proclaim in answer, on
   the evidence of Apostles and Evangelists, that the Father is eternal
   and the Son eternal, and demonstrate that the Son is God of all with an
   absolute, not a limited, pre-existence; that these bold assaults of
   their blasphemous logic--He was born out of nothing, and He was not
   before He was born--are powerless against Him; that His eternity is
   consistent with sonship, and His sonship with eternity; that there was
   in Him no unique exemption from birth but a birth from everlasting,
   for, while birth implies a Father, Divinity is inseparable from
   eternity.

   35. Ignorance of prophetic diction and unskilfulness in interpreting
   Scripture has led them into a perversion of the point and meaning of
   the passage, The Lord created Me for a beginning of His ways for His
   works [553] . They labour to establish from it that Christ is created,
   rather than born, as God, and hence partakes the nature of created
   beings, though He excel them in the manner of His creation, and has no
   glory of Divine birth but only the powers of a transcendent creature.
   We in reply, without importing any new considerations or preconceived
   opinions, will make this very passage of Wisdom [554] display its own
   true meaning and object. We will show that the fact that He was created
   for the beginning of the ways of God and for His works, cannot be
   twisted into evidence concerning the Divine and eternal birth, because
   creation for these purposes and birth from everlasting are two entirely
   different things. Where birth is meant, there birth, and nothing but
   birth, is spoken of; where creation is mentioned, the cause of that
   creation is first named. There is a Wisdom born before all things, and
   again there is a wisdom created for particular purposes; the Wisdom
   which is from everlasting is one, the wisdom which has come into
   existence during the lapse of time is another.

   36. Having thus concluded that we must reject the word creation' from
   our confession of faith in God the Only-begotten, we proceed to lay
   down the teachings of reason and of piety concerning the Holy Spirit,
   that the reader, whose convictions have been established by patient and
   earnest study of the preceding books, may be provided with a complete
   presentation of the faith. This end will be attained when the
   blasphemies of heretical teaching on this theme also have been swept
   away, and the mystery, pure and undefiled, of the Trinity which
   regenerates us has been fixed in terms of saving precision on the
   authority of Apostles and Evangelists. Men will no longer dare, on the
   strength of mere human reasoning, to rank among creatures that Divine
   Spirit, Whom we receive as the pledge of immortality and source of
   fellowship with the sinless nature of God.

   37. I know, O Lord God Almighty, that I owe Thee, as the chief duty of
   my life, the devotion of all my words and thoughts to Thyself. The gift
   of speech which Thou hast bestowed can bring me no higher reward than
   the opportunity of service in preaching Thee and displaying Thee as
   Thou art, as Father and Father of God the Only-begotten, to the world
   in its blindness and the heretic in his rebellion. But this is the mere
   expression of my own desire; I must pray also for the gift of Thy help
   and compassion, that the breath of Thy Spirit may fill the sails of
   faith and confession which I have spread, and a favouring wind be sent
   to forward me on my voyage of instruction. We can trust the promise of
   Him Who said, Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find,
   knock, and it shall be opened unto you [555] ; and we in our want shall
   pray for the things we need. We shall bring an untiring energy to the
   study of Thy Prophets and Apostles, and we shall knock for entrance at
   every gate of hidden knowledge, but it is Thine to answer the prayer,
   to grant the thing we seek, to open the door on which we beat. Our
   minds are born with dull and clouded vision, our feeble intellect is
   penned within the barriers of an impassable ignorance concerning things
   Divine; but the study of Thy revelation elevates our soul to the
   comprehension of sacred truth, and submission to the faith is the path
   to a certainty beyond the reach of unassisted reason.

   38. And therefore we look to Thy support for the first trembling steps
   of this undertaking, to Thy aid that it may gain strength and prosper.
   We look to Thee to give us the fellowship of that Spirit Who guided the
   Prophets and the Apostles, that we may take their words in the sense in
   which they spoke and assign its right shade of meaning to every
   utterance. For we shall speak of things which they preached in a
   mystery; of Thee, O God Eternal, Father of the Eternal and
   Only-begotten God, Who alone art without birth, and of the One Lord
   Jesus Christ, born of Thee from everlasting. We may not sever Him from
   Thee, or make Him one of a plurality of Gods, on any plea of difference
   of nature. We may not say that He is not begotten of Thee, because Thou
   art One. We must not fail to confess Him as true God, seeing that He is
   born of Thee, true God, His Father. Grant us, therefore, precision of
   language, soundness of argument, grace of style, loyalty to truth.
   Enable us to utter the things that we believe, that so we may confess,
   as Prophets and Apostles have taught us, Thee, One God our Father, and
   One Lord Jesus Christ, and put to silence the gainsaying of heretics,
   proclaiming Thee as God, yet not solitary, and Him as God, in no unreal
   sense.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [508] Exod. iii. 14.

   [509] Isai. xl. 12.

   [510] Ib. lxvi. 1, 2.

   [511] Reading mens finita and naturæ finitatim for the infinita and
   infinitatem of the Benedictine Edition.

   [512] Ps. cxxxviii. (cxxxix.) 7-10.

   [513] Wisd. xiii. 5.

   [514] Cf. Hilary's explanation of this passage in Book ii. §§ 19, 20.

   [515] St. John i. 1-14.

   [516] Col. ii. 8-15.

   [517] xxiii. 22, according to the LXX., en hupostasei.

   [518] ii. 14.

   [519] St. John x. 38.

   [520] The letter of Arius to Alexander; Book iv., §§ 12, 13.

   [521] Acts iv. 32: in this and the following passages unum is read.

   [522] 1 Cor. iii. 8.

   [523] St. John xvii. 20, 21.

   [524] St. Luke xviii. 19.

   [525] St. John xvii. 3.

   [526] Ib. v. 19.

   [527] Ib. xiv. 28.

   [528] St. Mark xiii. 32.

   [529] Ib. xiv. 28.

   [530] St. John x. 30.

   [531] St. Luke xviii. 19.

   [532] St. John xiv. 9.

   [533] Ib. xvii. 10.

   [534] Ib. 3.

   [535] Ib. xiv. 11.

   [536] St. Mark xiii. 32.

   [537] Reading nativitas et nomen. The clause above, which is bracketed
   in Migne, appears to be a gloss.

   [538] St. Matt. xxvi. 38.

   [539] Ib. 39.

   [540] Ib. xxvii. 46.

   [541] St. Luke xxiii. 46.

   [542] St. Matt. xxvi. 38.

   [543] St. Matt. xxvi. 64.

   [544] Ib. 39.

   [545] St. John xviii. 11.

   [546] St. Matt. xxvii. 46.

   [547] St. Luke xxiii. 43.

   [548] Ib. 46.

   [549] Ib. 34.

   [550] Reading non desiderasse.

   [551] St. John xx. 17.

   [552] 1 Cor. xv. 27, 28.

   [553] Prov. viii. 22, according to the LXX.

   [554] Here, as often in early writers, the Sapiential books are
   included under this name.

   [555] St. Luke xi. 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book II.

   1. Believers have always found their satisfaction in that Divine
   utterance, which our ears heard recited from the Gospel at the moment
   when that Power, which is its attestation, was bestowed upon us:--Go
   now and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
   and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
   things whatsoever I command you; and, lo, I am with you alway, even
   unto the end of the world [556] . What element in the mystery of man's
   salvation is not included in those words? What is forgotten, what left
   in darkness? All is full, as from the Divine fulness; perfect, as from
   the Divine perfection. The passage contains the exact words to be used,
   the essential acts, the sequence of processes, an insight into the
   Divine nature. He bade them baptize in the Name of the Father, and of
   the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that is with confession of the Creator
   and of the Only-begotten, and of the Gift. For God the Father is One,
   from Whom are all things; and our Lord Jesus Christ the Only-begotten,
   through Whom are all things, is One; and the Spirit, God's Gift to us,
   Who pervades all things, is also One. Thus all are ranged according to
   powers possessed and benefits conferred;--the One Power from Whom all,
   the One Offspring through Whom all, the One Gift Who gives us perfect
   hope. Nothing can be found lacking in that supreme Union which
   embraces, in Father, Son and Holy Spirit, infinity in the Eternal, His
   Likeness in His express Image, our enjoyment of Him in the Gift.

   2. But the errors of heretics and blasphemers force us to deal with
   unlawful matters, to scale perilous heights, to speak unutterable
   words, to trespass on forbidden ground. Faith ought in silence to
   fulfil the commandments, worshipping the Father, reverencing with Him
   the Son, abounding in the Holy Ghost, but we must strain the poor
   resources of our language to express thoughts too great for words. The
   error of others compels us to err in daring to embody in human terms
   truths which ought to be hidden in the silent veneration of the heart.

   3. For there have risen many who have given to the plain words of Holy
   Writ some arbitrary interpretation of their own, instead of its true
   and only sense, and this in defiance of the clear meaning of words.
   Heresy lies in the sense assigned, not in the word written; the guilt
   is that of the expositor, not of the text. Is not truth indestructible?
   When we hear the name Father, is not sonship involved in that Name? The
   Holy Ghost is mentioned by name; must He not exist? We can no more
   separate fatherhood from the Father or sonship from the Son than we can
   deny the existence in the Holy Ghost of that gift which we receive. Yet
   men of distorted mind plunge the whole matter in doubt and difficulty,
   fatuously reversing the clear meaning of words, and depriving the
   Father of His fatherhood because they wish to strip the Son of His
   sonship. They take away the fatherhood by asserting that the Son is not
   a Son by nature; for a son is not of the nature of his father when
   begetter and begotten have not the same properties, and he is no son
   whose being is different from that of the father, and unlike it. Yet in
   what sense is God a Father (as He is), if He have not begotten in His
   Son that same substance and nature which are His own?

   4. Since, therefore, they cannot make any change in the facts recorded,
   they bring novel principles and theories of man's device to bear upon
   them. Sabellius, for instance, makes the Son an extension of the
   Father, and the faith in this regard a matter of words rather than of
   reality, for he makes one and the same Person, Son to Himself and also
   Father. Hebion allows no beginning to the Son of God except from Mary,
   and represents Him not as first God and then man, but as first man then
   God; declares that the Virgin did not receive into herself One
   previously existent, Who had been in the beginning God the Word
   dwelling with God, but that through the agency of the Word she bore
   Flesh; the Word' meaning in his opinion not the nature of the
   pre-existent Only-begotten God [557] , but only the sound of an
   uplifted voice. Similarly certain teachers of our present day assert
   that the Image and Wisdom and Power of God was produced out of nothing,
   and in time. They do this to save God, regarded as Father of the Son,
   from being lowered to the Son's level. They are fearful lest this birth
   of the Son from Him should deprive Him of His glory, and therefore come
   to God's rescue by styling His Son a creature made out of nothing, in
   order that God may live on in solitary perfection without a Son born of
   Himself and partaking His nature. What wonder that their doctrine of
   the Holy Ghost should be different from ours, when they presume to
   subject the Giver of that Holy Ghost to creation, and change, and
   non-existence. Thus do they destroy the consistency and completeness of
   the mystery of the faith. They break up the absolute unity of God by
   assigning differences of nature where all is clearly common to Each;
   they deny the Father by robbing the Son of His true Sonship; they deny
   the Holy Ghost in their blindness to the facts that we possess Him and
   that Christ gave Him. They betray ill-trained souls to ruin by their
   boast of the logical perfection of their doctrine; they deceive their
   hearers by emptying terms of their meaning, though the Names remain to
   witness to the truth. I pass over the pitfalls of other heresies,
   Valentinian, Marcionite, Manichee and the rest. From time to time they
   catch the attention of some foolish souls and prove fatal by the very
   infection of their contact; one plague as destructive as another when
   once the poison of their teaching has found its way into the hearer's
   thoughts.

   5. Their treason involves us in the difficult and dangerous position of
   having to make a definite pronouncement, beyond the statements of
   Scripture, upon this grave and abstruse matter. The Lord said that the
   nations were to be baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
   and of the Holy Ghost. The words of the faith are clear; the heretics
   do their utmost to involve the meaning in doubt. We may not on this
   account add to the appointed form, yet we must set a limit to their
   license of interpretation. Since their malice, inspired by the devil's
   cunning, empties the doctrine of its meaning while it retains the Names
   which convey the truth, we must emphasise the truth which those Names
   convey. We must proclaim, exactly as we shall find them in the words of
   Scripture, the majesty and functions of Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
   and so debar the heretics from robbing these Names of their connotation
   of Divine character, and compel them by means of these very Names to
   confine their use of terms to their proper meaning. I cannot conceive
   what manner of mind our opponents have, who pervert the truth, darken
   the light, divide the indivisible, rend the scatheless, dissolve the
   perfect unity. It may seem to them a light thing to tear up Perfection,
   to make laws for Omnipotence, to limit Infinity; as for me, the task of
   answering them fills me with anxiety; my brain whirls, my intellect is
   stunned, my very words must be a confession, not that I am weak of
   utterance, but that I am dumb. Yet a wish to undertake the task forces
   itself upon me; it means withstanding the proud, guiding the wanderer,
   warning the ignorant. But the subject is inexhaustible; I can see no
   limit to my venture of speaking concerning God in terms more precise
   than He Himself has used. He has assigned the Names--Father, Son and
   Holy Ghost,--which are our information of the Divine nature. Words
   cannot express or feeling embrace or reason apprehend the results of
   enquiry carried further; all is ineffable, unattainable,
   incomprehensible. Language is exhausted by the magnitude of the theme,
   the splendour of its effulgence blinds the gazing eye, the intellect
   cannot compass its boundless extent. Still, under the necessity that is
   laid upon us, with a prayer for pardon to Him Whose attributes these
   are, we will venture, enquire and speak; and moreover--it is the only
   promise that in so grave a matter we dare to make--we will accept
   whatever conclusion He shall indicate.

   6. It is the Father to Whom all existence owes its origin. In Christ
   and through Christ He is the source of all. In contrast to all else He
   is self-existent. He does not draw His being from without, but
   possesses it from Himself and in Himself. He is infinite, for nothing
   contains Him and He contains all things; He is eternally unconditioned
   by space, for He is illimitable; eternally anterior to time, for time
   is His creation. Let imagination range to what you may suppose is God's
   utmost limit, and you will find Him present there; strain as you will
   there is always a further horizon towards which to strain. Infinity is
   His property, just as the power of making such effort is yours. Words
   will fail you, but His being will not be circumscribed. Or again, turn
   back the pages of history, and you will find Him ever present; should
   numbers fail to express the antiquity to which you have penetrated, yet
   God's eternity is not diminished. Gird up your intellect to comprehend
   Him as a whole; He eludes you. God, as a whole, has left something
   within your grasp, but this something is inextricably involved in His
   entirety. Thus you have missed the whole, since it is only a part which
   remains in your hands; nay, not even a part, for you are dealing with a
   whole which you have failed to divide. For a part implies division, a
   whole is undivided, and God is everywhere and wholly present wherever
   He is. Reason, therefore, cannot cope with Him, since no point of
   contemplation can be found outside Himself and since eternity is
   eternally His. This is a true statement of the mystery of that
   unfathomable nature which is expressed by the Name Father:' God
   invisible, ineffable, infinite. Let us confess by our silence that
   words cannot describe Him; let sense admit that it is foiled in the
   attempt to apprehend, and reason in the effort to define. Yet He has,
   as we said, in Father' a name to indicate His nature; He is a Father
   unconditioned. He does not, as men do, receive the power of paternity
   from an external source. He is unbegotten, everlasting, inherently
   eternal. To the Son only is He known, for no one knoweth the Father
   save the Son and him to whom the Son willeth to reveal Him, nor yet the
   Son save the Father [558] . Each has perfect and complete knowledge of
   the Other. Therefore, since no one knoweth the Father save the Son, let
   our thoughts of the Father be at one with the thoughts of the Son, the
   only faithful Witness, Who reveals Him to us.

   7. It is easier for me to feel this concerning the Father than to say
   it. I am well aware that no words are adequate to describe His
   attributes. We must feel that He is invisible, incomprehensible,
   eternal. But to say that He is self-existent and self-originating and
   self-sustained, that He is invisible and incomprehensible and immortal;
   all this is an acknowledgment of His glory, a hint of our meaning, a
   sketch of our thoughts, but speech is powerless to tell us what God is,
   words cannot express the reality. You hear that He is self-existent;
   human reason cannot explain such independence. We can find objects
   which uphold, and objects which are upheld, but that which thus exists
   is obviously distinct from that which is the cause of its existence.
   Again, if you hear that He is self-originating, no instance can be
   found in which the giver of the gift of life is identical with the life
   that is given. If you hear that He is immortal, then there is something
   which does not spring from Him and with which He has, by His very
   nature [559] , no contact; and, indeed, death is not the only thing
   which this word immortal' claims as independent of God [560] . If you
   hear that He is incomprehensible, that is as much as to say that He is
   non-existent, since contact with Him is impossible. If you say that He
   is invisible, a being that does not visibly exist cannot be sure of its
   own existence. Thus our confession of God fails through the defects of
   language; the best combination of words we can devise cannot indicate
   the reality and the greatness of God. The perfect knowledge of God is
   so to know Him that we are sure we must not be ignorant of Him, yet
   cannot describe Him. We must believe, must apprehend, must worship; and
   such acts of devotion must stand in lieu of definition.

   8. We have now exchanged the perils of a harbourless coast for the
   storms of the open sea. We can neither safely advance nor safely
   retreat, yet the way that lies before us has greater hardships than
   that which lies behind. The Father is what He is, and as He is
   manifested, so we must believe. The mind shrinks in dread from treating
   of the Son; at every word I tremble lest I be betrayed into treason.
   For He is the Offspring of the Unbegotten, One from One, true from
   true, living from living, perfect from perfect; the Power of Power, the
   Wisdom of Wisdom, the Glory of Glory, the Likeness of the invisible
   God, the Image of the Unbegotten Father. Yet in what sense can we
   conceive that the Only-begotten is the Offspring of the Unbegotten?
   Repeatedly the Father cries from heaven, This is My beloved Son in Whom
   I am well pleased [561] . It is no rending or severance, for He that
   begat is without passions, and He that was born is the Image of the
   invisible God and bears witness, The Father is in Me and I in the
   Father [562] . It is no mere adoption, for He is the true Son of God
   and cries, He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also [563] . Nor
   did He come into existence in obedience to a command as did created
   things, for He is the Only-begotten of the One God; and He has life in
   Himself, even as He that begot Him has life, for He says, As the Father
   hath life in Himself, even so gave He to the Son to have life in
   Himself [564] . Nor is there a portion of the Father resident in the
   Son, for the Son bears witness, All things that the Father hath are
   Mine [565] , and again, And all things that are Mine are Thine, and
   Thine are Mine [566] , and the Apostle testifies, For in Him dwelleth
   all the fulness of the Godhead bodily [567] ; and by the nature of
   things a portion cannot possess the whole [568] . He is the perfect Son
   of the perfect Father, for He Who has all has given all to Him. Yet we
   must not imagine that the Father did not give, because He still
   possesses, or that He has lost, because He gave to the Son.

   9. The manner of this birth is therefore a secret confined to the Two.
   If any one lays upon his personal incapacity his failure to solve the
   mystery, in spite of the certainty that Father and Son stand to Each
   Other in those relations, he will be still more pained at the ignorance
   to which I confess. I, too, am in the dark, yet I ask no questions. I
   look for comfort to the fact that Archangels share my ignorance, that
   Angels have not heard the explanation, and worlds do not contain it,
   that no prophet has espied it and no Apostle sought for it, that the
   Son Himself has not revealed it. Let such pitiful complaints cease.
   Whoever you are that search into these mysteries, I do not bid you
   resume your exploration of height and breadth and depth; I ask you
   rather to acquiesce patiently in your ignorance of the mode of Divine
   generation, seeing that you know not how His creatures come into
   existence. Answer me this one question:--Do your senses give you any
   evidence that you yourself were begotten? Can you explain the process
   by which you became a father? I do not ask whence you drew perception,
   how you obtained life, whence your reason comes, what is the nature of
   your senses of smell, touch, sight, hearing; the fact that we have the
   use of all these is the evidence that they exist. What I ask is:--How
   do you give them to your children? How do you ingraft the senses,
   lighten the eyes, implant the mind? Tell me, if you can. You have,
   then, powers which you do not understand, you impart gifts which you
   cannot comprehend. You are calmly indifferent to the mysteries of your
   own being, profanely impatient of ignorance concerning the mysteries of
   God's.

   10. Listen then to the Unbegotten Father, listen to the Only-begotten
   Son. Hear His words, The Father is greater than I [569] , and I and the
   Father are One [570] , and He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father
   also [571] , and The Father is in Me and I in the Father [572] , and I
   went out from the Father [573] , and Who is in the bosom of the Father
   [574] , and Whatsoever the Father hath He hath delivered to the Son
   [575] , and The Son hath life in Himself, even as the Father hath in
   Himself [576] . Hear in these words the Son, the Image, the Wisdom, the
   Power, the Glory of God. Next mark the Holy Ghost proclaiming Who shall
   declare His generation [577] ? Note [578] the Lord's assurance, No one
   knoweth the Son save the Father, neither doth any know the Father save
   the Son and He to whom the Son willeth to reveal Him [579] . Penetrate
   into the mystery, plunge into the darkness which shrouds that birth,
   where you will be alone with God the Unbegotten and God the
   Only-begotten. Make your start, continue, persevere. I know that you
   will not reach the goal, but I shall rejoice at your progress. For He
   who devoutly treads an endless road, though he reach no conclusion,
   will profit by his exertions. Reason will fail for want of words, but
   when it comes to a stand it will be the better for the effort made.

   11. The Son draws His life from that Father Who truly has life; the
   Only begotten from the Unbegotten, Offspring from Parent, Living from
   Living. As the Father hath life in Himself, even so gave He to the Son
   also to have life in Himself [580] . The Son is perfect from Him that
   is perfect, for He is whole from Him that is whole. This is no division
   or severance, for Each is in the Other, and the fulness of the Godhead
   is in the Son. Incomprehensible is begotten of Incomprehensible, for
   none else knows Them, but Each knows the Other; Invisible is begotten
   of Invisible, for the Son is the Image of the invisible God, and he
   that has seen the Son has seen the Father also. There is a distinction,
   for They are Father and Son; not that Their Divinity is different in
   kind, for Both are One, God of God, One God Only begotten of One God
   Unbegotten. They are not two Gods, but One of One; not two Unbegotten,
   for the Son is born of the Unborn. There is no diversity, for the life
   of the living God is in the living Christ. So much I have resolved to
   say concerning the nature of their Divinity; not imagining that I have
   succeeded in making a summary of the faith, but recognising that the
   theme is inexhaustible. So faith, you object, has no service to render,
   since there is nothing that it can comprehend. Not so; the proper
   service of faith is to grasp and confess the truth that it is
   incompetent to comprehend its Object.

   12. It remains to say something more concerning the mysterious
   generation of the Son; or rather this something more is everything. I
   quiver, I linger, my powers fail, I know not where to begin. I cannot
   tell the time of the Son's birth; it were impious not to be certain of
   the fact. Whom shall I entreat? Whom shall I call to my aid? From what
   books shall I borrow the terms needed to state so hard a problem? Shall
   I ransack the philosophy of Greece? No! I have read, Where is the wise?
   Where is the enquirer of this world [581] ? In this matter, then, the
   world's philosophers, the wise men of paganism, are dumb: for they have
   rejected the wisdom of God. Shall I turn to the Scribe of the law? He
   is in darkness, for the Cross of Christ is an offence to him. Shall I,
   perchance, bid you shut your eyes to heresy, and pass it by in silence,
   on the ground that sufficient reverence is shown to Him Whom we preach
   if we believe that lepers were cleansed, the deaf heard, the lame ran,
   the palsied stood, the blind (in general) received sight, the blind
   from his birth had eyes given to him [582] , devils were routed, the
   sick recovered, the dead lived. The heretics confess all this, and
   perish.

   13. Look now to see a thing not less miraculous than lame men running,
   blind men seeing, the flight of devils, the life from the dead. There
   stands by my side, to guide me through the difficulties which I have
   enunciated, a poor fisherman, ignorant, uneducated, fishing-lines in
   hand, clothes dripping, muddy feet, every inch a sailor. Consider and
   decide whether it were the greater feat to raise the dead or impart to
   an untrained mind the knowledge of mysteries so deep as he reveals by
   saying, In the beginning was the Word [583] . What means this In the
   beginning was? He ranges backward over the spaces of time, centuries
   are left behind, ages are cancelled. Fix in your mind what date you
   will for this beginning; you miss the mark, for even then He, of Whom
   we are speaking, was. Survey the universe, note well what is written of
   it, In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth [584] . This
   word beginning fixes the moment of creation; you can assign its date to
   an event which is definitely stated to have happened in the beginning.
   But this fisherman of mine, unlettered and unread, is untrammelled by
   time, undaunted by its immensity; he pierces beyond the beginning. For
   his was has no limit of time and no commencement; the uncreated Word
   was in the beginning.

   14. But perhaps we shall find that our fisherman has been guilty of
   departure from the terms of the problem proposed for solution [585] .
   He has set the Word free from the limitations of time; that which is
   free lives its own life and is bound to no obedience. Let us,
   therefore, pay our best attention to what follows:--And the Word was
   with God. We find that it is with God that the Word, Which was before
   the beginning, exists unconditioned by time. The Word, Which was, is
   with God. He Who is absent when we seek for His origin in time [586] is
   present all the while with the Creator of time. For this once our
   fisherman has escaped; perhaps he will succumb to the difficulties
   which await him.

   15. For you will plead that a word is the sound of a voice; that it is
   a naming of things, an utterance of thoughts. This Word was with God,
   and was in the beginning; the expression of the eternal Thinker's
   thoughts must be eternal. For the present I will give you a brief
   answer of my own on the fisherman's behalf, till we see what defence he
   has to make for his own simplicity. The nature, then, of a word is that
   it is first a potentiality, afterwards a past event; an existing thing
   only while it is being heard. How can we say, In the beginning was the
   Word, when a word neither exists before, nor lives after, a definite
   point of time? Can we even say that there is a point of time in which a
   word exists? Not only are the words in a speaker's mouth non-existent
   until they are spoken, and perished the instant they are uttered, but
   even in the moment of utterance there is a change from the sound which
   commences to that which ends a word. Such is the reply that suggests
   itself to me as a bystander. But your opponent the Fisherman has an
   answer of his own. He will begin by reproving you for your inattention.
   Even though your unpractised ear failed to catch the first clause, In
   the beginning was the Word, why complain of the next, And the Word was
   with God? Was it And the Word was in God that you heard,--the dictum of
   some profound philosophy? Or is it that your provincial dialect makes
   no distinction between in and with? The assertion is that Which was in
   the beginning was with, not in, Another. But I will not argue from the
   beginning of the sentence; the sequel can take care of itself. Hear now
   the rank and the name of the Word:--And the Word was God. Your plea
   that the Word is the sound of a voice, the utterance of a thought,
   falls to the ground. The Word is a reality, not a sound, a Being, not a
   speech, God, not a nonentity.

   16. But I tremble to say it; the audacity staggers me. I hear, And the
   Word was God; I, whom the prophets have taught that God is One. To save
   me from further fears, give me, friend Fisherman, a fuller imparting of
   this great mystery. Show that these assertions are consistent with the
   unity of God; that there is no blasphemy in them, no explaining away,
   no denial of eternity. He continues, He was in the beginning with God.
   This He was in the beginning removes the limit of time; the word God
   shows that He is more than a voice; that He is with God proves that He
   neither encroaches nor is encroached upon, for His identity is not
   swallowed up in that of Another, and He is clearly stated to be present
   with the One Unbegotten God as God, His One and Only-begotten Son.

   17. We are still waiting, Fisherman, for your full description of the
   Word. He was in the beginning, it may be said, but perhaps He was not
   before the beginning. To this also I will furnish a reply on my
   Fisherman's behalf. The Word could not be other than He was; that was
   is unconditional and unlimited. But what says the Fisherman for
   himself? All things were made through Him. Thus, since nothing exists
   apart from Him through Whom the universe came into being, He, the
   Author of all things, must have an immeasurable existence. For time is
   a cognisable and divisible measure of extension, not in space, but in
   duration. All things are from Him, without exception; time then itself
   is His creature.

   18. But, my Fisherman, the objection will be raised that you are
   reckless and extravagant in your language; that All things were made
   through Him needs qualification. There is the Unbegotten, made of none;
   there is also the Son, begotten of the Unborn Father. This All things
   is an unguarded statement, admitting no exceptions. While we are
   silent, not daring to answer or trying to think of some reply, do you
   break in with, And without Him was nothing made. You have restored the
   Author of the Godhead to His place, while proclaiming that He has a
   Companion. From your saying that nothing was made without Him, I learn
   that He was not alone. He through Whom the work was done is One; He
   without Whom it was not done is Another: a distinction is drawn between
   Creator and Companion.

   19. Reverence for the One Unbegotten Creator distressed me, lest in
   your sweeping assertion that all things were made by the Word you had
   included Him. You have banished my fears by your Without Him was
   nothing made. Yet this same Without Him was nothing made brings trouble
   and distraction. There was, then, something made by that Other; not
   made, it is true, without Him. If the Other did make anything, even
   though the Word were present at the making, then it is untrue that
   through Him all things were made. It is one thing to be the Creator's
   Companion, quite another to be the Creator's Self. I could find answers
   of my own to the previous objections; in this case, Fisherman, I can
   only turn at once to your words, All things were made through Him. And
   now I understand, for the Apostle has enlightened me:--Things visible
   and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or
   powers, all are through Him and in Him [587] .

   20. Since, then, all things were made through Him, come to our help and
   tell us what it was that was made not without Him. That which was made
   in Him is life. That which was made in Him was certainly not made
   without Him; for that which was made in Him was also made through Him.
   All things were created in Him and through Him [588] . They were
   created in Him [589] , for He was born as God the Creator. Again,
   nothing that was made in Him was made without Him, for the reason that
   God the Begotten was life, and was born as Life, not made life after
   His birth; for there are not two elements in Him, one inborn and one
   afterwards conferred. There is no interval in His case between birth
   and maturity. None of the things that were created in Him was made
   without Him, for He is the Life which made their creation possible.
   Moreover God, the Son of God, became God by virtue of His birth, not
   after He was born. Being born the Living from the Living, the True from
   the True, the Perfect from the Perfect, He was born in full possession
   of His powers. He needed not to learn in after time what His birth was,
   but was conscious of His Godhead by the very fact that He was born as
   God of God. I and the Father are One [590] , are the words of the
   Only-begotten Son of the Unbegotten. It is the voice of the One God
   proclaiming Himself to be Father and Son; Father speaking in the Son
   and Son in the Father. Hence also He that hath seen Me hath seen the
   Father also [591] ; hence All that the Father hath, He hath given to
   the Son [592] ; hence As the Father hath life in Himself so hath He
   given to the Son to have life in Himself [593] ; hence No one knoweth
   the Father save the Son, nor the Son save the Father [594] ; hence In
   Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily [595] .

   21. This Life is the Light of men, the Light which lightens the
   darkness. To comfort us for that powerlessness to describe His
   generation of which the prophet speaks [596] , the Fisherman adds, And
   the darkness comprehended Him not [597] . The language of unaided
   reason was baffled and silenced; the Fisherman who lay on the bosom of
   the Lord was taught to express the mystery. His language is not the
   world's language, for He deals with things that are not of the world.
   Let us know what it is, if there be any teaching that you can extract
   from his words, more than their plain sense conveys; if you can
   translate into other terms the truth we have elicited, publish them
   abroad. If there be none--indeed, because there are none--let us accept
   with reverence this teaching of the fisherman, and recognise in his
   words the oracles of God. Let us cling in adoration to the true
   confession of Father and Son, Unbegotten and Only-begotten ineffably,
   Whose majesty defies all expression and all perception. Let us, like
   John, lie on the bosom of the Lord Jesus, that we too may understand
   and proclaim the mystery.

   22. This faith, and every part of it, is impressed upon us by the
   evidence of the Gospels, by the teaching of the Apostles, by the
   futility of the treacherous attacks which heretics make on every side.
   The foundation stands firm and unshaken in face of winds and rains and
   torrents; storms cannot overthrow it, nor dripping waters hollow it,
   nor floods sweep it away. Its excellence is proved by the failure of
   countless assaults to impair it. Certain remedies are so compounded as
   to be of value not merely against some single disease but against all;
   they are of universal efficacy. So it is with the Catholic faith. It is
   not a medicine for some special malady, but for every ill; virulence
   cannot master, nor numbers defeat, nor complexity baffle it. One and
   unchanging it faces and conquers all its foes. Marvellous it is that
   one form of words should contain a remedy for every disease, a
   statement of truth to confront every contrivance of falsehood. Let
   heresy muster its forces and every sect come forth to battle. Let our
   answer to their challenge be that there is One Unbegotten God the
   Father, and One Only-begotten Son of God, perfect Offspring of perfect
   Parent; that the Sun was begotten by no lessening of the Father or
   subtraction from His Substance, but that He Who possesses all things
   begot an all-possessing Son; a Son not emanating nor proceeding from
   the Father, but compact of, and inherent in, the whole Divinity, of Him
   Who wherever He is present is present eternally; One free from time,
   unlimited in duration, since by Him all things were made [598] , and,
   indeed, He could not be confined within a limit created by Himself.
   Such is the Catholic and Apostolic Faith which the Gospel has taught us
   and we avow.

   23. Let Sabellius, if he dare, confound Father and Son as two names
   with one meaning, making of them not Unity but One Person. He shall
   have a prompt answer from the Gospels, not once or twice, but often
   repeated, This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased [599] . He
   shall hear the words, The Father is greater than I [600] , and I go to
   the Father [601] , and Father, I thank Thee [602] , and Glorify Me,
   Father [603] , and Thou art the Son of the living God [604] . Let
   Hebion try to sap the faith, who allows the Son of God no life before
   the Virgin's womb, and sees in Him the Word only after His life as
   flesh had begun. We will bid him read again, Father, glorify Me with
   Thine own Self with that glory which I had with Thee before the world
   was [605] , and In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
   God, and the Word was God [606] , and All things were made through Him
   [607] , and He was in the world, and the world was made through Him,
   and the world knew Him not [608] . Let the preachers whose apostleship
   is of the newest fashion--an apostleship of Antichrist--come forward
   and pour their mockery and insult upon the Son of God. They must hear,
   I came out from the Father [609] and The Son in the Father's bosom
   [610] , and I and the Father are One [611] , and I in the Father, and
   the Father in Me [612] . And lastly, if they be wrath, as the Jews
   were, that Christ should claim God for His own Father, making Himself
   equal with God, they must take the answer which He gave the Jews,
   Believe My works, that the Father is in Me and I in the Father [613] .
   Thus our one immovable foundation, our one blissful rock of faith, is
   the confession from Peter's mouth, Thou art the Son of the living God
   [614] . On it we can base an answer to every objection with which
   perverted ingenuity or embittered treachery may assail the truth.

   24. In what remains we have the appointment of the Father's will. The
   Virgin, the birth, the Body, then the Cross, the death, the visit to
   the lower world; these things are our salvation. For the sake of
   mankind the Son of God was born of the Virgin and of the Holy Ghost. In
   this process He ministered to Himself; by His own power--the power of
   God--which overshadowed her He sowed the beginning of His Body, and
   entered on the first stage of His life in the flesh. He did it that by
   His Incarnation He might take to Himself from the Virgin the fleshly
   nature, and that through this commingling there might come into being a
   hallowed Body of all humanity; that so through that Body which He was
   pleased to assume all mankind might be hid in Him, and He in return,
   through His unseen existence, be reproduced in all. Thus the invisible
   Image of God scorned not the shame which marks the beginnings of human
   life. He passed through every stage; through conception, birth,
   wailing, cradle and each successive humiliation.

   25. What worthy return can we make for so great a condescension? The
   One Only-begotten God, ineffably born of God, entered the Virgin's womb
   and grew and took the frame of poor humanity. He Who upholds the
   universe, within Whom and through Whom are all things, was brought
   forth by common childbirth; He at Whose voice Archangels and Angels
   tremble, and heaven and earth and all the elements of this world are
   melted, was heard in childish wailing. The Invisible and
   Incomprehensible, Whom sight and feeling and touch cannot gauge, was
   wrapped in a cradle. If any man deem all this unworthy of God, the
   greater must he own his debt for the benefit conferred the less such
   condescension befits the majesty of God. He by Whom man was made had
   nothing to gain by becoming Man; it was our gain that God was incarnate
   and dwelt among us, making all flesh His home by taking upon Him the
   flesh of One. We were raised because He was lowered; shame to Him was
   glory to us. He, being God, made flesh His residence, and we in return
   are lifted anew from the flesh to God.

   26. But lest perchance fastidious minds be exercised by cradle and
   wailing, birth and conception, we must render to God the glory which
   each of these contains, that we may approach His self-abasement with
   souls duly filled with His claim to reign, and not forget His majesty
   in His condescension. Let us note, therefore, who were attendant on His
   conception. An Angel speaks to Zacharias; fertility is given to the
   barren; the priest comes forth dumb from the place of incense; John
   bursts forth into speech while yet confined within his mother's womb;
   an Angel blesses Mary and promises that she, a virgin, shall be the
   mother of the Son of God. Conscious of her virginity, she is distressed
   at this hard thing; the Angel explains to her the mighty working of
   God, saying, The Holy Ghost shall come from above into thee, and the
   power of the Most High shall overshadow thee [615] . The Holy Ghost,
   descending from above, hallowed the Virgin's womb, and breathing
   therein (for The Spirit bloweth where it listeth [616] ), mingled
   Himself with the fleshly nature of man, and annexed by force and might
   that foreign domain. And, lest through weakness of the human structure
   failure should ensue, the power of the Most High overshadowed the
   Virgin, strengthening her feebleness in semblance of a cloud cast round
   her, that the shadow, which was the might of God, might fortify her
   bodily frame to receive the procreative power of the Spirit. Such is
   the glory of the conception.

   27. And now let us consider the glory which accompanies the birth, the
   wailing and the cradle. The Angel tells Joseph that the Virgin shall
   bear a Son, and that Son shall be named Emmanuel, that is, God with us.
   The Spirit foretells it through the prophet, the Angel bears witness;
   He that is born is God with us. The light of a new star shines forth
   for the Magi; a heavenly sign escorts the Lord of heaven. An Angel
   brings to the shepherds the news that Christ the Lord is born, the
   Saviour of the world. A multitude of the heavenly host flock together
   to sing the praise of that childbirth; the rejoicing of the Divine
   company proclaims the fulfilment of the mighty work. Then glory to God
   in heaven, and peace on earth to men of good will is announced. And now
   the Magi come and worship Him wrapped in swaddling clothes; after a
   life devoted to mystic rites of vain philosophy they bow the knee
   before a Babe laid in His cradle. Thus the Magi stoop to reverence the
   infirmities of Infancy; its cries are saluted by the heavenly joy of
   angels; the Spirit Who inspired the prophet, the heralding Angel, the
   light of the new star, all minister around Him. In such wise was it
   that the Holy Ghost's descent and the overshadowing power of the Most
   High brought Him to His birth. The inward reality is widely different
   from the outward appearance; the eye sees one thing, the soul another.
   A virgin bears; her child is of God. An Infant wails; angels are heard
   in praise. There are coarse swaddling clothes; God is being worshipped.
   The glory of His Majesty is not forfeited when He assumes the lowliness
   of flesh.

   28. So was it also during His further life on earth. The whole time
   which He passed in human form was spent upon the works of God. I have
   no space for details; it must suffice to say that in all the varied
   acts of power and healing which He wrought, the fact is conspicuous
   that He was man by virtue of the flesh He had taken, God by the
   evidence of the works He did.

   29. Concerning the Holy Spirit I ought not to be silent, and yet I have
   no need to speak; still, for the sake of those who are in ignorance, I
   cannot refrain. There is no need to speak, because we are bound to
   confess Him, proceeding, as He does, from Father and Son [617] . For my
   own part, I think it wrong to discuss the question of His existence. He
   does exist, inasmuch as He is given, received, retained; He is joined
   with Father and Son in our confession of the faith, and cannot be
   excluded from a true confession of Father and Son; take away a part,
   and the whole faith is marred. If any man demand what meaning we attach
   to this conclusion, he, as well as we, has read the words of the
   Apostle, Because ye are sons of God, God hath sent the Spirit of His
   Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father [618] , and Grieve not the
   Holy Spirit of God, in Whom ye have been sealed [619] , and again, But
   we have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is
   of God, that we may know the things that are given unto us by God [620]
   , and also But ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that
   the Spirit of God is in you. But if any man hath not the Spirit of
   Christ, he is not His [621] , and further, But if the Spirit of Him
   that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, He that raised up
   Christ from the dead shall quicken also your mortal bodies for the sake
   of His Spirit which dwelleth in you [622] . Wherefore since He is, and
   is given, and is possessed, and is of God, let His traducers take
   refuge in silence. When they ask, Through Whom is He? To what end does
   He exist? Of what nature is He? we answer that He it is through Whom
   all things exist, and from Whom are all things, and that He is the
   Spirit of God, God's gift to the faithful. If our answer displease
   them, their displeasure must also fall upon the Apostles and the
   Prophets, who spoke of Him exactly as we have spoken. And furthermore,
   Father and Son must incur the same displeasure.

   30. The reason, I believe, why certain people continue in ignorance or
   doubt is that they see this third Name, that of the Holy Spirit, often
   used to signify the Father or the Son. No objection need be raised to
   this; whether it be Father or Son, He is Spirit, and He is holy.

   31. But the words of the Gospel, For God is Spirit [623] , need careful
   examination as to their sense and their purpose. For every saying has
   an antecedent cause and an aim which must be ascertained by study of
   the meaning. We must bear this in mind lest, on the strength of the
   words, God is Spirit, we deny not only the Name, but also the work and
   the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Lord was speaking with a woman of
   Samaria, for He had come to be the Redeemer for all mankind. After He
   had discoursed at length of the living water, and of her five husbands,
   and of him whom she then had who was not her husband, the woman
   answered, Lord, I perceive that Thou art a prophet. Our fathers
   worshipped in this mountain; and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place
   where men ought to worship [624] . The Lord replied, Woman, believe Me,
   the hour cometh when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall
   ye worship the Father. Ye worship that which ye know not; we worship
   that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews. But the hour
   cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father
   in the Spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship Him.
   For God is Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship in the Spirit
   and in truth, for God is Spirit [625] . We see that the woman, her mind
   full of inherited tradition, thought that God must be worshipped either
   on a mountain, as at Samaria, or in a temple, as at Jerusalem; for
   Samaria in disobedience to the Law had chosen a site upon the mountain
   for worship, while the Jews regarded the temple founded by Solomon as
   the home of their religion, and the prejudices of both confined the
   all-embracing and illimitable God to the crest of a hill or the vault
   of a building. God is invisible, incomprehensible, immeasurable; the
   Lord said that the time had come when God should be worshipped neither
   on mountain nor in temple. For Spirit cannot be cabined or confined; it
   is omnipresent in space and time, and under all conditions present in
   its fulness. Therefore, He said, they are the true worshippers who
   shall worship in the Spirit and in truth. And these who are to worship
   God the Spirit in the Spirit shall have the One for the means, the
   Other for the object, of their reverence: for Each of the Two stands in
   a different relation to the worshipper. The words, God is Spirit, do
   not alter the fact that the Holy Spirit has a Name of His own, and that
   He is the Gift to us. The woman who confined God to hill or temple was
   told that God contains all things and is self-contained: that He, the
   Invisible and Incomprehensible must be worshipped by invisible and
   incomprehensible means. The imparted gift and the object of reverence
   were clearly shewn when Christ taught that God, being Spirit, must be
   worshipped in the Spirit, and revealed what freedom and knowledge, what
   boundless scope for adoration, lay in this worship of God, the Spirit,
   in the Spirit.

   32. The words of the Apostle are of like purport; For the Lord is
   Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty [626] .
   To make his meaning clear he has distinguished between the Spirit, Who
   exists, and Him Whose Spirit He is Proprietor and Property, He and His
   are different in sense. Thus when he says, The Lord is Spirit he
   reveals the infinity of God; when He adds, Where the Spirit of the Lord
   is, there is liberty, he indicates Him Who belongs to God; for He is
   the Spirit of the Lord, and Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
   liberty. The Apostle makes the statement not from any necessity of his
   own argument, but in the interests of clearness. For the Holy Ghost is
   everywhere One, enlightening all patriarchs and prophets and the whole
   company of the Law, inspiring John even in his mother's womb, given in
   due time to the Apostles and other believers, that they might recognise
   the truth vouchsafed them.

   33. Let us hear from our Lord's own words what is the work of the Holy
   Ghost within us. He says, I have yet many things to say unto you, but
   ye cannot bear them now [627] . For it is expedient for you that I go:
   if I go I will send you the Advocate [628] . And again, I will ask the
   Father and He shall send you another Advocate, that He may be with you
   for ever, even the Spirit of truth [629] . He shall guide you into all
   truth, for He shall not speak from Himself, but whatsoever things He
   shall hear He shall speak, and He shall declare unto you the things
   that are to come. He shall glorify Me, for He shall take of Mine [630]
   . These words were spoken to show how multitudes should enter the
   kingdom of heaven; they contain an assurance of the goodwill of the
   Giver, and of the mode and terms of the Gift. They tell how, because
   our feeble minds cannot comprehend the Father or the Son, our faith
   which finds God's incarnation hard of credence shall be illumined by
   the gift of the Holy Ghost, the Bond of union and the Source of light.

   34. The next step naturally is to listen to the Apostle's account of
   the powers and functions of this Gift. He says, As many as are led by
   the Spirit of God, these are the children of God. For ye received not
   the Spirit of bondage again unto fear, but ye received the Spirit of
   adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father [631] ; and again, For no man by
   the Spirit of God saith anathema to Jesus, and no man can say, Jesus is
   Lord, but in the Holy Spirit [632] ; and he adds, Now there are
   diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, and diversities of
   ministrations, but the same Lord, and diversities of workings, but the
   same God, Who worketh all things in all. But to each one is given the
   enlightenment of the Spirit, to profit withal. Now to one is given
   through the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge
   according to the same Spirit, to another faith in the same Spirit, to
   another gifts of healings in the One Spirit, to another workings of
   miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to
   another kinds of tongues, to another interpretation of tongues. But all
   these worketh the One and same Spirit [633] . Here we have a statement
   of the purpose and results of the Gift; and I cannot conceive what
   doubt can remain, after so clear a definition of His Origin, His action
   and His powers.

   35. Let us therefore make use of this great benefit, and seek for
   personal experience of this most needful Gift. For the Apostle says, in
   words I have already cited, But we have not received the spirit of this
   world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things that
   are given unto us by God [634] . We receive Him, then, that we may
   know. Faculties of the human body, if denied their exercise, will lie
   dormant. The eye without light, natural or artificial, cannot fulfil
   its office; the ear will be ignorant of its function unless some voice
   or sound be heard; the nostrils unconscious of their purpose unless
   some scent be breathed. Not that the faculty will be absent, because it
   is never called into use, but that there will be no experience of its
   existence. So, too, the soul of man, unless through faith it have
   appropriated the gift of the Spirit, will have the innate faculty of
   apprehending God, but be destitute of the light of knowledge. That
   Gift, which is in Christ, is One, yet offered, and offered fully, to
   all; denied to none, and given to each according to the measure of his
   willingness to receive; its stores the richer, the more earnest the
   desire to earn them. This gift is with us unto the end of the world,
   the solace of our waiting, the assurance, by the favours which He
   bestows, of the hope that shall be ours, the light of our minds, the
   sun of our souls. This Holy Spirit we must seek and must earn, and then
   hold fast by faith and obedience to the commands of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [556] St. Matt. xxviii. 19, 20.

   [557] Reading non antea.

   [558] Cf. St. Matt. xi. 27.

   [559] Reading a se, instead of alter.

   [560] This is merely a verbal paradox, to illustrate the inadequacy of
   language to treat of God. God is ex hypothesi author of all things, and
   contains all things in Himself. But the negative term immortal'
   excludes death, and its concomitants of disease, pain, &c., from God's
   sphere.

   [561] St. Matt. iii. 17; xvii. 5. Again in § 23 Hilary says that these
   words were often repeated.

   [562] St. John x. 38.

   [563] Ib. xiv. 9.

   [564] Ib. v. 26.

   [565] Ib. xvi. 15.

   [566] Ib. xvii. 10. The words which follow, "and Whatsoever the Father
   hath He Hath given to the Son," printed in the editions as a Scriptural
   citation, are evidently a gloss which has crept into the text. The
   words do not occur in Scripture, but are used by Hilary in § 10 of this
   Book.

   [567] Col. ii. 9.

   [568] Omitting esse.

   [569] St. John xiv. 28.

   [570] Ib. x. 30.

   [571] Ib. xiv. 9.

   [572] Ib. x. 38.

   [573] Ib. xvi. 28.

   [574] Ib. i. 18.

   [575] The citation which is interpolated in § 8, where see the note,
   and cf. St. Matt. xi. 25.

   [576] St. John v. 26.

   [577] Isai. liii. 8.

   [578] Reading observa.

   [579] St. Matt. xi. 27.

   [580] St. John v. 26.

   [581] 1 Cor. i. 20.

   [582] The healing of the blind man, St. John ix. 1 ff., is treated as a
   special case distinct from more ordinary cases of blindness.

   [583] St. John i. 1.

   [584] Gen. i. 1.

   [585] I.e. how to reconcile the Unity of God with the Divinity of
   Christ. To say that the Word is God might seem to contradict the Unity
   by asserting the existence of a second God.

   [586] Reading a cognitione temporis.

   [587] Col. i. 16.

   [588] Cf. Col. i. 16.

   [589] I.e. potentially.

   [590] St. John x. 30.

   [591] Ib. xiv. 9.

   [592] Ib. xvi. 15.

   [593] Ib. v. 26.

   [594] St. Matt. xi. 27.

   [595] Col. ii. 9. The argument of §§ 18-20 is not easy. They begin with
   the possible objection to All things were made through Him, that this
   would include the Father among the Son's creations. The answer is found
   in the following words, Without Him was not anything made. These show
   that the Son was not alone in His work; the Father is co-existent. But
   they raise another difficulty. What if the Father were the sole agent
   in creation, the Son only His inseparable Companion, yet taking no
   share in the work? The answer is found in the preceding words, All
   things were made through Him, amplified and explained by St. Paul when
   He says that it was through Him and in Him. In Him, because when the
   Son, the future Creator, was born, the world was potentially created;
   in Him also because He is Life, and thus the condition of all
   existence. Again, the truth of the words, All things were made through
   Him, is shewn by the manner of His birth. It was instantaneous, and He
   was born endowed with all His powers. We may say therefore that He was
   the author of His own existence; All things were made through Him, with
   the necessary exception of the Father.

   [596] Isai. liii. 8.

   [597] St. John i. 4.

   [598] Reading sint.

   [599] St. Matt. xvii. 5. See the note to § 8.

   [600] St. John xiv. 28.

   [601] Ib. 12.

   [602] Ib. xi. 41.

   [603] Ib. xvii. 5.

   [604] St. Matt. xvi. 17.

   [605] St. John xvii. 5.

   [606] Ib. i. 1.

   [607] Ib. i. 3.

   [608] Ib. i. 10.

   [609] Ib. xvi. 28.

   [610] Ib. i. 18.

   [611] Ib. x. 30.

   [612] Ib. xiv. 11.

   [613] Ib. x. 38.

   [614] St. Matt. xvi. 16.

   [615] St. Luke i. 35.

   [616] St. John iii. 8.

   [617] Qui Patre et Filio auctoribus confitendus est; A comparison with
   dum et usum et auctorem eius ignorant in § 4 makes this appear the
   probable translation. It might, of course, mean confess Him on the
   evidence of Father and Son.

   [618] Gal. iv. 6.

   [619] Eph. iv. 30.

   [620] 1 Cor. ii. 12.

   [621] Rom. viii. 9.

   [622] Ib. 11.

   [623] St. John iv. 24.

   [624] Ib. 19, 20.

   [625] Ib. 21-24.

   [626] 2 Cor. iii. 17.

   [627] St. John xvi. 12.

   [628] Ib. 7.

   [629] Ib. xiv. 16, 17.

   [630] Ib. xiv. 13, 14.

   [631] Rom. viii. 14, 15.

   [632] 1 Cor. xii. 3.

   [633] Ib. 4-11.

   [634] 1 Cor. ii. 12, cited in § 29.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book III.

   1. The words of the Lord, I in the Father, and the Father in Me [635] ,
   confuse many minds, and not unnaturally, for the powers of human reason
   cannot provide them with any intelligible meaning. It seems impossible
   that one object should be both within and without another, or that
   (since it is laid down that the Beings of whom we are treating, though
   They do not dwell apart, retain their separate existence and condition)
   these Beings can reciprocally contain One Another, so that One should
   permanently envelope, and also be permanently enveloped by, the Other,
   whom yet He envelopes. This is a problem which the wit of man will
   never solve, nor will human research ever find an analogy for this
   condition of Divine existence. But what man cannot understand, God can
   be. I do not mean to say that the fact that this is an assertion made
   by God renders it at once intelligible to us. We must think for
   ourselves, and come to know the meaning of the words, I in the Father,
   and the Father in Me: but this will depend upon our success in grasping
   the truth that reasoning based upon Divine verities can establish its
   conclusions, even though they seem to contradict the laws of the
   universe.

   2. In order to solve as easily as possible this most difficult problem,
   we must first master the knowledge which the Divine Scriptures give of
   Father and of Son, that so we may speak with more precision, as dealing
   with familiar and accustomed matters. The eternity of the Father, as we
   concluded after full discussion in the last Book, transcends space, and
   time, and appearance, and all the forms of human thought. He is without
   and within all things, He contains all and can be contained by none, is
   incapable of change by increase or diminution, invisible,
   incomprehensible, full, perfect, eternal, not deriving anything that He
   has from another, but, if ought be derived from Him, still complete and
   self-sufficing.

   3. He therefore, the Unbegotten, before time was begot a Son from
   Himself; not from any pre-existent matter, for all things are through
   the Son; not from nothing, for the Son is from the Father's self; not
   by way of childbirth, for in God there is neither change nor void; not
   as a piece of Himself cut or torn off or stretched out, for God is
   passionless and bodiless, and only a possible and embodied being could
   so be treated, and, as the Apostle says, in Christ dwelleth all the
   fulness of the Godhead bodily [636] . Incomprehensibly, ineffably,
   before time or worlds, He begat the Only-begotten from His own
   unbegotten substance, bestowing through love and power His whole
   Divinity upon that Birth. Thus He is the Only-begotten, perfect,
   eternal Son of the unbegotten, perfect, eternal Father. But those
   properties which He has in consequence of the Body which He took, are
   the fruit of His goodwill toward our salvation. For He, being invisible
   and bodiless and incomprehensible, as the Son of God, took upon Him
   such a measure of matter and of lowliness as was needed to bring Him
   within the range of our understanding, and perception, and
   contemplation. It was a condescension to our feebleness rather than a
   surrender of His own proper attributes.

   4. He, therefore, being the perfect Father's perfect Son, the
   Only-begotten Offspring of the unbegotten God, who has received all
   from Him Who possesses all, being God from God, Spirit from Spirit,
   Light from Light, says boldly, The Father in Me, and I in the Father
   [637] . For as the Father is Spirit, so is the Son Spirit; as the
   Father is God, so is the Son God; as the Father is Light, so is the Son
   Light. Thus those properties which are in the Father are the source of
   those wherewith the Son is endowed; that is, He is wholly Son of Him
   Who is wholly Father; not imported from without, for before the Son
   nothing was; not made from nothing, for the Son is from God; not a son
   partially, for the fulness of the Godhead is in the Son; not a Son in
   some respects, but in all; a Son according to the will of Him who had
   the power, after a manner which He only knows. What is in the Father is
   in the Son also; what is in the Unbegotten is in the Only-begotten
   also. The One is from the Other, and they Two are a Unity; not Two made
   One, yet One in the Other, for that which is in Both is the same. The
   Father is in the Son, for the Son is from Him; the Son is in the
   Father, because the Father is His sole Origin; the Only-begotten is in
   the Unbegotten, because He is the Only-begotten from the Unbegotten.
   Thus mutually Each is in the Other, for as all is perfect in the
   Unbegotten Father, so all is perfect in the Only-begotten Son. This is
   the Unity which is in Son and Father, this the power, this the love;
   our hope, and faith, and truth, and way, and life is not to dispute the
   Father's powers or to depreciate the Son, but to reverence the mystery
   and majesty of His birth; to set the unbegotten Father above all
   rivalry, and count the Only-begotten Son as His equal in eternity and
   might, confessing concerning God the Son that He is from God.

   5. Such powers are there in God; powers which the methods of our reason
   cannot comprehend, but of which our faith, on the sure evidence of His
   action, is convinced. We shall find instances of this action in the
   bodily sphere as well as in the spiritual, its manifestation taking,
   not the form of an analogy which might illustrate the Birth, but of a
   deed marvellous yet comprehensible. On the wedding day in Galilee water
   was made wine. Have we words to tell or senses to ascertain what
   methods produced the change by which the tastelessness of water
   disappeared, and was replaced by the full flavour of wine? It was not a
   mixing; it was a creation, and a creation which was not a beginning,
   but a transformation. A weaker liquid was not obtained by admixture of
   a stronger element; an existing thing perished and a new thing came
   into being. The bridegroom was anxious, the household in confusion, the
   harmony of the marriage feast imperilled. Jesus is asked for help. He
   does not rise or busy Himself; He does the work without an effort.
   Water is poured into the vessels, wine drawn out in the cups. The
   evidence of the senses of the pourer contradicts that of the drawer.
   They who poured expect water to be drawn; they who draw think that wine
   must have been poured in. The intervening time cannot account for any
   gain or loss of character in the liquid. The mode of action baffles
   sight and sense, but the power of God is manifest in the result
   achieved.

   6. In the case of the five loaves a miracle of the same type excites
   our wonder. By their increase five thousand men and countless women and
   children are saved from hunger; the method eludes our powers of
   observation. Five loaves are offered and broken; while the Apostles are
   dividing them a succession of new-created portions passes, they cannot
   tell how, through their hands. The loaf which they are dividing grows
   no smaller, yet their hands are continually full of the pieces. The
   swiftness of the process baffles sight; you follow with the eye a hand
   full of portions, and meantime you see that the contents of the other
   hand are not diminished, and all the while the heap of pieces grows.
   The carvers are busy at their task, the eaters are hard at work; the
   hungry are satisfied, and the fragments fill twelve baskets. Sight or
   sense cannot discover the mode of so noteworthy a miracle. What was not
   existent is created; what we see passes our understanding. Our only
   resource is faith in God's omnipotence.

   7. There is no deception in these miracles of God, no subtle pretence
   to please or to deceive. These works of the Son of God were done from
   no desire for self-display; He Whom countless myriads of angels serve
   never deluded man. What was there of ours that He could need, through
   Whom all that we have was created? Did He demand praise from us who now
   are heavy with sleep, now sated with lust, now laden with the guilt of
   riot and bloodshed, now drunken from revelling;--He Whom Archangels,
   and Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers, without sleep or
   cessation or sin, praise in heaven with everlasting and unwearied
   voice? They praise Him because He, the Image of the Invisible God,
   created all their host in Himself, made the worlds, established the
   heavens, appointed the stars, fixed the earth, laid the foundations of
   the deep; because in after time He was born, He conquered death, broke
   the gates of hell, won for Himself a people to be His fellow-heirs,
   lifted flesh from corruption up to the glory of eternity. There was
   nothing, then, that He might gain from us, that could induce Him to
   assume the splendour of these mysterious and inexplicable works, as
   though He needed our praise. But God foresaw how human sin and folly
   would be misled, and knew that disbelief would dare to pass its
   judgment even on the things of God, and therefore He vanquished
   presumption by tokens of His power which must give pause to our
   boldest.

   8. For there are many of those wise men of the world whose wisdom is
   folly with God, who contradict our proclamation of God from God, True
   from True, Perfect from Perfect, One from One, as though we taught
   things impossible. They pin their faith to certain conclusions which
   they have reached by process of logic:--Nothing can be born of one, for
   every birth requires two parents, and If this Son be born of One He has
   received a part of His Begetter: if He be a part, then Neither of the
   Two is perfect, for something is missing from Him from Whom the Son
   issued, and there cannot be fulness in One Who consists of a portion of
   Another. Thus Neither is perfect, for the Begetter has lost His
   fulness, and the Begotten has not acquired it. This is that wisdom of
   the world which was foreseen by God even in the prophet's days, and
   condemned through him in the words, I will destroy the wisdom of the
   wise, and reject the understanding of the prudent [638] . And the
   apostle says: Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the
   inquirer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this
   world? For because in the wisdom of God the world through wisdom knew
   not God, it pleased God through the foolishness of preaching to save
   them that believe. For the Jews seek signs, and the Greeks seek wisdom,
   but we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews indeed a stumbling-block
   and to the Gentiles foolishness, but unto them that are called, both
   Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. Because
   the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
   stronger than men [639] .

   9. The Son of God, therefore, having the charge of mankind, was first
   made man, that men might believe on Him; that He might be to us a
   witness, sprung from ourselves, of things Divine, and preach to us,
   weak and carnal as we are, through the weakness of the flesh concerning
   God the Father, so fulfilling the Father's will, even as He says, I
   came not to do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent Me [640] .
   It was not that He Himself was unwilling, but that He might manifest
   His obedience as the result of His Father's will, for His own will is
   to do His Father's. This is that will to carry out the Father's will of
   which He testifies in the words: Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy
   Son, that Thy Son may glorify Thee; even as Thou hast given Him power
   over all flesh, that whatsoever Thou hast given Him, He should give it
   eternal life. And this is life eternal, that they should know Thee the
   only true God, and Him Whom Thou didst send, Jesus Christ. I have
   glorified Thee upon earth, having accomplished the work which Thou
   gavest Me to do. And now, O Father, glorify Me with Thine own Self with
   the glory which I had with Thee before the world was. I have manifested
   Thy Name unto the men whom Thou hast given Me [641] . In words short
   and few He has revealed the whole task to which He was appointed and
   assigned. Yet those words, short and few as they are, are the true
   faith's safeguard against every suggestion of the devil's cunning. Let
   us briefly consider the force of each separate phrase.

   10. He says, Father the hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son may
   glorify Thee. He says that the hour, not the day nor the time, is come.
   An hour is a fraction of a day. What hour must this be? The hour, of
   course, of which He speaks, to strengthen His disciples, at the time of
   His passion:--Lo, the hour is come that the Son of Man should be
   glorified [642] . This then is the hour in which He prays to be
   glorified by the Father, that He Himself may glorify the Father. But
   what does He mean? Does One who is about to give glory look to receive
   it? Does One who is about to confer honour make request for Himself? Is
   He in want of the very thing which He is about to repay? Here let the
   world's philosophers, the wise men of Greece, beset our path, and
   spread their syllogistic nets to entangle the truth. Let them ask How?
   and Whence? and Why? When they can find no answer, let us tell them
   that it is because God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
   confound the wise [643] . That is the reason why we in our foolishness
   understand [644] things incomprehensible to the world's philosophers.
   The Lord had said, Father, the hour is come; He had revealed the hour
   of His passion, for these words were spoken at the very moment; and
   then He added, Glorify Thy Son. But how was the Son to be glorified? He
   had been born of a virgin, from cradle and childhood He had grown to
   man's estate, through sleep and hunger and thirst and weariness and
   tears He had lived man's life: even now He was to be spitted on,
   scourged, crucified. And why? These things were ordained for our
   assurance that in Christ is pure man. But the shame of the cross is not
   ours; we are not sentenced to the scourge, nor defiled by spitting. The
   Father glorifies the Son; how? He is next nailed to the cross. Then
   what followed? The sun, instead of setting, fled. How so? It did not
   retire behind a cloud, but abandoned its appointed orbit, and all the
   elements of the world felt that same shock of the death of Christ. The
   stars in their courses, to avoid complicity in the crime, escaped by
   self-extinction from beholding the scene. What did the earth? It
   quivered beneath the burden of the Lord hanging on the tree, protesting
   that it was powerless to confine Him who was dying. Yet surely rock and
   stone will not refuse Him a resting-place. Yes, they are rent and
   cloven, and their strength fails. They must confess that the rock-hewn
   sepulchre cannot imprison the Body which awaits its burial.

   11. And next? The centurion of the cohort, the guardian of the cross,
   cries out, Truly this was the Son of God [645] . Creation is set free
   by the mediation of this Sin-offering; the very rocks lose their
   solidity and strength. They who had nailed Him to the cross confess
   that truly this is the Son of God. The outcome justifies the assertion.
   The Lord had said, Glorify Thy Son. He had asserted, by that word Thy,
   that He was God's Son not in name only, but in nature. Multitudes of us
   are sons of God; He is Son in another sense. For He is God's true and
   own Son, by origin and not by adoption, not by name only but in truth,
   born and not created. So, after He was glorified, that confession
   touched the truth; the centurion confessed Him the true Son of God,
   that no believer might doubt a fact which even the servant of His
   persecutors could not deny.

   12. But perhaps some may suppose that He was destitute of that glory
   for which He prayed, and that His looking to be glorified by a Greater
   is evidence of want of power. Who, indeed, would deny that the Father
   is the greater; the Unbegotten greater than the Begotten, the Father
   than the Son, the Sender than the Sent, He that wills than He that
   obeys? He Himself shall be His own witness:--The Father is greater than
   I. It is a fact which we must recognise, but we must take heed lest
   with unskilled thinkers the majesty of the Father should obscure the
   glory of the Son. Such obscuration is forbidden by this same glory for
   which the Son prays; for the prayer, Father glorify Thy Son, is
   completed by, That the Son may glorify Thee. Thus there is no lack of
   power in the Son, Who, when He has received this glory, will make His
   return for it in glory. But why, if He were not in want, did He make
   the prayer? No one makes request except for something which he needs.
   Or can it be that the Father too is in want? Or has He given His glory
   away so recklessly that He needs to have it returned Him by the Son?
   No; the One has never been in want, nor the Other needed to ask, and
   yet Each shall give to the Other. Thus the prayer for glory to be given
   and to be paid back is neither a robbery of the Father nor a
   depreciation of the Son, but a demonstration of the power of one
   Godhead resident in Both. The Son prays that He may be glorified by the
   Father; the Father deems it no humiliation to be glorified by the Son.
   The exchange of glory given and received proclaims the unity of power
   in Father and in Son.

   13. We must next ascertain what and whence this glorifying is. God, I
   am sure, is subject to no change; His eternity admits not of defect or
   amendment, of gain or of loss. It is the character of Him alone, that
   what He is, He is from everlasting. What He from everlasting is, it is
   by His nature impossible that He should ever cease to be. How then can
   He receive glory, a thing which He fully possesses, and of which His
   store does not diminish; there being no fresh glory which He can
   obtain, and none that He has lost and can recover? We are brought to a
   standstill. But the Evangelist does not fail us, though our reason has
   displayed its helplessness. To tell us what return of glory it was that
   the Son should make to the Father, he gives the words: Even as Thou
   hast given Him power over all flesh, that whatsoever Thou hast given
   Him He may give it eternal life. And this is life eternal that they
   should know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast
   sent. The Father, then, is glorified through the Son, by His being made
   known to us. And the glory was this, that the Son, being made flesh,
   received from Him power over all flesh, and the charge of restoring
   eternal life to us, ephemeral beings burdened with the body. Eternal
   life for us was the result not of work done, but of innate power; not
   by a new creation, but simply by knowledge of God, was the glory of
   that eternity to be acquired. Nothing was added to God's glory; it had
   not decreased, and so could not be replenished. But He is glorified
   through the Son in the sight of us, ignorant, exiled, defiled, dwelling
   in hopeless death and lawless darkness; glorified inasmuch as the Son,
   by virtue of that power over all flesh which the Father gave Him, was
   to bestow on us eternal life. It is through this work of the Son that
   the Father is glorified. So when the Son received all things from the
   Father, the Father glorified Him; and conversely, when all things were
   made through the Son, He glorified the Father. The return of glory
   given lies herein, that all the glory which the Son has is the glory of
   the Father, since everything He has is the Father's gift. For the glory
   of Him who executes a charge redounds to the glory of Him Who gave it,
   the glory of the Begotten to the glory of the Begetter.

   14. But in what does eternity of life consist? His own words tell
   us:--That they may know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ Whom
   Thou hast sent. Is there any doubt or difficulty here, or any
   inconsistency? It is life to know the true God; but the bare knowledge
   of Him does not give it. What, then, does He add? And Jesus Christ Whom
   Thou hast sent. In Thee, the only true God, the Son pays the honour due
   to His Father; by the addition, And Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent,
   He associates Himself with the true Godhead. The believer in his
   confession draws no line between the Two, for his hope of life rests in
   Both, and indeed, the true God is inseparable from Him Whose Name
   follows in the creed. Therefore when we read, That they may know Thee,
   the only true God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent, these terms of
   Sender and of Sent are not intended, under any semblance of distinction
   or discrimination, to convey a difference between the true Godhead of
   Father and of Son, but to be a guide to the devout confession of Them
   as Begetter and Begotten.

   15. And so the Son glorifies the Father fully and finally in the words
   which follow, I have glorified Thee on the earth, having accomplished
   the work which Thou hast given Me to do. All the Father's praise is
   from the Son, for every praise bestowed upon the Son is praise of the
   Father, since all that He accomplished is what the Father had willed.
   The Son of God is born as man; but the power of God is in the
   virgin-birth. The Son of God is seen as man; but God is present in His
   human actions. The Son of God is nailed to the cross; but on the cross
   God conquers human death. Christ, the Son of God, dies; but all flesh
   is made alive in Christ. The Son of God is in hell; but man is carried
   back to heaven. In proportion to our praise of Christ for these His
   works, will be the praise we bring to Him from Whom Christ's Godhead
   is. These are the ways in which the Father glorifies the Son on earth;
   and in return the Son reveals by works of power to the ignorance of the
   heathen and to the foolishness of the world, Him from Whom He is. This
   exchange of glory, given and received, implies no augmentation of the
   Godhead, but means the praises rendered for the knowledge granted to
   those who had lived in ignorance of God. What, indeed, could there be
   which the Father, from Whom are all things, did not richly possess? In
   what was the Son lacking, in Whom all the fulness of the Godhead had
   been pleased to dwell? The Father is glorified on earth because the
   work which He had commanded is finished.

   16. Next let us see what this glory is which the Son expects to receive
   from the Father; and then our exposition will be complete. The sequel
   is, I have glorified Thee on the earth, having accomplished the work
   which Thou hast given Me to do. And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with
   Thine own Self with the glory which I had with Thee before the world
   was. I have manifested Thy name unto men. It is, then, by the Son's
   works that the Father is glorified, in that He is recognised as God, as
   Father of God the Only-begotten, Who for our salvation willed that His
   Son should be born as man, even of a virgin; that Son Whose whole life,
   consummated in the Passion, was consistent with the humiliation of the
   virgin birth. Thus, because the Son of God, all-perfect and born from
   everlasting in the fulness of the Godhead, had now by incarnation
   become Man and was ready for His death, He prays that He may be
   glorified with God, even as He was glorifying His Father on the earth;
   for at that moment the powers of God were being glorified in the flesh
   before the eyes of a world that knew Him not. But what is this glory
   with the Father, for which He looks? It is that, of course, which He
   had with Him before the world was. He had the fulness of the Godhead;
   He has it still, for He is God's Son. But He Who was the Son of God had
   become the Son of man also, for The Word was made flesh. He had not
   lost His former being, but He had become what He was not before; He had
   not abdicated His own position, yet He had taken ours; He prays that
   the nature which He had assumed may be promoted to the glory which He
   had never renounced. Therefore, since the Son is the Word, and the Word
   was made flesh, and the Word was God, and was in the beginning with
   God, and the Word was Son before the foundation of the world; this Son,
   now incarnate, prayed that flesh might be to the Father what the Son
   had been. He prayed that flesh, born in time, might receive the
   splendour of the everlasting glory, that the corruption of the flesh
   might be swallowed up, transformed into the power of God and the purity
   of the Spirit. It is His prayer to God, the Son's confession of the
   Father, the entreaty of that flesh wherein all shall see Him on the
   Judgment-day, pierced and bearing the marks of the cross; of that flesh
   wherein His glory was foreshown upon the Mount, wherein He ascended to
   heaven and is set down at the right hand of God, wherein Paul saw Him,
   and Stephen paid Him worship.

   17. The name Father has thus been revealed to men; the question arises,
   What is this Father's own name? Yet surely the name of God has never
   been unknown. Moses heard it from the bush, Genesis announces it at the
   beginning of the history of creation, the Law has proclaimed and the
   prophets extolled it, the history of the world has made mankind
   familiar with it; the very heathen have worshipped it under a veil of
   falsehood. Men have never been left in ignorance of the name of God.
   And yet they were, in very truth, in ignorance. For no man knows God
   unless He confess Him as Father, Father of the Only-begotten Son, and
   confess also the Son a Son by no partition or extension or procession,
   but born of Him, as Son of Father, ineffably and incomprehensibly, and
   retaining the fulness of that Godhead from which and in which He was
   born as true and infinite and perfect God. This is what the fulness of
   the Godhead means. If any of these things be lacking, there will not be
   that fulness which was pleased to dwell in Him. This is the message of
   the Son, His revelation to men in their ignorance. The Father is
   glorified through the Son when men recognise that He is Father of a Son
   so Divine.

   18. The Son, wishing to assure us of the truth of this, His Divine
   birth, has appointed His works to serve as an illustration, that from
   the ineffable power displayed in ineffable deeds we may learn the
   lesson of the ineffable birth. For instance, when water was made wine,
   and five loaves satisfied five thousand men, beside women and children,
   and twelve baskets were filled with the fragments, we see a fact though
   we cannot understand it; a deed is done though it baffles our reason;
   the process cannot be followed, though the result is obvious. It is
   folly to intrude in the spirit of carping, when the matter into which
   we enquire is such that we cannot probe it to the bottom. For even as
   the Father is ineffable because He is Unbegotten, so is the Son
   ineffable because He is the Only-begotten, since the Begotten is the
   Image of the Unbegotten. Now it is by the use of our senses and of
   language that we have to form our conception of an image; and it must
   be by the same means that we form our idea of that which the image
   represents. But in this case we, whose faculties can deal only with
   visible and tangible things, are straining after the invisible, and
   striving to grasp the impalpable. Yet we take no shame to ourselves, we
   reproach ourselves with no irreverence, when we doubt and criticise the
   mysteries and powers of God. How is He the Son? Whence is He? What did
   the Father lose by His birth? Of what portion of the Father was He
   born? So we ask; yet all the while there has been confronting us the
   evidence of works done to assure us that God's action is not limited by
   our power of comprehending His methods.

   19. You ask what was the manner in which, as the Spirit teaches, the
   Son was born? I will put a question to you as to things corporal. I ask
   not in what manner He was born of a virgin; I ask only whether her
   flesh, in the course of bringing His flesh to readiness for birth,
   suffered any loss. Assuredly she did not conceive Him in the common
   way, or suffer the shame of human intercourse, in order to bear Him:
   yet she bore Him, complete in His human Body, without loss of her own
   completeness. Surely piety requires that we should regard as possible
   with God a thing which we see became possible through his power in the
   case of a human being [646] .

   20. But you, whoever you are that would seek into the unsearchable, and
   in all seriousness form an opinion upon the mysteries and powers of
   God;--I turn to you for counsel, and beg you to enlighten me, an
   unskilled and simple believer of all that God says, as to a
   circumstance which I am about to mention. I listen to the Lord's words
   and, since I believe what is recorded, I am sure that after His
   Resurrection He offered Himself repeatedly in the Body to the sight of
   multitudes of unbelievers. At any rate, He did so to Thomas who had
   protested that he would not believe unless he handled His wounds. His
   words are, Unless I shall see in His hands the print of the nails, and
   put my finger into the place of the nails, and thrust my hand into His
   side, I will not believe [647] . The Lord stoops to the level even of
   our feeble understanding; to satisfy the doubts of unbelieving minds He
   works a miracle of His invisible power. Do you, my critic of the ways
   of heaven, explain His action if you can. The disciples were in a
   closed room; they had met and held their assembly in secret since the
   Passion of the Lord. The Lord presents Himself to strengthen the faith
   of Thomas by meeting his challenge; He gives him His Body to feel, His
   wounds to handle. He, indeed, who would be recognised as having
   suffered wounds must needs produce the body in which those wounds were
   received. I ask at what point in the walls of that closed house the
   Lord bodily entered. The Apostle has recorded the circumstances with
   careful precision; Jesus came when the doors were shut, and stood in
   the midst [648] . Did He penetrate through bricks and mortar, or
   through stout woodwork, substances whose very nature it is to bar
   progress? For there He stood in bodily presence; there was no suspicion
   of deceit. Let the eye of your mind follow His path as He enters; let
   your intellectual vision accompany Him as He passes into that closed
   dwelling. There is no breach in the walls, no door has been unbarred;
   yet lo, He stands in the midst Whose might no barrier can resist. You
   are a critic of things invisible; I ask you to explain a visible event.
   Everything remains firm as it was; no body is capable of insinuating
   itself through the interstices of wood and stone. The Body of the Lord
   does not disperse itself, to come together again after a disappearance;
   yet whence comes He Who is standing in the midst? Your senses and your
   words are powerless to account for it; the fact is certain, but it lies
   beyond the region of human explanation. If, as you say, our account of
   the Divine birth is a lie, then prove that this account of the Lord's
   entrance is a fiction. If we assume that an event did not happen,
   because we cannot discover how it was done, we make the limits of our
   understanding into the limits of reality. But the certainty of the
   evidence proves the falsehood of our contradiction. The Lord did stand
   in a closed house in the midst of the disciples; the Son was born of
   the Father. Deny not that He stood, because your puny wits cannot
   ascertain how He came there; renounce a disbelief in God the
   Only-begotten and perfect Son of God the Unbegotten and perfect Father,
   which is based only on the incapacity of sense and speech to comprehend
   the transcendent miracle of that birth.

   21. Nay more, the whole constitution of nature would bear us out
   against the impiety of doubting the works and powers of God. And yet
   our disbelief tilts even against obvious truth; we strive in our fury
   to pluck even God from His throne. If we could, we would climb by
   bodily strength to heaven, would fling into confusion the ordered
   courses of sun and stars, would disarrange the ebb and flow of tides,
   check rivers at their source or make their waters flow backward, would
   shake the foundations of the world, in the utter irreverence of our
   rage against the paternal work of God. It is well that our bodily
   limitations confine us within more modest bounds. Assuredly, there is
   no concealment of the mischief we would do if we could. In one respect
   we are free; and so with blasphemous insolence we distort the truth and
   turn our weapons against the words of God.

   22. The Son has said, Father, I have manifested Thy Name unto men. What
   reason is there for denunciation or fury here? Do you deny the Father?
   Why, it was the primary purpose of the Son to enable us to know the
   Father. But in fact you do deny Him when, according to you, the Son was
   not born of Him. Yet why should He have the name of Son if He be, as
   others are, an arbitrary creation of God? I could feel awe of God as
   Creator of Christ as well as Founder of the universe; it were an
   exercise of power worthy of Him to be the Maker of Him Who made
   Archangels and Angels, things visible and things invisible, heaven and
   earth and the whole creation around us. But the work which the Lord
   came to do was not to enable you to recognise the omnipotence of God as
   Creator of all things, but to enable you to know Him as the Father of
   that Son Who addresses you. In heaven there are Powers beside Himself,
   Powers mighty and eternal; there is but one Only-begotten Son, and the
   difference between Him and them is not one of mere degree of might, but
   that they all were made through Him. Since He is the true and only Son,
   let us not make Him a bastard by asserting that He was made out of
   nothing. You hear the name Son; believe that He is the Son. You hear
   the name Father; fix it in your mind that He is the Father. Why
   surround these names with doubt and illwill and hostility? The things
   of God are provided with names which give a true indication of the
   realities; why force an arbitrary meaning upon their obvious sense?
   Father and Son are spoken of; doubt not that the words mean what they
   say. The end and aim of the revelation of the Son is that you should
   know the Father. Why frustrate the labours of the Prophets, the
   Incarnation of the Word, the Virgin's travail, the effect of miracles,
   the cross of Christ? It was all spent upon you, it is all offered to
   you, that through it all Father and Son may be manifest to you. And you
   replace the truth by a theory of arbitrary action, of creation or
   adoption. Turn your thoughts to the warfare, the conflict waged by
   Christ. He describes it thus:--Father, I have manifested Thy Name unto
   men. He does not say, Thou hast created the Creator of all the heavens,
   orThou hast made the Maker of the whole earth. He says, Father, I have
   manifested Thy Name unto men. Accept your Saviour's gift of knowledge.
   Be assured that there is a Father Who begot, a Son Who was born; born
   in the truth of His Nature of the Father, Who is. Remember that the
   revelation is not of the Father manifested as God, but of God
   manifested as the Father.

   23. You hear the words, I and the Father are one [649] . Why do you
   rend and tear the Son away from the Father? They are a unity: an
   absolute Existence having all things in perfect communion with that
   absolute Existence, from Whom He is. When you hear the Son saying, I
   and the Father are one, adjust your view of facts to the Persons;
   accept the statement which Begetter and Begotten make concerning
   Themselves. Believe that They are One, even as They are also Begetter
   and Begotten. Why deny the common nature? Why impugn the true Divinity?
   You hear again, The Father in Me, and I in the Father [650] . That this
   is true of Father and of Son is demonstrated by the Son's works. Our
   science cannot envelope body in body, or pour one into another, as
   water into wine; but we confess that in Both is equivalence of power
   and fulness of the Godhead. For the Son has received all things from
   the Father; He is the Likeness of God, the Image of His substance. The
   words, Image of His substance [651] , discriminate between Christ and
   Him from Whom He is, but only to establish Their distinct existence,
   not to teach a difference of nature; and the meaning of Father in Son
   and Son in Father is that there is the perfect fulness of the Godhead
   in Both. The Father is not impaired by the Son's existence, nor is the
   Son a mutilated fragment of the Father. An image implies its original;
   likeness is a relative term. Now nothing can be like God unless it have
   its source in Him; a perfect likeness can be reflected only from that
   which it represents; an accurate resemblance forbids the assumption of
   any element of difference. Disturb not this likeness; make no
   separation where truth shews no variance, for He Who said, Let us make
   man after our image and likeness [652] , by those words Our likeness
   revealed the existence of Beings, Each like the Other. Touch not handle
   not, pervert not. Hold fast the Names which teach the truth, hold fast
   the Son's declaration of Himself. I would not have you flatter the Son
   with praises of your own invention; it is well with you if you be
   satisfied with the written word.

   24. Again, we must not repose so blind a confidence in human intellect
   as to imagine that we have complete knowledge of the objects of our
   thought, or that the ultimate problem is solved as soon as we have
   formed a symmetrical and consistent theory. Finite minds cannot
   conceive the Infinite; a being dependent for its existence upon another
   cannot attain to perfect knowledge either of its Creator or of itself,
   for its consciousness of self is coloured by its circumstances, and
   bounds are set which its perception cannot pass. Its activity is not
   self-caused, but due to the Creator, and a being dependent on a Creator
   [653] has perfect possession of none of its faculties, since its origin
   lies outside itself. Hence by an inexorable law it is folly for that
   being to say that it has perfect knowledge of any matter; its powers
   have limits which it cannot modify, and only while it is under the
   delusion that its petty bounds are coterminous with infinity can it
   make the empty boast of possessing wisdom. For of wisdom it is
   incapable, its knowledge being limited to the range of its perception,
   and sharing the impotence of its dependent existence. And therefore
   this masquerade [654] of a finite nature boasting that it possesses the
   wisdom which springs only from infinite knowledge earns the scorn and
   ridicule of the Apostle, who calls its wisdom folly. He says, For
   Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, not in the
   language of wisdom, lest the cross of Christ should be made void. For
   the word of the cross is foolishness to them that are perishing, but
   unto them that are being saved it is the power of God. For it is
   written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and the understanding of
   the prudent I will reject. Where is the wise? Where is the scribe?
   Where is the enquirer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the
   wisdom of this world? For seeing that in the wisdom of God the world
   through its wisdom knew not God, God decreed through the foolishness of
   preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews ask for signs and the
   Greeks seek after wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, unto Jews
   indeed a stumbling-block and to Gentiles foolishness, but unto them
   that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the
   wisdom of God. Because the weakness of God is stronger than men, and
   the foolishness of God is wiser than men [655] . Thus all unbelief is
   foolishness, for it takes such wisdom as its own finite perception can
   attain, and, measuring infinity by that petty scale, concludes that
   what it cannot understand must be impossible. Unbelief is the result of
   incapacity engaged in argument. Men are sure that an event never
   happened, because they have made up their minds that it could not
   happen.

   25. Hence the Apostle, familiar with the narrow assumption of human
   thought that what it does not know is not truth, says that he does not
   speak in the language of knowledge, lest his preaching should be in
   vain. To save himself from being regarded as a preacher of foolishness
   he adds that the word of the cross is foolishness to them that perish.
   He knew that the unbelievers held that the only true knowledge was that
   which formed their own wisdom, and that, since their wisdom was
   cognisant only of matters which lay within their narrow horizon, the
   other wisdom, which alone is Divine and perfect, seemed foolishness to
   them. Thus their foolishness actually consisted, in that feeble
   imagination which they mistook for wisdom. Hence it is that the very
   things which to them that perish are foolishness are the power of God
   to them that are saved; for these last never use their own inadequate
   faculties as a measure, but attribute to the Divine activities the
   omnipotence of heaven. God rejects the wisdom of the wise and the
   understanding of the prudent in this sense, that just because they
   recognise their own foolishness, salvation is granted to them that
   believe. Unbelievers pronounce the verdict of foolishness on everything
   that lies beyond their ken, while believers leave to the power and
   majesty of God the choice of the mysteries wherein salvation is
   bestowed. There is no foolishness in the things of God; the foolishness
   lies in that human wisdom which demands of God, as the condition of
   belief, signs and wisdom. It is the foolishness of the Jews to demand
   signs; they have a certain knowledge of the Name of God through long
   acquaintance with the Law, but the offence of the cross repels them.
   The foolishness of the Greeks is to demand wisdom; with Gentile folly
   and the philosophy of men they seek the reason why God was lifted up on
   the cross. And because, in consideration for the weakness of our mental
   powers, these things have been hidden in a mystery, this foolishness of
   Jews and Greeks turns to unbelief; for they denounce, as unworthy of
   reasonable credence, truths which their mind is inherently incapable of
   comprehending. But, because the world's wisdom was so foolish,--for
   previously through God's wisdom it knew not God, that is, the splendour
   of the universe, and the wonderful order which He planned for His
   handiwork, taught it no reverence for its Creator--God was pleased
   through the preaching of foolishness to save them that believe, that
   is, through the faith of the cross to make everlasting life the lot of
   mortals; that so the self-confidence of human wisdom might be put to
   shame, and salvation found where men had thought that foolishness
   dwelt. For Christ, Who is foolishness to Gentiles, and offence to Jews,
   is the Power of God and the Wisdom of God; because what seems weak and
   foolish to human apprehension in the things of God transcends in true
   wisdom and might the thoughts and the powers of earth.

   26. And therefore the action of God must not be canvassed by human
   faculties; the Creator must not be judged by those who are the work of
   His hands. We must clothe ourselves in foolishness that we may gain
   wisdom; not in the foolishness of hazardous conclusions, but in the
   foolishness of a modest sense of our own infirmity, that so the
   evidence of God's power may teach us truths to which the arguments of
   earthly philosophy cannot attain. For when we are fully conscious of
   our own foolishness, and have felt the helplessness and destitution of
   our reason, then through the counsels of Divine Wisdom we shall be
   initiated into the wisdom of God; setting no bounds to boundless
   majesty and power, nor tying the Lord of nature down to nature's laws;
   sure that for us the one true faith concerning God is that of which He
   is at once the Author and the Witness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [635] St. John xiv. 11.

   [636] Col. ii. 9.

   [637] St. John x. 38.

   [638] Isaiah xxix. 14.

   [639] 1 Cor. i. 20-25.

   [640] St. John vi. 38.

   [641] Ib. xvii. 1-6.

   [642] St. John xii. 23.

   [643] 1 Cor. i. 27.

   [644] Reading intelligimus.

   [645] St. Matt. xxvii. 54.

   [646] This is an argument against the objection that God, if Christ is
   His Son, must have suffered loss. If God is His Father and the sole
   source of His existence, Christ must have come into being by separation
   from the Father; i.e. the Father must have suffered diminution and lost
   His completeness. The answer is that a woman--and a fortiori the
   Virgin, who was the only human parent Christ--suffers no loss of bodily
   completeness through becoming a mother. There is no allusion to the
   belief in the perpetual virginity of the Mother of our Lord.

   [647] St. John xx. 25.

   [648] Ib. xx. 26.

   [649] St. John x. 30.

   [650] St. John x. 38.

   [651] Heb. i. 3.

   [652] Gen. i. 26.

   [653] Omitting in aliud.

   [654] Substitutio: this word seems, except in technical senses of the
   law, to be very late and very rare. The only meaning, and that one not
   attested in the dictionaries, which will suit this passage, seems to be
   that of the jackdaw dressed in peacock's feathers.

   [655] 1 Cor. i. 17-25.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book IV.

   1. The earlier books of this treatise, written some time ago, contain,
   I think, an invincible proof that we hold and profess the faith in
   Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which is taught by the Evangelists and
   Apostles, and that no commerce is possible between us and the heretics,
   inasmuch as they deny unconditionally, irrationally, and recklessly,
   the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet certain points remained
   which I have felt myself bound to include in this and the following
   books, in order to make our assurance of the faith even more certain by
   exposure of every one of their falsehoods and blasphemies. Accordingly,
   we will enquire first what are the dangers of their teaching, the risks
   involved by such irreverence; next, what principles they hold, and what
   arguments they advance against the apostolic faith to which we adhere,
   and by what sleight of language they impose upon the candour of their
   hearers; and lastly, by what method of comment they disarm the words of
   Scripture of their force and meaning.

   2. We are well aware that neither the speech of men nor the analogy of
   human nature can give us a full insight into the things of God. The
   ineffable cannot submit to the bounds and limits of definition; that
   which is spiritual is distinct from every class or instance of bodily
   things. Yet, since our subject is that of heavenly natures, we must
   employ ordinary natures and ordinary speech as our means of expressing
   what our mind apprehends; a means no doubt unworthy of the majesty of
   God, but forced upon us by feebleness of our intellect, which can use
   only our own circumstances and our own words to convey to others our
   perceptions and our conclusions. This truth has been enforced already
   in the first book [656] , but is now repeated in order that, in any
   analogies from human affairs which we adduce, we may not be supposed to
   think of God as resembling embodied natures, or to compare spiritual
   Beings with our passible selves, but rather be regarded as advancing
   the outward appearance of visible things as a clue to the inward
   meaning of things invisible.

   3. For the heretics say that Christ is not from God, that is, that the
   Son is not born from the Father, and is God not by nature but by
   appointment; in other words, that He has received an adoption which
   consists in the giving of a name, being God's Son in the sense in which
   many are sons of God; again, that Christ's majesty is an evidence of
   God's widespread bounty, He being God in the sense in which there are
   gods many; although they admit that in His adoption and naming as God a
   more liberal affection than in other cases was shewn, His adoption
   being the first in order of time, and He greater than other adopted
   sons, and first in rank among the creatures because of the greater
   splendour which accompanied His creation. Some add, by way of
   confessing the omnipotence of God, that He was created into God's
   likeness, and that it was out of nothing that He, like other creatures,
   was raised up to be the Image of the eternal Creator, bidden at a word
   to spring from non-existence into being by the power of God, Who can
   frame out of nothing the likeness of Himself.

   4. Moreover, they use their knowledge of the historical fact that
   bishops of a former time have taught that Father and Son are of one
   substance, to subvert the truth by the ingenious plea that this is a
   heretical notion. They say that this term of one substance,' in the
   Greek homoousion, is used to mean and express that the Father is the
   same as the Son; that is, that He extended Himself out of infinity into
   the Virgin, and took a body from her, and gave to Himself, in the body
   which He had taken, the name of Son. This is their first lie concerning
   the homoousion. Their next lie is that this word homoousion implies
   that Father and Son participate in something antecedent to Either and
   distinct from Both, and that a certain imaginary substance, or ousia,
   anterior to all matter whatsoever, has existed heretofore and been
   divided and wholly distributed between the Two; which proves, they say,
   that Each of the Two is of a nature pro-existent to Himself, and Each
   identical in matter with the Other. And so they profess to condemn the
   confession of the homoousion on the ground that that term does not
   discriminate between Father and Son, and makes the Father subsequent in
   time to that matter which He has in common with the Son. And they have
   devised this third objection to the word homoousion, that its meaning,
   as they explain it, is that the Son derives His origin from a partition
   of the Father's substance, as though one object had been cut in two and
   He were the severed portion. The meaning of one substance,' they say,
   is that the part cut off from the whole continues to share the nature
   of that from which it has been severed; but God, being impassible,
   cannot be divided, for, if He must submit to be lessened by division,
   He is subject to change, and will be rendered imperfect if His perfect
   substance leave Him to reside in the severed portion.

   5. They think also that they have a compendious refutation of Prophets,
   Evangelists and Apostles alike, in their assertion that the Son was
   born within time. They pronounce us illogical for saying that the Son
   has existed from everlasting; and, since they reject the possibility of
   His eternity, they are forced to believe that He was born at a point in
   time. For if He has not always existed, there was a time when He was
   not; and if there be a time when He was not, time was anterior to Him.
   He who has not existed everlastingly began to exist within time, while
   He Who is free from the limits of time is necessarily eternal. The
   reason they give for their rejection of the eternity of the Son is that
   His everlasting existence contradicts the faith in His birth; as though
   by confessing that He has existed eternally, we made His birth
   impossible.

   6. What foolish and godless fears! What impious anxiety on God's
   behalf! The meaning which they profess to detect in the word
   homoousion, and in the assertion of the eternity of the Son, is
   detested, rejected, denounced by the Church. She confesses one God from
   Whom are all things; she confesses one Jesus Christ our Lord, through
   whom are all things; One from Whom, One through Whom; One the Source of
   all, One the Agent through Whom all were created. In the One from Whom
   are all things she recognises the Majesty which has no beginning, and
   in the One through Whom are all things she recognises a might coequal
   with His Source; for Both are jointly supreme in the work of creation
   and in rule over created things. In the Spirit she recognises God as
   Spirit, impassible and indivisible, for she has learnt from the Lord
   that Spirit has neither flesh nor bones [657] ; a warning to save her
   from supposing that God, being Spirit, could be burdened with bodily
   suffering and loss. She recognises one God, unborn from everlasting;
   she recognises also one Only-begotten Son of God. She confesses the
   Father eternal and without beginning; she confesses also that the Son's
   beginning is from eternity. Not that He has no beginning, but that He
   is Son of the Father Who has none; not that He is self-originated, but
   that He is from Him Who is unbegotten from everlasting; born from
   eternity, receiving, that is, His birth from the eternity of the
   Father. Thus our faith is free from the guesswork of heretical
   perversity; it is expressed in fixed and published terms, though as yet
   no reasoned defence of our confession has been put forth. Still, lest
   any suspicion should linger around the sense in which the Fathers have
   used the word homoousion and round our confession of the eternity of
   the Son, I have set down the proofs whereby we may be assured that the
   Son abides ever in that substance wherein He was begotten from the
   Father, and that the birth of His Son has not diminished ought of that
   Substance wherein the Father was abiding; that holy men, inspired by
   the teaching of God, when they said that the Son is homoousios with the
   Father pointed to no such flaws or defects as I have mentioned [658] .
   My purpose has been to counteract the impression that this ousia, this
   assertion that He is homoousios with the Father, is a negation of the
   nativity of the Only-begotten Son.

   7. To assure ourselves of the needfulness of these two phrases, adopted
   and employed as the best of safeguards against the heretical rabble of
   that day, I think it best to reply to the obstinate misbelief of our
   present heretics, and refute their vain and pestilent teaching by the
   witness of the evangelists and apostles. They flatter themselves that
   they can furnish a proof for each of their propositions; they have, in
   fact, appended to each some passages or other from holy Writ; passages
   so grossly misinterpreted as to ensnare none but the illiterate by the
   semblance of truth with which perverted ingenuity has masked their
   explanation.

   8. For they attempt, by praising the Godhead of the Father only, to
   deprive the Son of His Divinity, pleading that it is written, Hear, O
   Israel, the Lord thy God is One [659] , and that the Lord repeats this
   in His answer to the doctor of the Law who asked Him what was the
   greatest commandment in the Law;--Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is
   One [660] . Again, they say that Paul proclaims, For there is One God,
   and One Mediator between God and men [661] . And furthermore, they
   insist that God alone is wise, in order to leave no wisdom for the Son,
   relying upon the words of the Apostle, Now to Him that is able to
   stablish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
   according to the revelation of the mystery which hath been kept in
   silence through age-long times, but now is manifested through the
   scriptures of the prophets according to the commandment of the eternal
   God Who is made known unto all nations unto obedience of faith; to the
   only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and ever
   [662] . They argue also that He alone is true [663] , for Isaiah says,
   They shall bless Thee, the true God [664] , and the Lord Himself has
   borne witness in the Gospel, saying, And this is life eternal that they
   should know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast
   sent [665] . Again they reason that He alone is good, to leave no
   goodness for the Son, because it has been said through Him, There is
   none good save One, even God [666] ; and that He alone has power,
   because Paul has said, Which in His own times He shall shew to us, Who
   is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords
   [667] . And further, they profess themselves certain that in the Father
   there is no change nor turning, because He has said through the
   prophet, I am the Lord your God, and I am not changed [668] , and the
   apostle James, With Whom there is no change [669] ; certain also that
   He is the righteous Judge, for it is written, God is the righteous
   Judge, strong and patient [670] ; that He cares for all, because the
   Lord has said, speaking of the birds, And your heavenly. Father feedeth
   them [671] , and, Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And not one
   of them falleth upon the ground without the will of your Father; but
   the very hairs of your head are numbered [672] . They say that the
   Father has prescience of all things, as the blessed Susanna says, O
   eternal God, that knowest secrets, and knowest all things before they
   be [673] ; that He is incomprehensible, as it is written, The heaven is
   My throne, and the earth is the footstool of My feet. What house will
   ye build Me, or what is the place of My rest? For these things hath My
   hand made, and all these things are mine [674] ; that He contains all
   things, as Paul bears witness, For in Him we live and move and have our
   being [675] , and the psalmist, Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit, and
   whither shall I fly from Thy face? If I climb up into heaven, Thou art
   there; if I go down to hell, Thou art present. If I take my wings
   before the light and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even
   thither Thy hand shall lead me and Thy right hand shall hold me [676] ;
   that He is without body, for it is written, For God is Spirit, and they
   that worship Him must worship in spirit and in truth [677] ; that He is
   immortal and invisible, as Paul says, Who only hath immortality, and
   dwelleth in light unapproachable, whom no man hath seen nor can see
   [678] , and the Evangelist, No one hath seen God at any time, except
   the Only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father [679] ; that
   He alone abides eternally unborn, for it is written, I Am That I Am,
   and Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me
   unto you [680] , and through Jeremiah, O Lord, Who art Lord [681] .

   9. Who can fail to observe that these statements are full of fraud and
   fallacy? Cleverly as issues have been confused and texts combined,
   malice and folly is the character indelibly imprinted upon this
   laborious effort of cunning and clumsiness. For instance, among their
   points of faith they have included this, that they confess the Father
   only to be unborn; as though any one on our side could suppose that He,
   Who begot Him through Whom are all things, derived His being from any
   external source. The very fact that He bears the name of Father reveals
   Him as the cause of His Son's existence. That name of Father gives no
   hint that He who bears it is Himself descended from another, while it
   tells us plainly from Whom it is that the Son is begotten. Let us
   therefore leave to the Father His own special and incommunicable
   property, confessing that in Him reside the eternal powers of an
   omnipotence without beginning. None, I am sure, can doubt that the
   reason why, in their confession of God the Father, certain attributes
   are dwelt upon as peculiarly and inalienably His own, is that He may be
   left in isolated possession of them. For when they say that He alone is
   true, alone is righteous, alone is wise, alone is invisible, alone is
   good, alone is mighty, alone is immortal, they are raising up this word
   alone as a barrier to cut off the Son from His share in these
   attributes. He Who is alone, they say, has no partner in His
   properties. But if we suppose that these attributes reside in the
   Father only, and not in the Son also, then we must believe that God the
   Son has neither truth nor wisdom; that He is a bodily being compact of
   visible and material elements, ill-disposed and feeble and void of
   immortality; for we exclude Him from all these attributes of which we
   make the Father the solitary Possessor.

   10. We, however, who propose to discourse of that most perfect majesty
   and fullest Divinity which appertains to the Only-begotten Son of God,
   have no fear lest our readers should imagine that amplitude of phrase
   in speaking of the Son is a detraction from the glory of God the
   Father, as though every praise assigned to the Son had first been
   withdrawn from Him. For, on the contrary, the majesty of the Son is
   glory to the Father; the Source must be glorious from which He Who is
   worthy of such glory comes. The Son has nothing but by virtue of His
   birth; the Father shares all veneration received by that birthright.
   Thus the suggestion that we diminish the Father's honour is put to
   silence, for all the glory which, as we shall teach, is inherent in the
   Son will be reflected back, to the increased glory of Him who has
   begotten a Son so great.

   11. Now that we have exposed their plan of belittling the Son under
   cover of magnifying the Father, the next step is to listen to the exact
   terms in which they express their own belief concerning the Son. For,
   since we have to answer in succession each of their allegations and to
   display on the evidence of Holy Scripture the impiety of their
   doctrines, we must append, to what they say of the Father, the
   decisions which they have put on record concerning the Son, that by a
   comparison of their confession of the Father with their confession of
   the Son we may follow a uniform order in our solution of the questions
   as they arise. They state as their verdict that the Son is not derived
   from any pre-existent matter, for through Him all things were created,
   nor yet begotten from God, for nothing can be withdrawn from God; but
   that He was made out of what was nonexistent, that is, that He is a
   perfect creature of God, though different from His other creatures.
   They argue that He is a creature, because it is written, The Lord hath
   created Me for a beginning of His ways [682] ; that He is the perfect
   handiwork of God, though different from His other works, they prove, as
   to the first point, by what Paul writes to the Hebrews, Being made so
   much better than the angels, as He possesseth a more excellent name
   than they [683] , and again, Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the
   heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
   confession, Jesus Christ, who is faithful to Him that made Him [684] .
   For their depreciation of the might and majesty and Godhead of the Son
   they rely chiefly on His own words, The Father is greater than I [685]
   . But they admit that He is not one of the common herd of creatures on
   the evidence of All things were made through Him [686] . And so they
   sum up the whole of their blasphemous teaching in these words which
   follow:--

   12. "We confess One God, alone unmade, alone eternal, alone
   unoriginate, alone true, alone possessing immortality, alone good,
   alone mighty, Creator, Ordainer and Disposer of all things,
   unchangeable and unalterable, righteous and good, of the Law and the
   Prophets and the New Testament. We believe that this God gave birth to
   the Only-begotten Son before all worlds, through Whom He made the world
   and all things; that He gave birth to Him not in semblance, but in
   truth, following His own Will, so that He is unchangeable and
   unalterable, God's perfect creature but not as one of His other
   creatures, His handiwork, but not as His other works; not, as
   Valentinus maintained, that the Son is a development of the Father;
   nor, as Manichæus has declared of the Son, a consubstantial part of the
   Father; nor, as Sabellius, who makes two out of one, Son and Father at
   once; nor, as Hieracas, a light from a light, or a lamp with two
   flames; nor as if He was previously in being and afterwards born or
   created afresh to be a Son, a notion often condemned by thyself,
   blessed Pope [687] , publicly in the Church and in the assembly of the
   brethren. But, as we have affirmed, we believe that He was created by
   the will of God before times and worlds, and has His life and existence
   from the Father, Who gave Him to share His own glorious perfections.
   For, when the Father gave to Him the inheritance of all things, He did
   not thereby deprive Himself of attributes which are His without
   origination, He being the source of all things.

   13. "So there are three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. God, for
   His part, is the cause of all things, utterly unoriginate and separate
   from all; while the Son, put forth by the Father outside time, and
   created and established before the worlds, did not exist before He was
   born, but, being born outside time before the worlds, came into being
   as the Only Son of the Only Father. For He is neither eternal, nor
   co-eternal, nor co-uncreate with the Father, nor has He an existence
   collateral with the Father, as some say, who [688] postulate two unborn
   principles. But God is before all things, as being indivisible and the
   beginning of all. Wherefore He is before the Son also, as indeed we
   have learnt from thee in thy public preaching. Inasmuch then as He hath
   His being from God, and His glorious perfections, and His life, and is
   entrusted with all things, for this reason God is His source, and hath
   rule over Him, as being His God, since He is before Him. As to such
   phrases as from Him, and from the womb, and I went out from the Father
   and am come, if they be understood to denote that the Father extends a
   part and, as it were, a development of that one substance, then the
   Father will be of a compound nature and divisible and changeable and
   corporeal, according to them; and thus, as far as their words go, the
   incorporeal God will be subjected to the properties of matter [689] ."

   14. Such is their error, such their pestilent teaching; to support it
   they borrow the words of Scripture, perverting its meaning and using
   the ignorance of men as their opportunity of gaining credence for their
   lies. Yet it is certainly by these same words of God that we must come
   to understand the things of God. For human feebleness cannot by any
   strength of its own attain to the knowledge of heavenly things; the
   faculties which deal with bodily matters can form no notion of the
   unseen world. Neither our created bodily substance, nor the reason
   given by God for the purposes of ordinary life, is capable of
   ascertaining and pronouncing upon the nature and work of God. Our wits
   cannot rise to the level of heavenly knowledge, our powers of
   perception lack the strength to apprehend that limitless might. We must
   believe God's word concerning Himself, and humbly accept such insight
   as He vouchsafes to give. We must make our choice between rejecting His
   witness, as the heathen do, or else believing in Him as He is, and this
   in the only possible way, by thinking of Him in the aspect in which He
   presents Himself to us. Therefore let private judgment cease; let human
   reason refrain from passing barriers divinely set. In this spirit we
   eschew all blasphemous and reckless assertion concerning God, and
   cleave to the very letter of revelation. Each point in our enquiry
   shall be considered in the light of His instruction, Who is our theme;
   there shall be no stringing together of isolated phrases whose context
   is suppressed, to trick and misinform the unpractised listener. The
   meaning of words shall be ascertained by considering the circumstances
   under which they were spoken; words must be explained by circumstances
   not circumstances forced into conformity with words. We, at any rate,
   will treat our subject completely; we will state both the circumstances
   under which words were spoken, and the true purport of the words. Each
   point shall be considered in orderly sequence.

   15. Their starting-point is this; We confess, they say, One only God,
   because Moses says, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One [690] . But
   is this a truth which anyone has ever dared to doubt? Or was any
   believer ever known to confess otherwise than that there is One God
   from Whom are all things, One Majesty which has no birth, and that He
   is that unoriginated Power? Yet this fact of the Unity of God offers no
   chance for denying the Divinity of His Son. For Moses, or rather God
   through Moses, laid it down as His first commandment to that people,
   devoted both in Egypt and in the Desert to idols and the worship of
   imaginary gods, that they must believe in One God. There was truth and
   reason in the commandment, for God, from Whom are all things, is One.
   But let us see whether this Moses have not confessed that He, through
   Whom are all things, is also God. God is not robbed, He is still God,
   if His Son share the Godhead. For the case is that of God from God, of
   One from One, of God Who is One because God is from Him. And conversely
   the Son is not less God because God the Father is One, for He is the
   Only-begotten Son of God; not eternally unborn, so as to deprive the
   Father of His Oneness, nor yet different from God, for He is born from
   Him. We must not doubt that He is God by virtue of that birth from God
   which proves to us who believe that God is One; yet let us see whether
   Moses, who announced to Israel, The Lord thy God is One, has also
   proclaimed the Godhead of the Son. To make good our confession of the
   Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ we must employ the evidence of that
   same witness on whom the heretics rely for the confession of One Only
   God, which they imagine to involve the denial of the Godhead of the
   Son.

   16. Since, therefore, the words of the Apostle, One God the Father,
   from Whom are all things, and one Jesus Christ, our Lord, through Whom
   are all things [691] , form an accurate and complete confession
   concerning God, let us see what Moses has to say of the beginning of
   the world. His words are, And God said, Let there be a firmament in the
   midst of the water, and let it divide the water from the water. And it
   was so, and God made the firmament and God divided the water through
   the midst [692] . Here, then, you have the God from Whom, and the God
   through Whom. If you deny it, you must tell us through whom it was that
   God's work in creation was done, or else point for your explanation to
   an obedience in things yet uncreated, which, when God said Let there be
   a firmament, impelled the firmament to establish itself. Such
   suggestions are inconsistent with the clear sense of Scripture. For all
   things, as the Prophet says [693] , were made out of nothing; it was no
   transformation of existing things, but the creation into a perfect form
   of the non-existent. Through whom? Hear the Evangelist: All things were
   made through Him. If you ask Who this is, the same Evangelist will tell
   you: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
   Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All things were made
   through Him [694] . If you are minded to combat the view that it was
   the Father Who said, Let there be a firmament, the prophet will answer
   you: He spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were created
   [695] . The recorded words, Let there be a firmament, reveal to us that
   the Father spoke. But in the words which follow, And it was so, in the
   statement that God did this thing, we must recognise the Person of the
   Agent. He spake, and they were made; the Scripture does not say that He
   willed it, and did it. He commanded, and they were created; you observe
   that it does not say they came into existence, because it was His
   pleasure. In that case there would be no office for a Mediator between
   God and the world which was awaiting its creation. God, from Whom are
   all things, gives the order for creation which God, through Whom are
   all things, executes. Under one and the same Name we confess Him Who
   gave and Him Who fulfilled the command. If you dare to deny that God
   made is spoken of the Son, how do you explain All things were made
   through Him? Or the Apostle's words, One Jesus Christ, our Lord,
   through Whom are all things? Or, He spake, and they were made? If these
   inspired words succeed in convincing your stubborn mind, you will cease
   to regard that text, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One, as a
   refusal of Divinity to the Son of God, since at the very foundation of
   the world He Who spoke it proclaimed that His Son also is God. But let
   us see what increase of profit we may draw from this distinction of God
   Who commands and God Who executes. For though it is repugnant even to
   our natural reason to suppose that in the words, He commanded, and they
   were made, one single and isolated Person is intended, yet, for the
   avoidance of all doubts, we must expound the events which followed upon
   the creation of the world.

   17. When the world was complete and its inhabitant was to be created,
   the words spoken concerning him were, Let Us make man after Our image
   and likeness [696] . I ask you, Do you suppose that God spoke those
   words to Himself? Is it not obvious that He was addressing not Himself,
   but Another? If you reply that He was alone, then out of His own mouth
   He confutes you, for He says, Let Us make man after Our image and
   likeness. God has spoken to us through the Lawgiver in the way which is
   intelligible to us; that is, He makes us acquainted with His action by
   means of language, the faculty with which He has been pleased to endow
   us. There is, indeed, an indication of the Son of God [697] , through
   Whom all things were made, in the words, And God said, Let there be a
   firmament, and in, And God made the firmament, which follows: but lest
   we should think these words of God were wasted and meaningless,
   supposing that He issued to Himself the command of creation, and
   Himself obeyed it,--for what notion could be further from the thought
   of a solitary God than that of giving a verbal order to Himself, when
   nothing was necessary except an exertion of His will?--He determined to
   give us a more perfect assurance that these words refer to Another
   beside Himself. When He said, Let Us make man after Our image and
   likeness, His indication of a Partner demolishes the theory of His
   isolation. For an isolated being cannot be partner to himself; and
   again, the words, Let Us make, are inconsistent with solitude, while
   Our cannot be used except to a companion. Both words, Us and Our are
   inconsistent with the notion of a solitary God speaking to Himself, and
   equally inconsistent with that of the address being made to a stranger
   who has nothing in common with the Speaker. If you interpret the
   passage to mean that He is isolated, I ask you whether you suppose that
   He was speaking with Himself? If you do not understand that He was
   speaking with Himself, how can you assume that He was isolated? If He
   were isolated, we should find Him described as isolated; if He had a
   companion, then as not isolated. I and Mine would describe the former
   state; the latter is indicated by Us and Our.

   18. Thus, when we read, Let Us make man after Our image and likeness,
   these two words Us and Our reveal that there is neither one isolated
   God, nor yet one God in two dissimilar Persons; and our confession must
   be framed in harmony with the second as well as with the first truth.
   For the words our image--not our images--prove that there is one nature
   possessed by Both. But an argument from words is an insufficient proof,
   unless its result be confirmed by the evidence of facts; and
   accordingly it is written, And God made man; after the image of God
   made He him [698] . If the words He spoke, I ask, were the soliloquy of
   an isolated God, what meaning shall we assign to this last statement?
   For in it I see a triple allusion, to the Maker, to the being made, and
   to the image. The being made is man; God made him, and made him in the
   image of God. If Genesis were speaking of an isolated God, it would
   certainly have been And made him after His own image. But since the
   book was foreshowing the Mystery of the Gospel, it spoke not of two
   Gods, but of God and God, for it speaks of man made through God in the
   image of God. Thus we find that God wrought man after an image and
   likeness common to Himself and to God; that the mention of an Agent
   forbids us to assume that He was isolated; and that the work, done
   after an image and likeness which was that of Both, proves that there
   is no difference in kind between the Godhead of the One and of the
   Other.

   19. It may seem waste of time to bring forward further arguments, for
   truths concerning God gain no strength by repetition; a single
   statement suffices to establish them. Yet it is well for us to know all
   that has been revealed upon the subject, for though we are not
   responsible for the words of Scripture, yet we shall have to render an
   account for the sense we have assigned to them. One of the many
   commandments which God gave to Noah is, Whoso sheddeth man's blood, for
   his blood shall his life be shed, for after the image of God made I man
   [699] . Here again is the distinction between likeness, creature, and
   Creator. God bears witness that He made man after the image of God.
   When He was about to make man, because He was speaking of Himself, yet
   not to Himself, God said, After our image; and again, after man was
   made, God made man after the image of God. It would have been no
   inaccuracy of language, had He said, addressing Himself, I have made
   man after My image, for He had shewn that the Persons are one in nature
   by, Let us make man after Our image [700] . But for the more perfect
   removal of all doubt as to whether God be, or be not, a solitary Being,
   when He made man He made him, we are told, After the image of God.

   20. If you still wish to assert that God the Father in solitude said
   these words to Himself, I can go with you as far as to admit the
   possibility that He might in solitude have spoken to Himself as if He
   were conversing with a companion, and that it is credible that He
   wished the words I have made man after the image of God to be
   equivalent to I have made man after My own image. But your own
   confession of faith will refute you. For you have confessed that all
   things are from the Father, but all through the Son; and the words, Let
   Us make man, shew that the Source from Whom are all things is He Who
   spoke thus, while God made him after the image of God clearly points to
   Him through Whom the work was done.

   21. And furthermore, to make all self-deception unlawful, that Wisdom,
   which you have yourself confessed to be Christ, shall confront you with
   the words, When He was establishing the fountains under the heaven,
   when He was making strong the foundations of the earth, I was with Him,
   setting them in order. It was I, over Whom He rejoiced. Moreover, I was
   daily rejoicing in His sight, all the while that He was rejoicing in
   the world that He had made, and in the sons of men [701] . Every
   difficulty is removed; error itself must recognise the truth. There is
   with God Wisdom, begotten before the worlds; and not only present with
   Him, but setting in order, for She was with Him, setting them in order.
   Mark this work of setting in order, or arranging. The Father, by His
   commands, is the Cause; the Son, by His execution of the things
   commanded, sets in order. The distinction between the Persons is marked
   by the work assigned to Each. When it says Let us make, creation is
   identified with the word of command; but when it is written, I was with
   Him, setting them in order, God reveals that He did not do the work in
   isolation. For He was rejoicing before Him, Who, He tells us, rejoiced
   in return; Moreover, I was daily rejoicing in His sight, all the while
   that He was rejoicing in the world that He had made, and in the sons of
   men. Wisdom has taught us the reason of Her joy. She rejoiced because
   of the joy of the Father, Who rejoices over the completion of the world
   and over the sons of men. For it is written, And God saw that they were
   good. She rejoices that God is well pleased with His work, which has
   been made through Her, at His command. She avows that Her joy results
   from the Father's gladness over the finished world and over the sons of
   men; over the sons of men, because in the one man Adam the whole human
   race had begun its course. Thus in the creation of the world there is
   no mere soliloquy of an isolated Father; His Wisdom is His partner in
   the work, and rejoices with Him when their conjoint labour ends.

   22. I am aware that the full explanation of these words involves the
   discussion of many and weighty problems. I do not shirk them, but
   postpone them for the present, reserving their consideration for later
   stages of the enquiry. For the present I devote myself to that article
   of the blasphemers' faith, or rather faithlessness, which asserts that
   Moses proclaims the solitude of God. We do not forget that the
   assertion is true in the sense that there is One God, from Whom are all
   things; but neither do we forget that this truth is no excuse for
   denying the Godhead of the Son, since Moses throughout the course of
   his writings clearly indicates the existence of God and God. We must
   examine how the history of God's choice, and of the giving of the Law,
   proclaims God co-ordinate with God.

   23. After God had often spoken with Abraham, Sarah was moved to wrath
   against Hagar, being jealous that she, the mistress, was barren, while
   her handmaid had conceived a son. Then, when Hagar had departed from
   her sight, the Spirit speaks thus concerning her, And the angel of the
   Lord said unto Hagar, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under
   her hands. And the angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy
   seed exceedingly, and it shall not be numbered for multitude, and
   again, And she called the Name of the Lord that spake with her, Thou
   art God, Who hast seen me [702] . It is the Angel of God Who speaks
   [703] , and speaks of things far beyond the powers which a messenger,
   for that is the meaning of the word, could have. He says, I will
   multiply thy seed exceedingly, and it shall not be numbered for
   multitude. The power of multiplying nations lies outside the ministry
   of an angel. Yet what says the Scripture of Him Who is called the Angel
   of God, yet speaks words which belong to God alone? And she called the
   Name of the Lord that spake with her, Thou art God, Who hast seen me.
   First He is the Angel of God; then He is the Lord, for She called the
   Name of the Lord; then, thirdly, He is God, for Thou art God, Who hast
   seen me. He Who is called the Angel of God is also Lord and God. The
   Son of God is also, according to the prophet, the Angel of great
   counsel [704] . To discriminate clearly between the Persons, He is
   called the Angel of God; He Who is God from God is also the Angel of
   God, but, that He may have the honour which is His due, He is entitled
   also Lord and God.

   24. In this passage the one Deity is first the Angel of God, and then,
   successively, Lord and God. But to Abraham He is God only. For when the
   distinction of Persons had first been made, as a safeguard against the
   delusion that God is a solitary Being, then His true and unqualified
   name could safely be uttered. And so it is written. And God said to
   Abraham, Behold Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt
   call his name Isaac; and I will establish My covenant with him for an
   everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him. And as far Ishmael,
   behold. I have heard thee and have blessed him, and will multiply him
   exceedingly; twelve nations shall he beget, and I will make him a great
   nation [705] . Is it possible to doubt that He Who was previously
   called the Angel of God is here, in the sequel, spoken of as God? In
   both instances He is speaking of Ishmael; in both it is the same Person
   Who shall multiply him. To save us from supposing that this was a
   different Speaker from Him who had addressed Hagar, the Divine words
   expressly attest the identity, saying, And I have blessed him, and will
   multiply him. The blessing is repeated from a former occasion, for
   Hagar had already been addressed; the multiplication is promised for a
   future day, for this is God's first word to Abraham concerning Ishmael.
   Now it is God Who speaks to Abraham; to Hagar the Angel of God had
   spoken. Thus God and the Angel of God are One; He Who is the Angel of
   God is also God the Son of God. He is called the Angel because He is
   the Angel of great counsel; but afterwards He is spoken of as God, lest
   we should suppose that He Who is God is only an angel. Let us now
   repeat the facts in order. The Angel of the Lord spoke to Hagar; He
   spoke also to Abraham as God. One Speaker addressed both. The blessing
   was given to Ishmael, and the promise that he should grow into a great
   people.

   25. In another instance the Scripture reveals through Abraham that it
   was God Who spoke. He receives the further promise of a son, Isaac.
   Afterwards there appear to him three men. Abraham, though he sees
   three, worships One, and acknowledges Him as Lord. Three were standing
   before him, Scripture says, but he knew well Which it was that he must
   worship and confess. There was nothing in outward appearance to
   distinguish them, but by the eye of faith, the vision of the soul, he
   knew his Lord. Then the Scripture goes on, And He said unto him, I will
   certainly return unto thee at this time hereafter, and Sarah thy wife
   shall have a son [706] ; and afterwards the Lord said to Him, I will
   not conceal from Abraham My servant the things that I will do [707] ;
   and again, Moreover the Lord said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
   filled up, and their sins are exceeding great [708] . Then after long
   discourse, which for the sake of brevity shall be omitted, Abraham,
   distressed at the destruction which awaited the innocent as well as the
   guilty, said, In no wise wilt Thou, Who judgest the earth, execute this
   judgment. And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within
   the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes [709] .
   Afterwards, when the warning to Lot, Abraham's brother, was ended, the
   Scripture says, And the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah
   brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven [710] ; and, after a
   while, And the Lord visited Sarah as He had said, and did unto Sarah as
   He had spoken, and Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old
   age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him [711] . And
   afterwards, when the handmaid with her son had been driven from
   Abraham's house, and was dreading lest her child should die in the
   wilderness for want of water, the same Scripture says And the Lord God
   heard the voice of the lad, where he was, and the Angel of God called
   to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What is it, Hagar? Fear not,
   for God hath heard the voice of the lad from the place where he is.
   Arise, and take the lad and hold his hand, for I will make him a great
   nation [712] .

   26. What blind faithlessness it is, what dulness of an unbelieving
   heart, what headstrong impiety, to abide in ignorance of all this, or
   else to know and yet neglect it! Assuredly it is written for the very
   purpose that error or oblivion may not hinder the recognition of the
   truth. If, as we shall prove, it is impossible to escape knowledge of
   the facts, then it must be nothing less than blasphemy to deny them.
   This record begins with the speech of the Angel to Hagar, His promise
   to multiply Ishmael into a great nation and to give him a countless
   offspring. She listens, and by her confession reveals that He is Lord
   and God. The story begins with His appearance as the Angel of God; at
   its termination He stands confessed as God Himself. Thus He Who, while
   He executes the ministry of declaring the great counsel is God's Angel,
   is Himself in name and nature God. The name corresponds to the nature;
   the nature is not falsified to make it conform to the name. Again, God
   speaks to Abraham of this same matter; he is told that Ishmael has
   already received a blessing, and shall be increased into a nation; I
   have blessed him, God says. This is no change from the Person indicated
   before; He shews that it was He Who had already given the blessing. The
   Scripture has obviously been consistent throughout in its progress from
   mystery to clear revelation; it began with the Angel of God, and
   proceeds to reveal that it was God Himself Who had spoken in this same
   matter.

   27. The course of the Divine narrative is accompanied by a progressive
   development of doctrine. In the passage which we have discussed God
   speaks to Abraham, and promises that Sarah shall bear a son. Afterwards
   three men stand by him; he worships One and acknowledges Him as Lord.
   After this worship and acknowledgment by Abraham, the One promises that
   He will return hereafter at the same season, and that then Sarah shall
   have her son. This One again is seen by Abraham in the guise of a man,
   and salutes him with the same promise. The change is one of name only;
   Abraham's acknowledgment in each case is the same. It was a Man whom he
   saw, yet Abraham worshipped Him as Lord; he beheld, no doubt, in a
   mystery the coming Incarnation. Faith so strong has not missed its
   recognition; the Lord says in the Gospel, Your father Abraham rejoiced
   to see My day; and he saw it, and was glad [713] . To continue the
   history; the Man Whom he saw promised that He would return at the same
   season. Mark the fulfilment of the promise, remembering meanwhile that
   it was a Man Who made it. What says the Scripture? And the Lord visited
   Sarah. So this Man is the Lord, fulfilling His own promise. What
   follows next? And God did unto Sarah as He had said. The narrative
   calls His words those of a Man, relates that Sarah was visited by the
   Lord, proclaims that the result was the work of God. You are sure that
   it was a Man who spoke, for Abraham not only heard, but saw Him. Can
   you be less certain that He was God, when the same Scripture, which had
   called Him Man, confesses Him God? For its words are, And Sarah
   conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, and at the set time
   of which God had spoken to him. But it was the Man who had promised
   that He would come. Believe that He was nothing more than man; unless,
   in fact, He Who came was God and Lord. Connect the incidents. It was,
   confessedly, the Man who promised that He would come that Sarah might
   conceive and bear a son. And now accept instruction, and confess the
   faith; it was the Lord God Who came that she might conceive and bear.
   The Man made the promise in the power of God; by the same power God
   fulfilled the promise. Thus God reveals Himself both in word and deed.
   Next, two of the three men whom Abraham saw depart; He Who remains
   behind is Lord and God. And not only Lord and God, but also Judge, for
   Abraham stood before the Lord and said, In no wise shalt Thou do this
   things, to slay the righteous with the wicked, for then the righteous
   shall be as the wicked. In no wise wilt Thou Who judgest the whole
   earth, execute this judgment [714] . Thus by all his words Abraham
   instructs us in that faith, for which he was justified; he recognises
   the Lord from among the three, he worships Him only, and confesses that
   He is Lord and Judge.

   28. Lest you fall into the error of supposing that this acknowledgment
   of the One was a payment of honor to all the three whom Abraham saw in
   company, mark the words of Lot when he saw the two who had departed;
   And when Lot saw them, he rose up to meet them, and he bowed himself
   with his face toward the ground; and he said, Behold, my lords, turn in
   to your servant's house [715] . Here the plural lords shews that this
   was nothing more than a vision of angels; in the other case the
   faithful patriarch pays the honour due to One only. Thus the sacred
   narrative makes it clear that two of the three were mere angels; it had
   previously proclaimed the One as Lord and God by the words, And the
   Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I then
   bear a child? But I am grown old. Is anything from God impossible? At
   this season I will return to thee hereafter, and Sarah shall have a son
   [716] . The Scripture is accurate and consistent; we detect no such
   confusion as the plural used of the One God and Lord, no Divine honours
   paid to the two angels. Lot, no doubt, calls them lords, while the
   Scripture calls them angels. The one is human reverence, the other
   literal truth.

   29. And now there falls on Sodom and Gomorrah the vengeance of a
   righteous judgment. What can we learn from it for the purposes of our
   enquiry? The Lord rained brimstone and fire from the Lord. It is The
   Lord from the Lord; Scripture makes no distinction, by difference of
   name, between Their natures, but discriminates between Themselves. For
   we read in the Gospel, The Father judgeth no man, but hath given all
   judgment to the Son [717] . Thus what the Lord gave, the Lord had
   received from the Lord.

   30. You have now had evidence of God the Judge as Lord and Lord; learn
   next that there is the same joint ownership of name in the case of God
   and God. Jacob, when he fled through fear of his brother, saw in his
   dream a ladder resting upon the earth and reaching to heaven, and the
   angels of God ascending and descending upon it, and the Lord resting
   above it, Who gave him all the blessings which He had bestowed upon
   Abraham and Isaac. At a later time God spoke to him thus: And God said
   unto Jacob, Arise, go up to the place Bethel, and dwell there, and make
   there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest
   from the face of thy brother [718] . God demands honour for God, and
   makes it clear that demand is on behalf of Another than Himself. He who
   appeared to thee when thou fleddest are His words: He guards carefully
   against any confusion of the Persons. It is God Who speaks, and God of
   Whom He speaks. Their majesty is asserted by the combination of Both
   under Their true Name of God, while the words plainly declare Their
   several existence.

   31. Here again there occur to me considerations which must be taken
   into account in a complete treatment of the subject. But the order of
   defence must adapt itself to the order of attack, and I reserve these
   outstanding questions for discussion in the next book. For the present,
   in regard to God Who demanded honour for God, it will suffice for me to
   point out that He Who was the Angel of God, when He spoke with Hagar,
   was God and Lord when He spoke of the same matter with Abraham; that
   the Man Who spoke with Abraham was also God and Lord, while the two
   angels, who were seen with the Lord and whom He sent to Lot, are
   described by the prophet as angels, and nothing more. Nor was it to
   Abraham only that God appeared in human guise; He appeared as Man to
   Jacob also. And not only did He appear, but, so we are told, He
   wrestled; and not only did He wrestle, but He was vanquished by His
   adversary. Neither the time at my disposal, nor the subject, will allow
   me to discuss the typical meaning of this wrestling. It was certainly
   God Who wrestled, for Jacob prevailed against God, and Israel saw God.

   32. And now let us enquire whether elsewhere than in the case of Hagar
   the Angel of God has been discovered to be God Himself. He has been so
   discovered, and found to be not only God, but the God of Abraham and of
   Isaac and of Jacob. For the Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses from
   the bush; and Whose voice, think you, are we to suppose was heard? The
   voice of Him Who was seen, or of Another? There is no room for
   deception; the words of Scripture are clear: And the Angel of the Lord
   appeared unto him in a flame of fire from a bush, and again, The Lord
   called unto him from the bush, Moses, Moses, and he answered, What is
   it? And the Lord said, Draw not nigh hither, put off thy shoes from off
   thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. And He
   said unto him, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
   God of Jacob [719] . He who appeared in the bush speaks from the bush;
   the place of the vision and of the voice is one; He Who speaks is none
   other than He Who was seen. He Who is the Angel of God when the eye
   beholds Him is the Lord when the ear hears Him, and the Lord Whose
   voice is heard is recognised as the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and
   of Jacob. When He is styled the Angel of God, the fact is revealed that
   He is no self-contained and solitary Being: for He is the Angel of God.
   When He is designated Lord and God, He receives the full title which is
   due to His nature and His name. You have, then, in the Angel Who
   appeared from the bush, Him Who is Lord and God.

   33. Continue your study of the witness borne by Moses; mark how
   diligently he seizes every opportunity of proclaiming the Lord and God.
   You take note of the passage, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One
   [720] . Note also the words of that Divine song of his; See, See, that
   I am the Lord, and there is no God beside Me [721] . While God has been
   the Speaker throughout the poem, he ends with, Rejoice, ye heavens,
   together with Him and let all the sons of God praise Him. Rejoice, O ye
   nations, with His people, and let all the Angels of God do Him honour
   [722] . God is to be glorified by the Angels of God, and He says, For I
   am the Lord, and there is no God beside Me. For He is God the
   Only-begotten, and the title Only-begotten' excludes all partnership in
   that character, just as the title Unoriginate' denies that there is, in
   that regard, any who shares the character of the Unoriginate Father.
   The Son is One from One. There is none unoriginate except God the
   Unoriginate, and so likewise there is none only-begotten except God the
   Only-begotten. They stand Each single and alone, being respectively the
   One Unoriginate and the One Only-begotten. And so They Two are One God,
   for between the One, and the One Who is His offspring there lies no
   gulf of difference of nature in the eternal Godhead. Therefore He must
   be worshipped by the sons of God and glorified by the angels of God.
   Honour and reverence is demanded for God from the sons and from the
   angels of God. Notice Who it is that shall receive this honour, and by
   whom it is to be paid. It is God, and they are the sons and angels of
   God. And lest you should imagine that honour is not demanded for God
   Who shares our nature [723] , but that Moses is thinking here of
   reverence due to God the Father,--though, indeed, it is in the Son that
   the Father must be honoured--examine the words of the blessing bestowed
   by God upon Joseph, at the end of the same book. They are, And let the
   things that are well-pleasing to Him that appeared in the bush come
   upon the head and crown of Joseph [724] . Thus God is to be worshipped
   by the sons of God; but God Who is Himself the Son of God. And God is
   to be reverenced by the angels of God; but God Who is Himself the Angel
   of God. For God appeared from the bush as the Angel of God, and the
   prayer for Joseph is that he may receive such blessings as He shall
   please. He is none the less God because He is the Angel of God; and
   none the less the Angel of God because He is God. A clear indication is
   given of the Divine Persons; the line is definitely drawn between the
   Unbegotten and the Begotten. A revelation of the mysteries of heaven is
   granted, and we are taught not to dream of God as dwelling in solitude,
   when angels and sons of God shall worship Him, Who is God's Angel and
   His Son.

   34. Let this be taken as our answer from the books of Moses, or rather
   as the answer of Moses himself. The heretics imagine that they can use
   his assertion of the Unity of God in disproof of the Divinity of God
   the Son; a blasphemy in defiance of the clear warning of their own
   witness, for whenever he confesses that God is One he never fails to
   teach the Son's Divinity. Our next step must be to adduce the manifold
   utterance of the prophets concerning the same Son.

   35. You know the words, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One; would
   that you knew them aright! As you interpret them, I seek in vain for
   their sense. It is said in the Psalms, God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee
   [725] . Impress upon the reader's mind the distinction between the
   Anointer and the Anointed; discriminate between the Thee and the Thy:
   make it clear to Whom and of Whom the words are spoken. For this
   definite confession is the conclusion of the preceding passage, which
   runs thus; Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy
   kingdom is a right sceptre. Thou hast loved righteousness and hated
   iniquity. And then he continues, Therefore God, Thy God, hath anointed
   Thee. Thus the God of the eternal kingdom, in reward for His love of
   righteousness and hatred of iniquity, is anointed by His God. Surely
   some broad difference is drawn, some gap too wide for our mental span,
   between these names? No; the distinction of Persons is indicated by
   Thee and Thy, but nothing suggests a difference of nature. Thy points
   to the Author, Thee to Him Who is the Author's offspring. For He is God
   from God, as these same words of the prophet declare, God, Thy God,
   hath anointed Thee. And His own words bear witness that there is no God
   anterior to God the Un-originate; Be ye My witnesses, and I am witness,
   saith the Lord God, and My Servant Whom I have chosen, that ye may know
   and believe and understand that I am, and before Me there is no other
   God, nor shall be after Me [726] . Thus the majesty of Him that has no
   beginning is declared, and the glory of Him that is from the
   Unoriginate is safeguarded; for God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee. That
   word Thy declares His birth, yet does not contradict His nature [727] ;
   Thy God means that the Son was born from Him to share the Godhead. But
   the fact that the Father is God is no obstacle to the Son's being God
   also, for God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee. Mention is made both of
   Father and of Son; the one title of God conveys the assurance that in
   character and majesty They are One.

   36. But lest these words, For I am, and before Me there is no other
   God, nor shall be after Me, be made a handle for blasphemous
   presumption, as proving that the Son is not God, since after the God,
   Whom no God precedes, there follows no other God, the purpose of the
   passage must be considered. God is His own best interpreter, but His
   chosen Servant joins with Him to assure us that there is no God before
   Him, nor shall be after Him. His own witness concerning Himself is,
   indeed, sufficient, but He has added the witness of the Servant Whom He
   has chosen. Thus we have the united testimony of the Two, that there is
   no God before Him; we accept the truth, because all things are from
   Him. We have Their witness also that there shall be no God after Him;
   but They do not deny that God has been born from Him in the past.
   Already there was the Servant speaking thus, and bearing witness to the
   Father; the Servant born in that tribe from which God's elect was to
   spring. He sets forth also the same truth in the Gospels: Behold, My
   Servant Whom I have chosen, My Beloved in Whom My soul is well pleased
   [728] . This is the sense, then, in which God says, There is no other
   God before Me, nor shall be after Me. He reveals the infinity of His
   eternal and unchanging majesty by this assertion that there is no God
   before or after Himself. But He gives His Servant a share both in the
   bearing of witness and in the possession of the Name of God.

   37. The fact is obvious from His own words. For He says to Hosea the
   prophet, I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, but will
   altogether be their enemy. But I will have mercy upon the children of
   Judah, and will save them in the Lord their God [729] . Here God the
   Father gives the name of God, without any ambiguity, to the Son, in
   Whom also He chose us before countless ages. Their God, He says, for
   while the Father, being Unoriginate, is independent of all, He has
   given us for an inheritance to His Son. In like manner we read, Ask of
   Me, and I will give Thee the Gentiles for Thine inheritance [730] .
   None can be God to Him from Whom are all things [731] , for He is
   eternal and has no beginning; but the Son has God, from Whom He was
   born, for His Father. Yet to us the Father is God and the Son is God;
   the Father reveals to us that the Son is our God, and the Son teaches
   that the Father is God over us. The point for us to remember is that in
   this passage the Father gives to the Son the name of God, the title of
   His own unoriginate majesty. But I have commented sufficiently on these
   words of Hosea.

   38. Again, how clear is the declaration made by God the Father through
   Isaiah concerning our Lord! He says, For thus saith the Lord, the holy
   God of Israel, Who made the things to come, Ask me concerning your sons
   and your daughters, and concerning the works of My hands command ye Me.
   I have made the earth and man upon it, I have commanded all the stars,
   I have raised up a King with righteousness, and all His ways are
   straight. He shall build My city, and shall turn back the captivity of
   My people, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of Sabaoth. Egypt
   shall labour, and the merchandise of the Ethiopians and Sabeans. Men of
   stature shall come over unto Thee and shall be Thy servants, and shall
   follow after Thee, bound in chains, and shall worship Thee and make
   supplication unto Thee, for God is in Thee and there is no God beside
   Thee. For Thou art God, and we knew it not, O God of Israel, the
   Saviour. All that resist Him shall be ashamed and confounded, and shall
   walk in confusion [732] . Is any opening left for gainsaying, or excuse
   for ignorance? If blasphemy continue, is it not in brazen defiance that
   it survives? God from Whom are all things, Who made all by His command,
   asserts that He is the Author of the universe, for, unless He had
   spoken, nothing had been created. He asserts that He has raised up a
   righteous King, who builds for Himself, that is, for God, a city, and
   turns back the captivity of His people, for no gift nor reward, for
   freely are we all saved. Next, He tells how after the labours of Egypt,
   and after the traffic of Ethiopians and Sabeans, men of stature shall
   come over to Him. How shall we understand these labours in Egypt, this
   traffic of Ethiopians and Sabeans? Let us call to mind how the Magi of
   the East worshipped and paid tribute to the Lord; let us estimate the
   weariness of that long pilgrimage to Bethlehem of Judah. In the
   toilsome journey of the Magian princes we see the labours of Egypt to
   which the prophet alludes. For when the Magi executed, in their
   spurious, material way, the duty ordained for them by the power of God,
   the whole heathen world was offering in their person the deepest
   reverence of which its worship was capable. And these same Magi
   presented gifts of gold and frankincense and myrrh from [733] the
   merchandise of the Ethiopians and Sabeans; a thing foretold by another
   prophet, who has said, The Ethiopians shall fall down before His face,
   and His enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tharsis shall offer
   presents, the Kings of the Arabians and Sabeans shall bring gifts, and
   there shall be given to Him of the gold of Arabia [734] . The Magi and
   their offerings stand for the labour of Egypt and for the merchandise
   of Ethiopians and Sabeans; the adoring Magi represent the heathen
   world, and offer the choicest gifts of the Gentiles to the Lord Whom
   they adore.

   39. As for the men of stature who shall come over to Him and follow Him
   in chains, there is no doubt who they are. Turn to the Gospels; Peter,
   when he is to follow his Lord, is girded up. Read the Apostles: Paul,
   the servant of Christ, boasts of his bonds. Let us see whether this
   prisoner of Jesus Christ' conforms in his teaching to the prophecies
   uttered by God concerning God His Son. God had said, They shall make
   supplication, for God is in Thee. Now mark and digest these words of
   the Apostle:--God was in Christ, reconciling the world to Himself [735]
   . And then the prophecy continues, And there is no God beside Thee. The
   Apostle promptly matches this with For there is one Jesus Christ our
   Lord, through Whom are all things [736] . Obviously there can be none
   other but He, for He is One. The third prophetic statement is, Thou art
   God and we knew it not. But Paul, once the persecutor of the Church,
   says, Whose are the fathers, from Whom is Christ, Who is God over all
   [737] . Such is to be the message of these men in chains; men of
   stature, indeed, they will be, and shall sit on twelve thrones to judge
   the tribes of Israel, and shall follow their Lord, witnesses to Him in
   teaching and in martyrdom.

   40. Thus God is in God, and it is God in Whom God dwells. But how is
   There is no God beside Thee true, if God be within Him? Heretic! In
   support of your confession of a solitary Father you employ the words,
   There is no God beside Me; what sense can you assign to the solemn
   declaration of God the Father, There is no God beside Thee, if your
   explanation of There is no God beside Me be a denial of the Godhead of
   the Son? To whom, in that case, can God have said, There is no God
   beside Thee? You cannot suggest that this solitary Being said it to
   Himself. It was to the King Whom He summoned that the Lord said, by the
   mouth of the men of stature who worshipped and made supplication, For
   God is in Thee. The facts are inconsistent with solitude. In Thee
   implies that there was One present within range, if I may say so, of
   the Speaker's voice. The complete sentence, God is in Thee, reveals not
   only God present, but also God abiding in Him Who is present. The words
   distinguish the Indweller from Him in Whom He dwells, but it is a
   distinction of Person only, not of character. God is in Him, and He, in
   Whom God is, is God. The residence of God cannot be within a nature
   strange and alien to His own. He abides in One Who is His own, born
   from Himself. God is in God, because God is from God. For Thou art God,
   and we knew it not, O God of Israel, the Saviour.

   41. My next book is devoted to the refutation of your denial that God
   is in God; for the prophet continues, All that resist Him shall be
   ashamed and confounded and shall walk in confusion. This is God's
   sentence, passed upon your unbelief. You set yourself in opposition to
   Christ, and it is on His account that the Father's voice is raised in
   solemn reproof; for He, Whose Godhead you deny, is God. And you deny it
   under cloak of reverence for God, because He says, There is no other
   God beside Me. Submit to shame and confusion; the Unoriginate God has
   no need of the dignity you offer; He has never asked for this majesty
   of isolation which you attribute to Him. He repudiates your officious
   interpretation which would twist His words, There is no other God
   beside Me, into a denial of the Godhead of the Son Whom He begot from
   Himself. To frustrate your purpose of demolishing the Divinity of the
   Son by assigning the Godhead in some special sense to Himself, He
   rounds off the glories of the Only-begotten by the attribution of
   absolute Divinity:--And there is no God beside Thee. Why make
   distinctions between exact equivalents? Why separate what is perfectly
   matched? It is the peculiar characteristic of the Son of God that there
   is no God beside Him; the peculiar characteristic of God the Father
   that there is no God apart from Him. Use His words concerning Himself;
   confess Him in His own terms, and entreat Him as King; For God is in
   Thee, and there is no God beside Thee. For Thou art God, and we knew it
   not, O God of Israel, the Saviour. A confession couched in words so
   reverent is free from the taint of presumption: its terms can excite no
   repugnance. Above all, we must remember that to refuse it means shame
   and ignominy. Brood in thought over these words of God; employ them in
   your confession of Him, and so escape the threatened shame. For if you
   deny the Divinity of the Son of God, you will not be augmenting the
   glory of God by adoring Him in lonely majesty; you will be slighting
   the Father by refusing to reverence the Son. In faith and veneration
   confess of the Unoriginate God that there is no God beside Him; claim
   for God the Only-begotten that apart from Him there is no God.

   42. As you have listened already to Moses and Isaiah, so listen now to
   Jeremiah inculcating the same truth as they:--This is our God, and
   there shall be none other likened unto Him, Who hath found out all the
   way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant and to
   Israel His beloved. Afterward did He shew Himself upon earth and dwelt
   among men [738] . For previously he had said, And He is Man, and Who
   shall know Him [739] ? Thus you have God seen on earth and dwelling
   among men. Now I ask you what sense you would assign to No one hath
   seen God at any time, save the Only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom
   of the Father [740] , when Jeremiah proclaims God seen on earth and
   dwelling among men? The Father confessedly cannot be seen except by the
   Son; Who then is This who was seen and dwelt among men? He must be our
   God, for He is God visible in human form, Whom men can handle. And take
   to heart the prophet's words, There shall be none other likened to Him.
   If you ask how this can be, listen to the remainder of the sentence,
   lest you be tempted to deny to the Father His share of the confession.
   Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One. The whole passage is, There
   shall be none likened unto Him, Who hath found out all the way of
   knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant and to Israel His
   beloved. Afterward did He shew Himself upon earth and dwelt among men.
   For there is one Mediator between God and Men, Who is both God and Man;
   Mediator both in giving of the Law and in taking of our body. Therefore
   none other can be likened unto Him, for He is One, born from God into
   God, and He it was through Whom all things were created in heaven and
   earth, through Whom times and worlds were made. Everything, in fine,
   that exists owes its existence to His action. He it is that instructs
   Abraham, that speaks with Moses, that testifies to Israel, that abides
   in the prophets, that was born through the Virgin from the Holy Ghost,
   that nails to the cross of His passion the powers that are our foes,
   that slays death in hell, that strengthens the assurance of our hope by
   His Resurrection, that destroys the corruption of human flesh by the
   glory of His Body. Therefore none shall be likened unto Him. For these
   are the peculiar powers of God the Only-begotten; He alone was born
   from God, the blissful Possessor of such great prerogatives. No second
   god can be likened unto Him, for He is God from God, not born from any
   alien being. There is nothing new or strange or modern created in Him.
   When Israel hears that its God is one, and that no second god is
   likened, that men may deem him God, to God Who is God's Son, the
   revelation means that God the Father and God the Son are One
   altogether, not by confusion of Person but by unity of substance. For
   the prophet forbids us, because God the Son is God, to liken Him to
   some second deity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [656] § 19.

   [657] St. Luke xxiv. 39.

   [658] In § 4.

   [659] Deut. vi. 4.

   [660] St. Mark xii. 29.

   [661] 1 Tim. ii. 5.

   [662] Rom. xvi. 25-27.

   [663] Omitting solus innascibilis et, which are out of place here.

   [664] Is. lxv. 16.

   [665] St. John xvii. 3.

   [666] St. Mark x. 18.

   [667] 1 Tim. vi. 15.

   [668] Mal. iii. 6.

   [669] i. 17.

   [670] Ps. vii. 12.

   [671] St. Matt. vi. 26.

   [672] Ib. x. 29, 30.

   [673] Susanna (Daniel xiii.) 42.

   [674] Isai. lxvi. 1, 2.

   [675] Acts xvii. 28.

   [676] Ps. cxxxix. 6-9 (cxxxviii. 7-10).

   [677] St. John iv. 24.

   [678] 1 Tim. vi. 16.

   [679] St. John i. 18.

   [680] Exod. iii. 14.

   [681] i. 6 (LXX).

   [682] Prov. viii. 22.

   [683] Heb. i. 4.

   [684] Ib. iii. 1.

   [685] St. John xiv. 28.

   [686] St. John i. 3.

   [687] Of Alexandria.

   [688] Omitting aut aliqui.

   [689] This Epistle of Arius to Alexander is translated substantially as
   in Newman's Arians of the Fourth Century, ch. II., § 5, though there
   are differences of some importance between Hilary's Latin version and
   the Greek in Athanasius de Synodis, § 16, from which Newman's version
   is made.

   [690] Deut. vi. 4.

   [691] 1 Cor. viii. 6.

   [692] Gen. i. 6, 7.

   [693] 2 Macc. vii. 28.

   [694] St. John i. 1-3.

   [695] Ps. clxviii. 5.

   [696] Gen. i. 26.

   [697] Reading Filii.

   [698] Gen. i. 27.

   [699] Ib. ix. 6.

   [700] I.e. by the word Our.

   [701] Prov. viii. 28-31.

   [702] Gen. xvi. 9, 10, 13.

   [703] The parenthesis which follows: "Now angel of God has two senses,
   that of Him Who is, and that of Him Whose He is" interrupts the sense
   and seems quite out of place. The same distinction in the case of the
   word Spirit, in Book II. § 32 may be compared.

   [704] Isaiah ix. 6 (LXX).

   [705] Gen. xvii. 19, 20.

   [706] Gen. xviii. 10.

   [707] Ib. 17.

   [708] Ib. 20.

   [709] Ib. 25, 26.

   [710] Ib. xix. 24.

   [711] Ib. xxi. 1, 2.

   [712] Ib. 17, 18.

   [713] St. John viii. 56.

   [714] Gen. xviii. 25.

   [715] Ib. xix. 1, 2.

   [716] Ib. xviii. 13, 14.

   [717] St. John v. 22.

   [718] Gen. xxxv. 1.

   [719] Exod. iii. 2, 4-6.

   [720] Deut. vi. 4.

   [721] Ib. xxxii. 39.

   [722] Ib. 43 (LXX.)

   [723] Dei naturalis: cf. Book ix. § 39.

   [724] Deut. xxxiii. 16.

   [725] Ps. xlv. 7 (xliv. 8).

   [726] Is. xliii. 10.

   [727] His human nature also; cf. next §, and Book xi. § 18.

   [728] St. Matt. xii. 18.

   [729] Hos. i. 6, 7.

   [730] Ps. ii. 8.

   [731] I.e. We cannot say Thy God of the Father.

   [732] Is. xlv. 11-16.

   [733] Reading ex for et.

   [734] Ps. lxxi. (lxxii.) 9, 10.

   [735] 2 Cor. v. 19.

   [736] 1 Cor. viii. 6.

   [737] Rom. ix. 5.

   [738] Baruch iii. 35-37.

   [739] Jer. xvii. 9 (LXX.).

   [740] St. John i. 18.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book V.

   1. Our reply, in the previous books, to the mad and blasphemous
   doctrines of the heretics has led us with open eyes into the difficulty
   that our readers incur an equal danger whether we refute our opponents,
   or whether we forbear. For while unbelief with boisterous irreverence
   was thrusting upon us the unity of God, a unity which devout and
   reasonable faith cannot deny, the scrupulous soul was caught in the
   dilemma that, whether it asserted or denied the proposition, the danger
   of blasphemy was equally incurred. To human logic it may seem
   ridiculous and irrational to say that it can be impious to assert, and
   impious to deny, the same doctrine, since what it is godly to maintain
   it must be godless to dispute; if it serve a good purpose to demolish a
   statement, it may seem folly to dream that good can come from
   supporting it. But human logic is fallacy in the presence of the
   counsels of God, and folly when it would cope with the wisdom of
   heaven; its thoughts are fettered by its limitations, its philosophy
   confined by the feebleness of natural reason. It must be foolish in its
   own eyes before it can be wise unto God; that is, it must learn the
   poverty of its own faculties and seek after Divine wisdom. It must
   become wise, not by the standard of human philosophy, but of that which
   mounts to God, before it can enter into His wisdom, and its eyes be
   opened to the folly of the world. The heretics have ingeniously
   contrived that this folly, which passes for wisdom, shall be their
   engine. They employ the confession of One God, for which they appeal to
   the witness of the Law and the Gospels in the words, Hear, O Israel,
   the Lord thy God is One [741] . They are well aware of the risks
   involved, whether their assertion be met by contradiction or passed
   over in silence; and, whichever happens, they see an opening to promote
   their heresy. If sacred truth, pressed with a blasphemous intent, be
   met by silence, that silence is construed as consent; as a confession
   that, because God is One, therefore His Son is not God, and God abides
   in eternal solitude. If, on the other hand, the heresy involved in
   their bold argument be met by contradiction, this opposition is branded
   as a departure from the true Gospel faith, which states in precise
   terms the unity of God, or else they cast in the opponent's teeth that
   he has fallen into the contrary heresy, which allows but one Person of
   Father and of Son [742] . Such is the deadly artifice, wearing the
   aspect of an attractive innocence, which the world's wisdom, which is
   folly with God, has forged to beguile us in this first article of their
   faith, which we can neither confess nor deny without risk of blasphemy.
   We walk between dangers on either hand; the unity of God may force us
   into a denial of the Godhead of His Son, or, if we confess that the
   Father is God and the Son is God, we may be driven into the heresy of
   interpreting the unity of Father and of Son in the Sabellian sense.
   Thus their device of insisting upon the One God would either shut out
   the Second Person from the Godhead, or destroy the Unity by admitting
   Him as a second God, or else make the unity merely nominal. For unity,
   they would plead, excludes a Second; the existence of a Second is
   destructive of unity; and Two cannot be One.

   2. But we who have attained this wisdom of God, which is folly to the
   world, and purpose, by means of the sound and saving profession of true
   faith in the Lord, to unmask the snake-like treachery of their
   teaching; we have so laid out the plan of our undertaking as to gain a
   vantage ground for the display of the truth without entangling
   ourselves in the dangers of heretical assertion. We carefully avoid
   either extreme; not denying that God is One, yet setting forth
   distinctly, on the evidence of the Lawgiver who proclaims the unity of
   God, the truth that there is God and God. We teach that it is by no
   confusion of the Two that God is One; we do not rend Him in pieces by
   preaching a plurality of Gods, nor yet do we profess a distinction only
   in name. But we present Him as God and God, postponing at present for
   fuller discussion hereafter the question of the Divine unity. For the
   Gospels tell us that Moses taught the truth when he proclaimed that God
   is One; and Moses by his proclamation of One God confirms the lesson of
   the Gospels, which tell of God and God. Thus we do not contradict our
   authorities, but base our teaching upon them, proving that the
   revelation to Israel of the unity of God gives no sanction to the
   refusal of Divinity to the Son of God; since he who is our authority
   for asserting that there is One God is our authority also for
   confessing the Godhead of His Son.

   3. And so the arrangement of our treatise follows closely the order of
   the objections raised. Since the next article of their blasphemous and
   dishonest confession is, We confess One true God [743] , the whole of
   this second [744] book is devoted to the question whether the Son of
   God be true God. For it is clear that the heretics have ingeniously
   contrived this arrangement of first naming One God and then One true
   God, in order to detach the Son from the name and nature of God; since
   the thought must suggest itself that, truth being inherent in the One
   God, it must be strictly confined to Him. And therefore, since it is
   clear beyond a doubt that Moses, when he proclaimed the unity of God,
   meant therein to assert the Divinity of the Son, let us return to the
   leading passages in which his teaching is conveyed, and enquire whether
   or no he wishes us to believe that the Son, Who, as he has taught us,
   is God, is also true God. It is clear that the truth, or genuineness,
   of a thing is a question of its nature and its powers. For instance,
   true wheat is that which grows to a head with the beard bristling round
   it, which is purged from the chaff and ground to flour, compounded into
   a loaf and taken for food, and renders the nature and the uses of
   bread. Thus natural powers are the evidence of truth; and let us see,
   by this test, whether He, Whom Moses calls God, be true God. We will
   defer for the present our discourse concerning this One God, Who is
   also true God, lest, if I fail at once to take up their challenge and
   uphold the One True God in the two Persons of Father and of Son, eager
   and anxious souls be oppressed by dangerous doubts.

   4. And now, since we accept as common ground the fact that God
   recognises His Son as God, I ask you: how does the creation of the
   world disprove our assertion that the Son is true God? There is no
   doubt that all things are through the Son, for, in the Apostle's words,
   All things are through Him, and in Him [745] . If all things are
   through Him, and all were made out of nothing, and none otherwise than
   through Him, in what element of true Godhead is He defective, Who
   possesses both the nature and the power of God? He had at His disposal
   the powers of the Divine nature, to bring into being the non-existent
   and to create at His pleasure. For God saw that they were good [746] .

   5. When the Law says, And God said, Let there be a firmament, and then
   adds, And God made the firmament, it introduces no other distinction
   than that of Person. It indicates no difference of power or nature, and
   makes no change of name. Under the one title of God it reveals, first,
   the thought of Him Who spoke, and then the action of Him Who created.
   The language of the narrator says nothing to deprive Him of Divine
   nature and power; nay rather, how precisely does it inculcate His true
   Godhead. The power to give effect to the word of creation belongs only
   to that Nature with Whom to speak is the same as to fulfil. How then is
   He not true God, Who creates, if He is true God, Who commands? If the
   word spoken was truly Divine, the deed done was truly Divine also. God
   spoke, and God created; if it was true God Who spoke, He Who created
   was true God also; unless indeed, while the presence of true Godhead
   was displayed in the speech of the One, its absence was manifested in
   the action of the Other. Thus in the Son of God we behold the true
   Divine nature. He is God, He is Creator, He is Son of God, He is
   omnipotent. It is not merely that He can do whatever He will, for will
   is always the concomitant of power; but He can do also whatever is
   commanded Him. Absolute power is this, that its possessor can execute
   as Agent whatever His words as Speaker can express. When unlimited
   power of expression is combined with unlimited power of execution, then
   this creative power, commensurate with the commanding word, possesses
   the true nature of God. Thus the Son of God is not false God, nor God
   by adoption, nor God by gift of the name, but true God. Nothing would
   be gained by the statement of the arguments by which His true Godhead
   is opposed. His possession of the name and of the nature of God is
   conclusive proof. He, by Whom all things were made, is God. So much the
   creation of the world tells me about Him. He is God, equal with God in
   name; true God, equal with true God in power. The might of God is
   revealed to us in the creative word; the might of God is manifested
   also in the creative act. And now again I ask by what authority you
   deny, in your confession of Father and Son, the true Divine nature of
   Him Whose name reveals His power, Whose power proves His right to the
   Name.

   6. My reader must bear in mind that I am silent about the current
   objections through no forgetfulness, and no distrust of my cause. For
   that constantly cited text, The Father is greater than I, and its
   cognate passages are perfectly familiar to me, and I have my
   interpretation of them ready, which makes them witness to the true
   Divine nature of the Son. But it serves my purpose best to adhere in
   reply to the order of attack, that our pious effort may follow close
   upon the progress of their impious scheme, and when we see them diverge
   into godless heresy we may at once obliterate the track of error. To
   this end we postpone to the end of our work the testimony of the
   Evangelists and Apostles, and join battle with the blasphemers for the
   present on the ground of the Law and the Prophets, silencing their
   crooked argument, based on misinterpretation and deceit, by the very
   texts with which they strive to delude us. The sound method of
   demonstrating a truth is to expose the fallacy of the objections raised
   against it; and the disgrace of the deceiver is complete if his own lie
   be converted into an evidence for the truth. And, indeed, the universal
   experience of mankind has learned that falsehood and truth are
   incompatible, and cannot be reconciled or made coherent; that by their
   very nature they are among those opposites which are eternally
   repugnant, and can never combine or agree.

   7. This being the case, I ask how a distinction can be made in the
   words, Let Us make man after Our own image and likeness, between a true
   God and a false. The words express a meaning, the meaning is the
   outcome of thought; the thought is set in motion by truth. Let us
   follow the words back to their meaning, and learn from the meaning the
   thought, and from the thought attain to the underlying truth. Thy
   enquiry is, whether He to Whom the words Let Us make man after Our own
   image and likeness were spoken, was not thought of as true by Him Who
   spoke; for they undoubtedly express the feeling and thought of the
   Speaker. In saying Let Us make, He clearly indicates One in no discord
   with Himself, no alien or powerless Being, but One endowed with power
   to do the thing of which He speaks. His own words assure us that this
   is the sense in which we must understand that they were spoken.

   8. To assure us still more fully of the true Godhead manifested in the
   nature and work of the Son, He, Who expressed His meaning in the words
   I have cited, shews that His thought was suggested by the true Divinity
   of Him to Whom He said, After Our own image and likeness. How is He
   falsely called God, to Whom the true God says, After Our own image and
   likeness? Our is inconsistent with isolation, and with difference
   either in purpose or in nature. Man is created, taking the words in
   their strict sense, in Their common image. Now there can be nothing
   common to the true and to the false. God, the Speaker, is speaking to
   God; man is being created in the image of Father and of Son. The Two
   are One in name and One in nature. It is only one image after which man
   is made. The time has not yet come for me to discuss this matter;
   hereafter I will explain what is this image of God the Father and of
   God the Son into which man was created. For the present we will stick
   to the question, was, or was not, He true God, to Whom the true God
   said, Let Us make man after Our own image and likeness? Separate, if
   you can, the true from the false elements in this image common to Both;
   in your heretical madness divide the indivisible. For They Two are One,
   of Whose one image and likeness man is the one copy.

   9. But now let us continue our reading of this Scripture, to shew how
   the consistency of truth is unaffected by these dishonest objections.
   The next words are, And God made man; after the image of God made He
   him. The image is in common; God made man after the image of God. I
   would ask him who denies that God's Son is true God, in what God's
   image he supposes that God made man? He must bear constantly in mind
   that all things are through the Son; heretical ingenuity must not, for
   its own purposes, twist this passage into action on the part of the
   Father. If, therefore, man is created through God the Son after the
   image of God the Father, he is created also after the image of the Son;
   for all admit that the words After Our image and likeness were spoken
   to the Son. Thus His true Godhead is as explicitly asserted by the
   Divine words as manifested in the Divine action; so that it is God Who
   moulds man into the image of God, Who reveals Himself as God, and,
   moreover, as true God. For His joint possession of the Divine image
   proves Him true God, while His creative action displays Him as God the
   Son.

   10. What wild insanity of abandoned souls! What blind audacity of
   reckless blasphemy! You hear of God and God; you hear of Our image. Why
   suggest that One is, and One is not, true God? Why distinguish between
   God by nature and God in name? Why, under pretext of defending the
   faith, do you destroy the faith? Why struggle to pervert the revelation
   of One God, One true God, into a denial that God is One and true? Not
   yet will I stifle your insane efforts with the clear words of
   Evangelists and Prophets, in which Father and Son appear not as one
   Person, but as One in nature, and Each as true God. For the present the
   Law, unaided, annihilates you. Does the Law ever speak of One true God,
   and One not true? Does it ever speak of Either, except by the name of
   God, which is the true expression of Their nature? It speaks of God and
   God; it speaks also of God as One. Nay, it does more than so describe
   Them. It manifests Them as true God and true God, by the sure evidence
   of Their joint image. It begins by speaking of Them first by their
   strict name of God; then it attributes true Godhead to Both in common.
   For when man, Their creature, is created after the image of Both, sound
   reason forces the conclusion that Each of Them is true God.

   11. But let us travel once more in our journey of instruction over the
   lessons taught in the holy Law of God. The Angel of God speaks to
   Hagar; and this same Angel is God. But perhaps His being the Angel of
   God means that He is not true God. For this title seems to indicate a
   lower nature; where the name points to a difference in kind, it is
   thought that true equality must be absent. The last book has already
   exposed the hollowness of this objection; the title of Angel informs us
   of His office, not of His nature. I have prophetic evidence for this
   explanation; Who maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flaming
   fire [747] . That flaming fire is His ministers; that spirit which
   comes, His angels. These figures shew the nature and the power of His
   messengers, or angels, and of His ministers. This spirit is an angel,
   that flaming fire a minister, of God. Their nature adapts them for the
   function of messenger or minister. Thus the Law, or rather God through
   the Law, wishing to indicate God the Son as a Person, yet as bearing
   the same name with the Father, calls Him the Angel, that is, the
   Messenger, of God. The title Messenger proves that He has an office of
   His own; that His nature is truly Divine is proved when He is called
   God. But this sequence, first Angel, then God, is in the order of
   revelation, not in Himself. For we confess Them Father and Son in the
   strictest sense, in such equality that the Only-begotten Son, by virtue
   of His birth, possesses true Divinity from the Unbegotten Father. This
   revelation of Them as Sender and as Sent is but another expression for
   Father and Son; not contradicting the true Divine nature of the Son,
   nor cancelling His possession of the Godhead as His birthright. For
   none can doubt that the Son by His birth partakes congenitally of the
   nature of His Author, in such wise that from the One there comes into
   being an indivisible Unity, because One is from One.

   12. Faith burns with passionate ardour; the burden of silence is
   intolerable, and my thoughts imperiously demand an utterance. Already,
   in the preceding book I have departed from the intended method of my
   demonstration. I was denouncing that blasphemous sense in which the
   heretics speak of One God, and expounding the passages in which Moses
   speaks of God and God. I hastened on with a precipitate, though devout,
   zeal to the true sense in which we hold the unity of God. And now
   again, wrapped up in the pursuit of another enquiry, I have suffered
   myself to wander from the course, and, while I was engaged upon the
   true Divinity of the Son, the ardour of my soul has hurried me on
   before the time to make the confession of true God as Father and as
   Son. But our own faith must wait its proper place in the treatise. This
   preliminary statement of it has been made as a safeguard for the
   reader; it shall be so developed and explained hereafter as to
   frustrate the schemes of the gainsayer.

   13. To resume the argument; this title of office indicates no
   difference of nature, for He, Who is the Angel of God, is God. The test
   of His true Godhead shall be, whether or no His words and acts were
   those of God. He increases Ishmael into a great people, and promises
   that many nations shall bear his name. Is this, I ask, within an
   angel's power? If not, and this is the power of God, why do you refuse
   true Divinity to Him Who, on your own confession, has the true power of
   God? Thus He possesses the true and perfect powers of the Divine
   nature. True God, in all the types in which He reveals Himself for the
   world's salvation, is not, nor ever can be, other than true God.

   14. Now first, I ask, what is the meaning of these terms, true God' and
   not true God'? If any one says to me This is fire, but not true fire;
   water, but not true water,' I can attach no intelligible meaning to his
   words. What difference in kind can there be between one true specimen,
   and another true specimen, of the same class? If a thing be fire, it
   must be true fire; while its nature remains the same it cannot lose
   this character of true fire. Deprive water of its watery nature, and by
   so doing you destroy it as true water; let it remain water, and it will
   inevitably still be true water. The only way in which an object can
   lose its nature is by losing its existence; if it continue to exist it
   must be truly itself. If the Son of God is God, then He is true God; if
   He is not true God, then in no possible sense is He God at all. If He
   has not the nature, then He has no right to the name; if, on the
   contrary, the name which indicates the nature is His by inherent right,
   then it cannot be that He is destitute of that nature in its truest
   sense.

   15. But perhaps it will be argued that, when the Angel of God is called
   God, He receives the name as a favour, through adoption, and has in
   consequence a nominal, not a true, Godhead. If He gave us an inadequate
   revelation of His Divine nature at the time when He was styled the
   Angel of God, judge whether He has not fully manifested His true
   Godhead under the name of a nature lower than the angelic. For a Man
   spoke to Abraham, and Abraham worshipped Him as God. Pestilent heretic!
   Abraham confessed Him, you deny Him, to be God. What hope is there for
   you, in your blasphemy, of the blessings promised to Abraham? He is
   Father of the Gentiles, but not for you; you cannot go forth from your
   regeneration to join the household of his seed, through the blessings
   given to his faith. You are no son, raised up to Abraham from the
   stones; you are a generation of vipers, an adversary of his belief. You
   are not the Israel of God, the heir of Abraham, justified by faith; for
   you have disbelieved God, while Abraham was justified and appointed to
   be the Father of the Gentiles through that faith wherein he worshipped
   the God Whose word he trusted. God it was Whom that blessed and
   faithful Patriarch worshipped then; and mark how truly He was God, to
   Whom, in His own words, all things are possible. Is there any, but God
   alone, to Whom nothing is impossible? And He, to Whom all things are
   possible, does He fall short of true Divinity?

   16. I ask further, Who is this God Who overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah?
   For the Lord rained from the Lord [748] ; was it not the true Lord from
   the true Lord? Have you any alternative to this Lord, and Lord? Or any
   other meaning for the terms, except that in Lord, and Lord, their
   Persons are distinguished? Bear in mind that Him Whom you have
   confessed as Alone true, you have also confessed as Alone the righteous
   Judge [749] . Now mark that the Lord who rains from the Lord, and slays
   not the just with the unjust, and judges the whole earth, is both Lord
   and also righteous Judge, and also rains from the Lord. In the face of
   all this, I ask you Which it is that you describe as alone the
   righteous Judge. The Lord rains from the Lord; you will not deny that
   He Who rains from the Lord is the righteous Judge, for Abraham, the
   Father of the Gentiles--but not of the unbelieving Gentiles--speaks
   thus: In no wise shalt Thou do this thing, to slay the righteous with
   the wicked, for then shall the righteous be as the wicked. In no wise
   shalt Thou, Who judgest the earth, execute this judgment [750] . This
   God, then, the righteous Judge, is clearly also the true God.
   Blasphemer! Your own falsehood confutes you. Not yet do I bring forward
   the witness of the Gospels concerning God the Judge; the Law has told
   me that He is the Judge. You must deprive the Son of His judgeship
   before you can deprive Him of His true Divinity. You have solemnly
   confessed that He Who is the only righteous Judge is also the only true
   God; your own statements bind you to the admission that He Who is the
   righteous Judge is also true God. This Judge is the Lord, to Whom all
   things are possible, the Promiser of eternal blessings, Judge of
   righteous and of wicked. He is the God of Abraham, worshipped by him.
   Fool and blasphemer that you are, your shameless readiness of tongue
   must invent some new fallacy, if you are to prove that He is not true
   God.

   17. His merciful and mysterious self-revelations are in no wise
   inconsistent with His true heavenly nature; and His faithful saints
   never fail to penetrate the guise He has assumed in order that faith
   may see Him. The types of the Law foreshew the mysteries of the Gospel;
   they enable the Patriarch to see and to believe what hereafter the
   Apostle is to gaze on and publish. For, since the Law is the shadow of
   things to come, the shadow that was seen was a true outline of the
   reality which cast it. God was seen and believed and worshipped as Man,
   Who was indeed to be born as Man in the fulness of time. He takes upon
   Him, to meet the Patriarch's eye, a semblance which foreshadows the
   future truth. In that old day God was only seen, not born, as Man; in
   due time He was born, as well as seen. Familiarity with the human
   appearance, which He took that men might behold Him, was to prepare
   them for the time when He should, in very truth, be born as Man. Then
   it was that the shadow took substance, the semblance reality, the
   vision life. But God remained unchanged, whether He were seen in the
   appearance, or born in the reality, of manhood. The resemblance was
   perfect between Himself, after His birth, and Himself, as He had been
   seen in vision. As He was born, so He had appeared; as He had appeared,
   so was He born. But, since the time has not yet come for us to compare
   the Gospel account with that of the prophet Moses, let us pursue our
   chosen course through the pages of the Law. Hereafter we shall prove
   from the Gospels that it was the true Son of God Who was born as Man;
   for the present, we are shewing from the Law that it was true God, the
   Son of God, Who appeared to the Patriarchs in human form. For when One
   appeared to Abraham as Man, He was worshipped as God and proclaimed as
   Judge; and when the Lord rained from the Lord, beyond a doubt the Law
   tells us that the Lord rained from the Lord in order to reveal to us
   the Father and the Son. Nor can we for a moment suppose that when the
   Patriarch, with full knowledge, worshipped the Son as God, he was blind
   to the fact that it was true God Whom he worshipped.

   18. But godless unbelief finds it very hard to apprehend the true
   faith. Their capacity for devotion has never been expanded by belief,
   and is too narrow to receive a full presentment of the truth. Hence the
   unbelieving soul cannot grasp the great work done by God in being born
   as Man to accomplish the salvation of mankind; in the work of its
   salvation it fails to see the power of God. They think of the travail
   of His birth, the feebleness of infancy, the growth of childhood, the
   attainment of maturity, of bodily suffering and of the Cross with which
   it ended, and of the death upon the Cross; and all this conceals His
   true Godhead from their eyes. Yet He had called into being all these
   capacities for Himself, as additions to His nature; capacities which in
   His true Divine nature He had not possessed. Thus He acquired them
   without loss of His true Divinity, and ceased not to be God when He
   became Man; when He, Who is God eternally, became Man at a point in
   time. They cannot see an exercise of the true God's power in His
   becoming what He was not before, yet never ceasing to be His former
   Self. And yet there would have been no acceptance of our feeble nature,
   had not He by the strength of His own omnipotent nature, while
   remaining what He was, come to be what previously He was not. What
   blindness of heresy, what foolish wisdom of the world, which cannot see
   that the reproach of Christ is the power of God, the folly of faith the
   wisdom of God! So Christ in your eyes is not God because He, Who was
   from eternity, was born, because the Unchangeable grew with years, the
   Impassible suffered, the Living died, the Dead lives; because all His
   history contradicts the common course of nature! Is not all this simply
   to say that He, being God, was omnipotent? Not yet, ye holy and
   venerable Gospels, do I turn your pages, to prove from them that Christ
   Jesus, amid these changes and sufferings, is God. For the Law is the
   forerunner of the Gospels, and the Law must teach us that, when God
   clothed Himself in infirmity, He lost not His Godhead. The types of the
   Law are our convincing assurance of the mysteries of the Gospel faith.

   19. Be with me now in thy faithful spirit, holy and blessed Patriarch
   Jacob, to combat the poisonous hissings of the serpent of unbelief.
   Prevail once more in thy wrestling with the Man, and, being the
   stronger, once more entreat His blessing. Why pray for what thou
   mightest demand from thy weaker Opponent? Thy strong arm has vanquished
   Him Whose blessing thou prayest. Thy bodily victory is in broad
   contrast to thy soul's humility, thy deeds to thy thoughts. It is a Man
   whom thou holdest powerless in thy strong grasp; but in thine eye this
   Man is true God, and God not in name only, but in nature. It is not the
   blessing of a God by adoption that thou dost claim, but the true God's
   blessing. With Man thou strivest; but face to face thou seest God. What
   thou seest with the bodily eye is different far from what thou
   beholdest with the vision of faith. Thou hast felt Him to be weak Man;
   but thy soul has been saved because it saw God in Him. When thou wast
   wrestling thou wast Jacob; thou art Israel now, through faith in the
   blessing which thou didst claim. According to the flesh, the Man is thy
   inferior, for a type of His passion in the flesh; but thou canst
   recognise God in that weak flesh, for a sign of His blessing in the
   Spirit. The witness of the eye does not disturb thy faith; His
   feebleness does not mislead thee into neglect of His blessing. Though
   He is Man, His humanity is no bar to His being God, His Godhead no bar
   to His being true God; for, being God, He must indeed be true [751] .

   20. The Law in its progress still follows the sequence of the Gospel
   mystery, of which it is the shadow; its types are a faithful
   anticipation of the truths taught by the Apostles. In the vision of his
   dream the blessed Jacob saw God; this was the revelation of a mystery,
   not a bodily manifestation. For there was shown to him the descent of
   angels by the ladder, and their ascent to heaven, and God resting above
   the ladder; and the vision, as it was interpreted, foretold that his
   dream should some day become a revealed truth. The Patriarch's words,
   The house of God and the gate of heaven, shew us the scene of His
   vision; and then, after a long account of what he did, the narrative
   proceeds thus: And God said unto Jacob, Arise, and go up to the place
   Bethel, and dwell there: and make there a Sacrifice unto God, that
   appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau [752] . If
   the faith of the Gospel has access through God the Son to God the
   Father, and if it is only through God that God can be apprehended, then
   shew us in what sense This is not true God, Who demands reverence for
   God, Who rests above the heavenly ladder. What difference of nature
   separates the Two, when Both bear the one name which indicates the one
   nature? It is God Who was seen; it is also God Who speaks about God Who
   was seen. God cannot be apprehended except through God; even as also
   God accepts no worship from us except through God. We could not
   understand that the One must be reverenced, unless the Other had taught
   us reverence for Him; we could not have known that the One is God,
   unless we had known the Godhead of the Other. The revelation of
   mysteries holds its appointed course; it is by God that we are
   initiated into the worship of God. And when one name, which tells of
   one nature, combines the Father with the Son, how can the Son so fall
   beneath Himself as to be other than true God?

   21. Human judgment must not pass its sentence upon God. Our nature is
   not such that it can lift itself by its own forces to the contemplation
   of heavenly things. We must learn from God what we are to think of God;
   we have no source of knowledge but Himself. You may be as carefully
   trained as you will in secular philosophy; you may have lived a life of
   righteousness. All this will contribute to your mental satisfaction,
   but it will not help you to know God. Moses was adopted as the son of
   the queen, and instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; he had,
   moreover, out of loyalty to his race avenged the wrong of the Hebrew by
   slaying the Egyptian [753] , and yet he knew not the God Who had
   blessed his fathers. For when he left Egypt through fear of the
   discovery of his deed, and was living as a shepherd in the land of
   Midian, he saw a fire in the bush, and the bush unconsumed. Then it was
   that he heard the voice of God, and asked His name, and learned His
   nature. Of all this he could have known nothing except through God
   Himself. And we, in like manner, must confine ourselves, in whatever we
   say of God, to the terms in which He has spoken to our understanding
   concerning Himself.

   22. It is the Angel of God Who appeared in the fire from the bush; and
   it is God Who spoke from the bush amid the fire. He is manifested as
   Angel; that is His office, not His nature. The name which expresses His
   nature is given you as God; for the Angel of God is God. But perhaps He
   is not true God. Is the God of Abraham, then, the God of Isaac, the God
   of Jacob, not true God? For the Angel Who speaks from the bush is their
   God eternally. And, lest you insinuate that the name is His only by
   adoption, it is the absolute God Who speaks to Moses. These are His
   words:--And the Lord said unto Moses, I Am that I Am; and He said, Thus
   shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, He that is hath sent me
   unto you [754] . God's discourse began as the speech of the Angel, in
   order to reveal the mystery of human salvation in the Son. Next He
   appears as the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
   Jacob, that we may know the name which is His by nature. Finally it is
   the God that is Who sends Moses to Israel, that we may have full
   assurance that in the absolute sense He is God.

   23. What further fictions can the futile folly of insane blasphemy
   devise? Do you still persist in your nightly sowing of tares,
   predestined to be burnt, among the pure wheat, when the knowledge of
   all the Patriarchs contradicts you? Nay more: if you believed Moses,
   you would believe also in God, the Son of God; unless perchance you
   deny that it was of Him that Moses spoke. If you propose to deny that,
   you must listen to the words of God:--For had ye believed Moses, ye
   would have believed Me also, for he wrote of Me [755] . Moses, indeed,
   will refute you with the whole volume of the Law, ordained through
   angels, which he received by the hand of the Mediator. Enquire whether
   He, Who gave the Law, were not true God; for the Mediator was the
   Giver. And was it not to meet God that Moses led out the people to the
   Mount? Was it not God Who came down into the Mount? Or was it, perhaps,
   only by a fiction or an adoption, and not by right of nature, that He,
   Who did all this, bore the name of God? Mark the blare of the trumpets,
   the flashing of the torches, the clouds of smoke, as from a furnace,
   rolling over the mountain, the terror of conscious impotence on the
   part of man in the presence of God, the confession of the people, when
   they prayed Moses to be their spokesman, that at the voice of God they
   would die. Is He, in your judgment, not true God, when simple dread
   lest He should speak filled Israel with the fear of death? He Whose
   voice could not be borne by human weakness? In your eyes is He not God,
   because He addressed you through the weak faculties of a man, that you
   might hear, and live [756] ? Moses entered the Mount; in forty days and
   nights he gained the knowledge of the mysteries of heaven, and set it
   all in order according to the vision of the truth which was revealed to
   him there. From intercourse with God, Who spoke with him, he received
   the reflected splendour of that glory on which none may gaze? his
   corruptible countenance was transfigured into the likeness of the
   unapproachable light of Him, with Whom he was dwelling. Of this God he
   bears witness, of this God he speaks; he summons the angels of God to
   come and worship Him amid the gladness of the Gentiles, and prays that
   the blessings which please Him may descend upon the head of Joseph. In
   face of such evidence as this, dare any man say that He has nothing but
   the name of God, and deny His true Divinity?

   24. This long discussion has, I believe, brought out the truth that no
   sound argument has ever been adduced in favour of a distinction between
   One Who is, and One Who is not, true God, in those passages where the
   Law speaks of God and God, of Lord and Lord. I have proved that these
   terms are inconsistent with difference between Them in name or in
   nature, and that we can use the name as a test of the nature, and the
   nature as a clue to the name. Thus I have shewn that the character, the
   power, the attributes, the name of God are inherent in Him Whom the Law
   has called God. I have shewn also that the Law, gradually unfolding the
   Gospel mystery, reveals the Son as a Person by manifesting God as
   obedient, in the creation of the world, to the words of God, and in the
   formation of man making what is the joint image of God, and of God; and
   again, that in the judgment of the men of Sodom the Lord is Judge from
   the Lord; that, in the giving of blessings and ordaining of the
   mysteries of the Law, the Angel of God is God. Thus, in support of the
   saving confession of God as ever manifested in the Persons of Father
   and of Son, we have shewn how the Law teaches the true Godhead by the
   use of the strict name of God; for, while the Law states clearly that
   They are Two, it casts no shadow of doubt upon the true Godhead of
   either.

   25. And now the time has come for us to put a stop to that cunning
   artifice of heresy, by which they pervert the devout and godly
   teachings of the Law into a support for their own godless delusion.
   They preface their denial of the Son of God with the words, Hear, O
   Israel, the Lord thy God is One; and then, because their blasphemy
   would be refuted by the identity of name, since the Law speaks of God
   and God, they invoke the authority of the prophetic words, They shall
   bless Thee, the true God, to prove that the name is not used in the
   true sense. They argue that these words teach that God is One, and that
   God, the Son of God, has His name only and not His nature; and that
   therefore we must conclude that the true God is one Person only. But
   perhaps you imagine, fool, that we shall contradict these texts of
   yours, and so deny that there is one true God. Assuredly we do not
   contradict them by a confession conceived in your sense. Our faith
   receives them, our reason accepts them, our words declare them. We
   recognise One God, and Him true God. The name of God has no dangers for
   our confession, which proclaims that in the nature of the Son there is
   the One true God. Learn the meaning of your own words, recognise the
   One true God, and then you will be able to make a faithful confession
   of God, One and true. It is the words of our faith which you are
   turning into the instrument of your blasphemy, preserving the sound and
   perverting the sense. Masquerading in a foolish garb of imaginary
   wisdom, under cover of loyalty to truth you are the truth's destroyer.
   You confess that God is One and true, on purpose to deny the truth
   which you confess. Your language claims a reputation for piety on the
   strength of its impiety, for truth on the strength of its falsehood.
   Your preaching of One true God leads up to a denial of Him. For you
   deny that the Son is true God, though you admit that He is God, but God
   in name only, not in nature. If His birth be in name, not in nature,
   then you are justified in denying His true right to the name; but if He
   be truly born as God, how then can He fail to be true God by virtue of
   His birth? Deny the fact, and you may deny the consequence; if you
   admit the fact, how can He be other than Himself? No being can alter
   its own essential nature. About His birth I shall speak presently;
   meantime I will refute your blasphemous falsehoods concerning His true
   Divine nature by the utterances of prophets. But I shall take care that
   in our assertion of the One true God I give no cover to the Sabellian
   heresy that the Father is one Person with the Son, and none to that
   slander against the Son's true Godhead, which you evolve out of the
   unity of the One true God.

   26. Blasphemy is incompatible with wisdom; where the fear of God, which
   is the beginning of wisdom, is absent, no glimmer of intelligence
   survives. An instance of this is seen in the heretics' citation of the
   prophet's words, And they shall bless Thee, the true God, as evidence
   against the Godhead of the Son. First, we see here the folly, which
   clogs unbelief in the misunderstanding or (if it were understood) in
   the suppression of the earlier part of the prophecy: and again we see
   it in their fraudulent interpolation of that one little word, not to be
   found in the book itself. This proceeding is as stupid as it is
   dishonest, since no one would trust them so far as to accept their
   reading without referring for corroboration to the prophetic text. For
   that text does not stand thus: They shall bless Thee, the true God, but
   thus: They shall bless the true God [757] . There is no slight
   difference between Thee, the true God and The true God. If Thee be
   retained, the pronoun of the second person implies that Another is
   being addressed; if Thee be omitted, True God, the object of the
   sentence, is the Speaker.

   27. To ensure that our explanation of the passage shall be complete and
   certain, I cite the words in full:--Therefore thus saith the Lord,
   Behold, they that serve Me shall eat, but ye shall be hungry, behold,
   they that serve Me shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty, behold, they
   that serve Me shall rejoice with gladness, but ye shall cry for sorrow
   of your heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. For ye shall
   leave your name for a rejoicing unto My chosen, but the Lord shall slay
   you. But My servants shall be called by a new name, which shall be
   blessed upon earth; and they shall bless the true God, and they that
   swear upon the earth shall swear by the true God [758] . There is
   always a good reason for any departure from the accustomed modes of
   expression, but novelty is also made an opportunity for
   misinterpretation. The question here is, Why, when so many earlier
   prophecies have been uttered concerning God, and the name God, alone
   and without epithet, has sufficed hitherto to indicate the Divine
   majesty and nature, the Spirit of prophecy should now foretell through
   Isaiah that the true God was to be blessed, and that men should swear
   upon earth by the true God. First, we must bear in mind that this
   discourse was spoken concerning times to come. Now, I ask, was not He,
   in the mind of the Jews, true God, Whom men used then to bless, and by
   whom they swore? The Jews, unaware of the typical meaning of their
   mysteries, and therefore ignorant of God the Son, worshipped God simply
   as God, and not as Father [759] ; for, if they had worshipped Him as
   Father, they would have worshipped the Son also. It was God, therefore,
   Whom they blessed and by Whom they swore. But the prophet testifies
   that it is true God Who shall be blessed hereafter; calling Him true
   God, because the mysteriousness of His Incarnation was to blind the
   eyes of some to His true Godhead. When falsehood was to be published
   abroad, it was necessary that the truth should be clearly stated. And
   now let us review this passage, clause by clause.

   28. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, they that serve Me shall
   eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold, they that serve Me shall drink,
   but ye shall be thirsty. Note that one clause contains two different
   tenses, in order to teach truth concerning two different times; They
   that serve Me shall eat. Present piety is rewarded with a future prize,
   and similarly present godlessness shall suffer the penalty of future
   thirst and hunger. Then He adds, Behold, they that serve Me shall
   rejoice with gladness, but ye shall cry for sorrow of your heart, and
   shall howl for vexation of spirit. Here again, as before, there is a
   revelation for the future and for the present. They who serve now shall
   rejoice with gladness, while they who do not serve shall abide in
   crying and howling through sorrow of heart and vexation of spirit. He
   proceeds, For ye shall leave your name for a rejoicing unto My chosen,
   but the Lord shall slay you. These words, dealing with a future time,
   are addressed to the carnal Israel, which is taunted with the prospect
   of having to surrender its name to the chosen of God. What is this
   name? Israel, of course; for to Israel the prophecy was addressed. And
   now I ask, What is Israel to-day? The Apostle gives the answer:--They
   who are in the spirit, not in the letter, they who walk in the Law of
   Christ, are the Israel of God [760] .

   29. Furthermore, we must form a conclusion why it is that the words
   cited above, Therefore thus saith the Lord, are followed by But the
   Lord shall slay you, and as to the meaning of the next sentence, But my
   servants shall be called by a new name, which shall be blessed upon
   earth. There can be no doubt that both Therefore thus saith the Lord,
   and afterwards But the Lord shall slay you, prove that it was the Lord
   Who both spoke, and also purposed to slay, Who meant to reward His
   servants with that new name, Who was well known to have spoken through
   the prophets and was to be the judge of the righteous and of the
   wicked. And thus the remainder of this revelation of the mystery of the
   Gospel removes all doubt concerning the Lord as Speaker and as Slayer.
   It continues:--But My servants shall be called by a new name, which
   shall be blessed upon earth. Here everything is in the future. What
   then is this new name of a religion; a name which shall be blessed upon
   earth? If ever in past ages there were a blessing upon the name
   Christian, it is not a new name. But if this hallowed name of our
   devotion towards God be new, then this new title of Christian, awarded
   to our faith, is that heavenly blessing which is our reward upon earth.

   30. And now come words in perfect harmony with the inward assurance of
   our faith. He says, And they shall bless the true God, and they that
   swear upon earth shall swear by the true God. And indeed they who in
   God's service have received the new name shall bless God; and moreover
   the God by Whom they shall swear is the true God. What doubt is there
   as to Who this true God is, by Whom men shall swear and Whom they shall
   bless, through Whom a new and blessed name shall be given to them that
   serve Him? I have on my side, in opposition to the blasphemous
   misrepresentations of heresy, the clear and definite evidence of the
   Church's faith; the witness of the new name which Thou, O Christ, hast
   given, of the blessed title which Thou hast bestowed in reward of loyal
   service. It swears that Thou art true God. Every mouth, O Christ, of
   them that believe tells that Thou art God. The faith of all believers
   swears that Thou art God, confesses, proclaims, is inwardly assured,
   that Thou art true God.

   31. And thus this passage of prophecy, taken with its whole context,
   clearly describes as God both Him Whom we serve for the new name's
   sake, and Him through Whom the new name is blessed upon earth. It tells
   us Who it is that is blessed as true God, and Who is sworn by as true
   God. And this is the confession of faith made, in the fulness of time,
   by the Church in loyal devotion to Christ her Lord. We can see how
   exactly the words of prophecy conform to the truth, by their refraining
   from the insertion of that pronoun of the second person. Had the words
   been Thee, the true God, then they might have been interpreted as
   spoken to another. The true God can refer to none but the Speaker. The
   passage, taken by itself, shews to Whom it refers; the preceding words,
   taken in connexion with it, declare Who the Speaker is Who makes this
   confession of God. They are these:--I have appeared openly to them that
   asked not for Me, and, I have been found of them that sought Me not. I
   said, Here am I, unto a nation that called not on My name. I have
   spread out My hands all the day to an unbelieving and gainsaying people
   [761] . Could a dishonest attempt to suppress the truth be more
   completely exposed, or the Speaker be more distinctly revealed as true
   God, than here? Who, I demand, was it that appeared to them that asked
   not for Him, and was found of them that sought Him not? What nation is
   it that formerly called not on His name? Who is it that spread out His
   hands all the day to an unbelieving and gainsaying people? Compare with
   these words that holy and Divine Song of Deuteronomy [762] , in which
   God, in His wrath against them that are no Gods, moves the unbelievers
   to jealousy against those that are no people and a foolish nation.
   Conclude for yourself, Who it is that makes Himself manifest to them
   that knew Him not; Who, though one people is His own, becomes the
   possession of strangers; Who it is that spreads out His hands before an
   unbelieving and gainsaying people, nailing to the cross the writing of
   the former sentence against us [763] . For the same Spirit in the
   prophet, whom we are considering, proceeds thus in the course of this
   one prophecy, which is connected in argument as well as continuous in
   utterance:--But My servants shall be called by a new name, which shall
   be blessed upon earth, and they shall bless the true God, and they that
   swear upon the earth shall swear by the true God.

   32. If heresy, in its folly and wickedness, shall attempt to entice the
   simple-minded and uninstructed away from the true belief that these
   words were spoken in reference to God the Son, by feigning that they
   are an utterance of God the Father concerning Himself, it shall hear
   sentence passed upon the lie by the Apostle and Teacher of the
   Gentiles. He interprets all these prophecies as allusions to the
   passion of the Lord and to the times of Gospel faith, when he is
   reproving the unbelief of Israel, which will not recognise that the
   Lord is come in the flesh. His words are:--For whosoever shall have
   called upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How shall they call on
   Him in Whom they have not believed? But how shall they believe in Him
   of Whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
   preacher? And how shall they preach, excerpt they have been sent? As it
   is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that proclaim peace, of
   them that proclaim good things. But all do not obey the Gospel. For
   Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report? So then faith cometh
   by hearing and hearing through the word. But I say, Have they not
   heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words
   unto the ends of the world. But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses
   saith, I will provoke you to jealousy against them that are no people,
   and against a foolish nation I will anger you. Moreover Esaias is bold,
   and saith, I appeared unto them that seek Me not, I was found by them
   that asked not after Me. But to Israel what saith He? All day long I
   have stretched forth My hands to a people that hearken not [764] . Who
   art thou that hast mounted up through the successive heavens, knowing
   not whether thou wert in the body or out of the body, and canst explain
   more faithfully than he the words of the prophet? Who art thou that
   hast heard, and mayst not tell, the ineffable mysteries of the secret
   things of heaven, and hast proclaimed with greater assurance the
   knowledge granted thee by God for revelation? Who art thou that hast
   been fore-ordained to a full share of the Lord's suffering on the
   Cross, and first has been caught up to Paradise and drawn nobler
   teaching from the Scriptures of God than this chosen vessel? If there
   be such a man, has he been ignorant that these are the deeds and words
   of the true God, proclaimed to us by His own true and chosen Apostle
   that we may recognise in Him their Author?

   33. But it may be argued that the Apostle was not inspired by the
   Spirit of prophecy when he borrowed these prophetic words; that he was
   only interpreting at random the words of another man, and though, no
   doubt, everything the Apostle says of himself comes to him by
   revelation from Christ, yet his knowledge of the words of Isaiah is
   only derived from the book. I answer that in the beginning of that
   utterance in which it is said that the servants of the true God shall
   bless Him and swear by Him, we read this adoration by the
   prophet:--From everlasting we have not heard, nor have our eyes seen
   God, except Thee, and Thy works which Thou wilt do for them that await
   Thy mercy [765] . Isaiah says that he has seen no God but Him. For he
   did actually see the glory of God, the mystery of Whose taking flesh
   from the Virgin he foretold. And if you, in your heresy, do not know
   that it was God the Only-begotten Whom the prophet saw in that glory,
   listen to the Evangelist:--These things said Esaias, when he saw His
   glory, and spake of Him [766] . The Apostle, the Evangelist, the
   Prophet combine to silence your objections. Isaiah did see God; even
   though it is written, No one hath seen God at any time, save the
   Only-begotten Son Who is in the bosom of the Father; He hath declared
   Him [767] , it was God Whom the prophet saw. He gazed upon the Divine
   glory, and men were filled with envy at such honour vouchsafed to his
   prophetic greatness. For this was the reason why the Jews passed
   sentence of death upon him.

   34. Thus the Only-begotten Son, Who is in the bosom of the Father, has
   told us of God, Whom no man has seen. Either disprove the fact that the
   Son has thus informed us, or else believe Him Who has been seen, Who
   appeared to them who knew Him not, and became the God of the Gentiles
   who called not upon Him and spread out His hands before a gainsaying
   people. And believe this also concerning Him, that they who serve Him
   are called by a new name, and that on earth men bless Him and swear by
   Him as true God. Prophecy tells, the Gospel confirms, the Apostle
   explains, the Church confesses, that He Who was seen is true God; but
   none venture to say that God the Father was seen. And yet the madness
   of heresy has run to such lengths that, while they profess to recognise
   this truth, they really deny it. They deny it by means of the
   newfangled and godless device of evading the truth, while making a
   studied pretence of adhesion to it. For when they confess one God,
   alone true and alone righteous, alone wise, alone unchangeable, alone
   immortal, alone mighty, they attach to Him a Son different in
   substance, not born from God to be God, but adopted through creation to
   be a Son, having the name of God not by nature, but as a title received
   by adoption; and thus they inevitably deprive the Son of all those
   attributes which they accumulate upon the Father in His lonely majesty.

   35. The distorted mind of heresy is incapable of knowing and confessing
   the One true God; the sound faith and reason necessary for such
   confession is incompatible with unbelief. We must confess Father and
   Son before we can apprehend God as One and true. When we have known the
   mysteries of man's salvation, accomplished in us through the power of
   regeneration unto life in the Father and the Son, then we may hope to
   penetrate the mysteries of the Law and the Prophets. Godless ignorance
   of the teaching of Evangelists and Apostles cannot frame the thought of
   One true God. Out of the teaching of Evangelists and Apostles we shall
   present the sound doctrine concerning Him, in accurate agreement with
   the faith of true believers. We shall present Him in such wise that the
   Only-begotten, Who is of the substance of the Father, shall be known as
   indivisible and inseparable in nature, not in Person. We shall set
   forth God as One, because God is from the nature of God. But we shall
   also establish this doctrine of the perfect unity of God upon the words
   of the Prophets, and make them the foundations of the Gospel structure,
   proving that there is One God, with one Divine nature, by the fact that
   God the Only-begotten is never classed apart as a second God. For
   throughout this book of our treatise we have followed the same course
   as in its predecessor; the same methods which proved there that the Son
   is God, have proved here that He is true God. I trust that our
   explanation of each passage has been so convincing that we have now
   manifested Him as true God as effectually as we formerly demonstrated
   His Godhead. The remainder of the book shall be devoted to the proof
   that He, Who is now recognised as true God, must not be regarded as a
   second God. Our disproof of the notion of a second God will further
   establish the unity; and this truth shall be displayed as not
   inconsistent with the personal existence of the Son, while yet it
   maintains the unity of nature in God and God.

   36. The true method of our enquiry demands that we should begin with
   him, through whom God first manifested Himself to the world, that is,
   with Moses, by whose mouth God the Only-begotten thus declared Himself;
   See, see that I am God, and there is no God beside Me [768] . That
   godless heresy must not assign these words to God, the unbegotten
   Father, is clear by the sense of the passage and by the evidence of the
   Apostle who, as we have already stated [769] , has taught us to
   understand this whole discourse as spoken by God the Only-begotten. The
   Apostle also points out the words, Rejoice, O ye nations, with His
   people [770] as those of the Son, and in corroboration further cites
   this:--And there shall be a root of Jesse, and One that shall arise to
   rule the nations; in Him shall the nations trust [771] . Thus Moses by
   the words, Rejoice, O ye nations, with His people indicates Him Who
   said, There is no God beside Me; and the Apostle refers the same words
   to our Lord Jesus Christ, God the Only-begotten, in Whose rising as a
   king from the root of Jesse, according to the flesh, the hope of the
   Gentiles rests. And therefore we must now consider the meaning of these
   words, that we, who know that they were spoken by Him, may ascertain in
   what sense He spoke them.

   37. That true and absolute and perfect doctrine, which forms our faith,
   is the confession of God from God and God in God, by no bodily process
   but by Divine power, by no transfusion from nature into nature but
   through the secret and mighty working of the One nature; God from God,
   not by division or extension or emanation, but by the operation of a
   nature which brings into existence, by means of birth, a nature One
   with itself. The facts shall receive a fuller treatment in the next
   book, which is to be devoted to an exposition of the teaching of the
   Evangelists and Apostles; for the present we must maintain our
   assertion and belief by means of the Law and the Prophets. The nature
   with which God is born is necessarily the same as that of His Source.
   He cannot come into existence as other than God, since His origin is
   from none other than God. His nature is the same, not in the sense that
   the Begetter also was begotten--for then the Unbegotten, having been
   begotten, would not be Himself--but that the substance of the Begotten
   consists in all those elements which are summed up in the substance of
   the Begetter, Who is His only Origin. Thus it is due to no external
   cause that His origin is from the One, and that His existence partakes
   the Unity; there is no novel element in Him, because His life is from
   the Living; no element absent, because the Living begot Him to partake
   His own life. Hence, in the generation of the Son, the incorporeal and
   unchangeable God begets, in accordance with His own nature, God
   incorporeal and unchangeable; and this perfect birth of incorporeal and
   unchangeable God from incorporeal and unchangeable God involves, as we
   see in the light of the revelation of God from God, no diminution of
   the Begetter's substance. And so God the Only-begotten bears witness
   through the holy Moses; See, see that I am God, and there is no God
   beside Me. For there is no second Divine nature, and so there can be no
   God beside Him, since He is God, yet by the powers of His nature God is
   also in Him. And because He is God and God is in Him, there is no God
   beside Him; for God, than Whom there is no other Source of Deity, is in
   Him, and consequently there is within Him not only His own existence,
   but the Author of that existence.

   38. This saving faith which we profess is sustained by the spirit of
   prophecy, speaking with one voice through many mouths, and never,
   through long and changing ages, bearing an uncertain witness to the
   truths of revelation. For instance, the words which, as we are told
   through Moses, were spoken by God the Only-begotten, are confirmed for
   our better instruction by the prophetic spirit, speaking this time
   through those men of stature,--For God is in Thee, and there is no God
   beside Thee. Thou art God, and we knew it not, O God of Israel, the
   Saviour. Let heresy fling itself with its utmost effort of despair and
   rage against this declaration of a name and nature inseparably joined,
   and rend in twain, if its furious struggles can, a union perfect in
   title and in fact. God is in God and beside Him there is no God. Let
   heresy, if it can, divide the God within from the God within Whom He
   is, and classify, Each after His kind, the members of that mystic
   union. For when He says God is in Thee, He teaches that the true nature
   of God the Father is present in God the Son; for we must understand
   that it is the God Who is [772] that is in Him. And when He adds, And
   there is no God beside Thee, He shews that outside Him there is no God,
   since God's dwelling is within Himself. And the third assertion, Thou
   art God and we knew it not, sets forth for our instruction what must be
   the confession of the devout and believing soul. When it has learnt the
   mysteries of the Divine birth, and the name Emmanuel which the angel
   announced to Joseph, it must cry, Thou art God, and we knew it not, O
   God of Israel, the Saviour. It must recognise the subsistence of the
   Divine nature in Him, inasmuch as God is in God, and the nonexistence
   of any other God except the true. For, He being God and God being in
   Him, the delusion of another God, of what kind soever, must be
   surrendered. Such is the message of the prophet Isaiah; he bears
   witness to the indivisible and inseparable Godhead of Father and of
   Son.

   39. Jeremiah also, a prophet equally inspired, has taught that God the
   Only-begotten is of a nature one with that of God the Father. His words
   are:--This is our God, and there shall be none other likened unto Him,
   Who hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto
   Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved. Afterward He was seen
   upon earth, and dwelt among men [773] . Why try to transform the Son of
   God into a second God? Learn to recognise and to confess the One True
   God. No second God is likened to Christ, and so can claim to be God. He
   is God from God by nature and by birth, for the Source of His Godhead
   is God. And, again, He is not a second God, for no other is likened
   unto Him; the truth that is in Him is nothing else than the truth of
   God. Why link together, in pretended devotion to the unity of God, true
   and false, base and genuine, unlike and unlike? The Father is God and
   the Son is God. God is in God; beside Him there is no God, and none
   other is likened unto Him so as to be God. If in these Two you shall
   recognise the Unity, instead of the solitude, of God, you will share
   the Church's faith, which confesses the Father in the Son. But if, in
   ignorance of the heavenly mystery, you insist that God is One in order
   to enforce the doctrine of His isolation, then you are a stranger to
   the knowledge of God, for you deny that God is in God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [741] Deut. vi. 4; St. Mark xii. 29.

   [742] Reading recideretue.

   [743] From the beginning of the Arian Creed, Book iv. § 12.

   [744] The first three books are regarded as preliminary. The direct
   refutation began with Book iv.

   [745] Col. i. 16.

   [746] i.e. His freedom of action is proved by His satisfaction with the
   result.

   [747] Psalm civ. (ciii.) 4.

   [748] Gen. xix. 24.

   [749] Book iv. § 12. The latter expression is cited inaccurately.

   [750] Gen. xviii. 25.

   [751] Omitting et benedicendo et transferendo et nuncupando.

   [752] Gen. xxxv. 1.

   [753] This act is used as the evidence of Moses' righteousness.

   [754] Exod. iii. 14.

   [755] St. John v. 46.

   [756] Reading viveres.

   [757] Isai. lxv. 16.

   [758] Ib. 13-16.

   [759] Cf. Book iii. § 17.

   [760] Cf. Rom. ii. 29.

   [761] Isai. lxv. 1, 2.

   [762] Deut. xxxii. 21.

   [763] Cf. Col. ii. 14.

   [764] Rom. x. 13-21.

   [765] Isai. lxiv. 4.

   [766] St. John xii. 41.

   [767] Ib. i. 18.

   [768] Deut. xxxii. 39.

   [769] Book iv. § 33.

   [770] Deut. xxxii. 43 (Rom. xv. 10).

   [771] Isai. xi. 10 (Rom. xv. 12).

   [772] Exod. iii. 14.

   [773] Baruch iii. 35-37.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book VI.

   1. It is with a full knowledge of the dangers and passions of the time
   that I have ventured to attack this wild and godless heresy, which
   asserts that the Son of God is a creature. Multitudes of Churches, in
   almost every province of the Roman Empire, have already caught the
   plague of this deadly doctrine; error, persistently inculcated and
   falsely claiming to be the truth, has become ingrained in minds which
   vainly imagine that they are loyal to the faith. I know how hardly the
   will is moved to a thorough recantation, when zeal for a mistaken cause
   is encouraged by the sense of numbers and confirmed by the sanction of
   general approval. A multitude under delusion can only be approached
   with difficulty and danger. When the crowd has gone astray, even though
   it know that it is in the wrong, it is ashamed to return. It claims
   consideration for its numbers, and has the assurance to command that
   its folly shall be accounted wisdom. It assumes that its size is
   evidence of the correctness of its opinions; and thus a falsehood which
   has found general credence is boldly asserted to have established its
   truth.

   2. For my own part, it was not only the claim which my vocation has
   upon me, the duty of diligently preaching the Gospel which, as a
   bishop, I owe to the Church, that has led me on. My eagerness to write
   has increased with the increasing numbers endangered and enthralled by
   this heretical theory. There was a rich prospect of joy in the thought
   of multitudes who might be saved, if they could know the mysteries of
   the right faith in God, and abandon the blasphemous principles of human
   folly, desert the heretics and surrender themselves to God; if they
   would forsake the bait with which the fowler snares his prey, and soar
   aloft in freedom and safety, following Christ as Leader, prophets as
   instructors, apostles as guides, and accepting the perfect faith and
   sure salvation in the confession of Father and of Son. So would they,
   in obedience to the words of the Lord, He that honoureth not the Son
   honoureth not the Father which hath sent Him [774] , be setting
   themselves to honour the Father, through honour paid to the Son.

   3. For of late the infection of a mortal evil has gone abroad among
   mankind, whose ravages have dealt destruction and death on every hand.
   The sudden desolation of cities smitten, with their people in them, by
   earthquake to the ground, the terrible slaughter of recurring wars, the
   widespread mortality of an irresistible pestilence, have never wrought
   such fatal mischief as the progress of this heresy throughout the
   world. For God, unto Whom all the dead live, destroys those only who
   are self-destroyed. From Him Who is to be the Judge of all, Whose
   Majesty will temper with mercy the punishment allotted to the mistakes
   of ignorance, they who deny Him can expect not even judgment, but only
   denial.

   4. For this mad heresy does deny; it denies the mystery of the true
   faith by means of statements borrowed from our confession, which it
   employs for its own godless ends. The confession of their misbelief,
   which I have already cited in an earlier book, begins thus:--"We
   confess one God, alone unmade, alone eternal, alone unoriginate, alone
   true, alone possessing immortality, alone good, alone mighty." Thus
   they parade the opening words of our own confession, which runs, "One
   God, alone unmade and alone un-originate," that this semblance of truth
   may serve as introduction to their blasphemous additions. For, after a
   multitude of words in which an equally insincere devotion to the Son is
   expressed, their confession continues, "God's perfect creature, but not
   as one of His other creatures, His Handiwork, but not as His other
   works." And again, after an interval in which true statements are
   occasionally interspersed in order to veil their impious purpose of
   alleging, as by sophistry they try to prove, that He came into
   existence out of nothing, they add, "He, created and established before
   the worlds, did not exist before He was born." And lastly, as though
   every point of their false doctrine, that He is to be regarded neither
   as Son nor as God, were guarded impregnably against assault, they
   continue:--"As to such phrases as from Him, and from the womb, and I
   went out from the Father and am come, if they be understood to denote
   that the Father extends a part and, as it were, a development of that
   one substance, then the Father will be of a compound nature and
   divisible and changeable and corporeal, according to them; and thus, as
   far as their words go, the incorporeal God will be subjected to the
   properties of matter." But, as we are now about to cover the whole
   ground once more, employing this time the language of the Gospels as
   our weapon against this most godless heresy, it has seemed best to
   repeat here, in the sixth book, the whole heretical document, though we
   have already given a full copy of it in the fourth [775] , in order
   that our opponents may read it again, and compare it, point by point,
   with our reply, and so be forced, however reluctant and argumentative,
   by the clear teaching of the Evangelists and Apostles, to recognise the
   truth. The heretical confession is as follows:--

   5. "We confess one God, alone unmade, alone eternal, alone unoriginate,
   alone possessing immortality, alone good, alone mighty, Creator,
   Ordainer and Disposer of all things, unchangeable and unalterable,
   righteous and good, of the Law and the Prophets and the New Testament.
   We believe that this God gave birth to the Only-begotten Son before all
   worlds, through Whom He made the world and all things, that He gave
   birth to Him not in semblance, but in truth, following His own will, so
   that He is unchangeable and unalterable, God's perfect Creature, but
   not as one of His other creatures, His Handiwork, but not as His other
   works; not, as Valentinus maintained, that the Son is a development of
   the Father, nor, as Manichæus has declared of the Son, a consubstantial
   part of the Father, nor, as Sabellius, who makes two out of One, Son
   and Father at once, nor, as Hieracas, a light from a light, or a lamp
   with two flames, nor, as if He was previously in being and afterwards
   born, or created afresh, to be a Son, a notion often condemned by
   thyself, blessed Pope, publicly in the Church, and in the assembly of
   the brethren. But, as we have affirmed, we believe that He was created
   by the will of God before times and worlds, and has His life and
   existence from the Father, Who gave Him to share His own glorious
   perfections. For, when the Father gave to Him the inheritance of all
   things, He did not thereby deprive Himself of attributes which are His
   without origination, He being the source of all things.

   6. "So there are three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. God, for
   His part, is the Cause of all things, utterly unoriginate and separate
   from all; while the Son, put forth by the Father outside time, and
   created and established before the worlds, did not exist before He was
   born, but, being born outside time before the worlds, came into being
   as the Only Son of the Only Father. For He is neither eternal, nor
   co-eternal, nor co-uncreate with the Father, nor has He an existence
   collateral with the Father, as some say who postulate two unborn
   principles. But God is before all things, as being indivisible and the
   beginning of all. Wherefore He is before the Son also, as indeed we
   have learnt from thee in thy public preaching. Inasmuch then as He has
   His being from God, and His glorious perfections, and His life, and is
   entrusted with all things, for this reason God is His Source. For He
   rules over Him, as being His God, since He is before Him. As to such
   phrases as from Him, and from the womb, and I went out from the Father
   and am come, if they be understood to denote that the Father extends a
   part and, as it were, a development of that one Substance, then the
   Father will be of a compound nature and divisible and changeable and
   corporeal, according to them; and thus, as far as their words go, the
   incorporeal God will be subjected to the properties of matter [776] ."

   7. Who can fail to see here the slimy windings of the serpent's track:
   the coiled adder, with forces concentrated for the spring, concealing
   the deadly weapon of its poisonous fangs within its folds? Presently we
   shall stretch it out and examine it, and expose the venom of this
   hidden head. For their plan is first to impress with certain sound
   statements, and then to infuse the poison of their heresy. They speak
   us fair, in order to work us secret harm. Yet, amid all their specious
   professions, I nowhere hear God's Son entitled God; I never hear
   sonship attributed to the Son. They say much about His having the name
   of Son, but nothing about His having the nature. That is kept out of
   sight, that He may seem to have no right even to the name. They make a
   show of unmasking other heresies to conceal the fact that they are
   heretics themselves. They strenuously assert that there is One only,
   One true God, to the end that they may strip the Son of God of His true
   and personal Divinity.

   8. And therefore, although in the two last books I have proved from the
   teaching of the Law and Prophets that God and God, true God and true
   God, true God the Father and true God the Son, must be confessed as One
   true God, by unity of nature and not by confusion of Persons, yet, for
   the complete presentation of the faith, I must also adduce the teaching
   of the Evangelists and Apostles. I must show from them that true God,
   the Son of God, is not of a different, an alien nature from that of the
   Father, but possesses the same Divinity while having a distinct
   existence through a true birth. And, indeed, I cannot think that any
   soul exists so witless as to fancy that, although we know God's
   self-revelations, yet we cannot understand them; that, if they can be
   understood, would not wish to understand, or would dream that human
   reason can devise improvements upon them. But before I begin to discuss
   the facts contained in these saving mysteries, I must first humble the
   pride with which these heretics rebuke the names of other heresies. I
   shall hold up to the light this ingenious cloak for their own impiety.
   I shall shew that this very means of concealing the deadliness of their
   teaching serves rather to reveal and betray it, and is a widely
   effectual warning of the true character of this honeyed poison.

   9. For instance, these heretics would have it that the Son of God is
   not from God; that God was not born from God out of, and in, the nature
   of God. To this end, when they have solemnly borne witness to "One God,
   alone true," they refrain from adding "The Father." And then, in order
   to escape from confessing one true Godhead of Father and of Son by a
   denial of the true birth, they proceed, "Not, as Valentinus maintained,
   that the Son is a development of the Father." Thus they think to cast
   discredit upon the birth of God from God by calling it a "development,"
   as though it were a form of the Valentinian heresy. For Valentinus was
   the author of foul and foolish imaginations; beside the chief God, he
   invented a whole household of deities and countless powers called æons,
   and taught that our Lord Jesus Christ was a development mysteriously
   brought about by a secret action of will. The faith of the Church, the
   faith of the Evangelists and Apostles, knows nothing of this imaginary
   development, sprung from the brain of a reckless and senseless dreamer.
   It knows nothing of the "Depth" and "Silence" and the thrice ten æons
   of Valentinus. It knows none but One God the Father, from Whom are all
   things, and One Jesus Christ, our Lord, through Whom are all things,
   Who is God born from God. But it occurred to them that He, in being
   born as God from God, neither withdrew anything from the Divinity of
   His Author nor was Himself born other than God; that He became God not
   by a new beginning of Deity but by birth from the existing God; and
   that every birth appears, as far as human faculties can judge, to be a
   development, so that even that birth might be regarded as a
   development. And these considerations have induced them to make an
   attack upon the Valentinian heresy of development as a means of
   destroying faith in the true birth of the Son. For the experience of
   common life leads worldly wisdom to suppose that there is no great
   difference between a birth and a development. The mind of man, dull and
   slow to grasp the things of God, needs to be constantly reminded of the
   principle, which I have stated more than once [777] , that analogies
   drawn from human experience are not of perfect application to the
   mysteries of Divine power; that their only value is that this
   comparison with material objects imparts to the spirit such a notion of
   heavenly things that we may rise, as by a ladder of nature, to an
   apprehension of the majesty of God. But the birth of God must not be
   judged by such development as takes place in human births. When One is
   born from One, God born from God, the circumstances of human birth
   enable us to apprehend the fact; but a birth which presupposes
   intercourse and conception and time and travail can give us no clue to
   the Divine method. When we are told that God was born from God, we must
   accept it as true that He was born, and be content with that. We shall,
   however, in the proper place discourse of the truth of the Divine
   birth, as the Gospels and the Apostles set it forth. Our present duty
   has been to expose this device of heretical ingenuity, this attack upon
   the true birth of Christ, concealed under the form of an attack upon a
   so-called development.

   10. And then, in continuation of this same fraudulent assault upon the
   faith, their confession proceeds thus:--"Nor, as Manichæus has declared
   of the Son, a consubstantial part of the Father." They have already
   denied that He is a development, in order to escape from the admission
   of His birth; now they introduce, labelled with the name of Manichæus,
   the doctrine that the Son is a portion of the one Divine substance, and
   deny it, in order to subvert the belief in God from God. For Manichæus,
   the furious adversary of the Law and Prophets, the strenuous champion
   of the devil's cause and blind worshipper of the sun, taught that That
   which was in the Virgin's womb was a portion of the one Divine
   substance, and that by the Son we must understand a certain piece of
   God's substance which was cut off, and made its appearance in the
   flesh. And so they make the most of this heresy that in the birth of
   the Son there was a division of the one substance and use it as a means
   of evading the doctrine of the birth of the Only-begotten, and the very
   name of the unity of substance. Because it is sheer blasphemy to speak
   of a birth resulting from division of the one substance they deny any
   birth; all forms of birth are joined in the condemnation which they
   pass upon the Manichæan notion of birth by severance. And again, they
   abolish the unity of substance, both name and thing, because the
   heretics hold that the unity is divisible; and deny that the Son is God
   from God, by refusing to believe that He is truly possessed of the
   Divine nature. Why does this mad heresy profess a fictitious reverence,
   a senseless anxiety? The faith of the Church does, as these insane
   propounders of error remind us, condemn Manichæus, for she knows
   nothing of the Son as a portion. She knows Him as whole God from whole
   God, as One from One, not severed but born. She is assured that the
   birth of God involves neither impoverishment of the Begetter nor
   inferiority of the Begotten. If this be the Church's own imagining,
   reproach her with the follies of a wisdom falsely claimed; but if she
   have learned it from her Lord, confess that the Begotten knows the
   manner of His begetting. She has learnt from God the Only-begotten
   these truths, that Father and Son are One, and that in the Son the
   fulness of the Godhead dwells. And therefore she loathes this
   attribution to the Son of a portion of the one substance; and, because
   she knows that He was truly born of God, she worships the Son as
   rightful Possessor of true Divinity. But, for the present, let us defer
   our full answer to these several allegations, and hasten through the
   rest of their denunciations.

   11. What follows is this:--"Nor, as Sabellius, who makes two out of
   One, Son and Father at once." Sabellius holds this in wilful blindness
   to the revelation of the Evangelists and Apostles. But what we see here
   is not one heretic honestly denouncing another. It is the wish to leave
   no point of union between Father and Son that prompts them to reproach
   Sabellius with his division of an indivisible Person; a division which
   does not result in the birth of a second Person, but cuts the One
   Person into two parts, one of which enters the Virgin's womb [778] .
   But we confess a birth; we reject this confusion of two Persons in One,
   while yet we cleave to the Divine unity. That is, we hold that God from
   God means unity of nature; for that Being, Who, by a true birth from
   God, became God, can draw His substance from no other source than the
   Divine. And since He continues to draw His being, as He drew it at
   first, from God, He must remain true God for ever; and hence They Two
   are One, for He, Who is God from God, has no other than the Divine
   nature, and no other than the Divine origin. But the reason why this
   blasphemous Sabellian confusion of two Persons into One is here
   condemned is that they wish to rob the Church of her true faith in Two
   Persons in One God. But now I must examine the remaining instances of
   this perverted ingenuity, to save myself from the reputation of a
   censorious judge of sincere enquirers, moved rather by dislike than
   genuine fear. I shall shew, by the terms with which they wind up their
   confession, what is the deadly conclusion which they have skilfully
   contrived shall be its inevitable issue.

   12. Their next clause is:--"Nor, as Hieracas, a light from a light, or
   a lamp with two flames, nor as if He was previously in being, and
   afterwards born, or created afresh, to be a Son." Hieracas ignores the
   birth of the Only-begotten, and, in complete unconsciousness of the
   meaning of the Gospel revelations, talks of two flames from one lamp.
   This symmetrical pair of flames, fed by the supply of oil contained in
   one bowl, is His illustration of the substance of Father and Son. It is
   as though that substance were something separate from Either Person,
   like the oil in the lamp, which is distinct from the two flames, though
   they depend upon it for their existence; or like the wick, of one
   material throughout and burning at both ends, which is distinct from
   the flames, yet provides them and connects them together. All this is a
   mere delusion of human folly, which has trusted to itself, and not to
   God, for knowledge. But the true faith asserts that God is born from
   God, as light from light, which pours itself forth without
   self-diminution, giving what it has yet having what it gave. It asserts
   that by His birth He was what He is, for as He is so was He born; that
   His birth was the gift of the existing Life, a gift which did not
   lessen the store from which it was taken; and that They Two are One,
   for He, from Whom He is born, is as Himself, and He that was born has
   neither another source nor another nature, for He is Light from Light.
   It is in order to draw men's faith away from this, the true doctrine,
   that this lantern or lamp of Hieracas is cast in the teeth of those who
   confess Light from Light. Because the phrase has been used in an
   heretical sense, and condemned both now and in earlier days, they want
   to persuade us that there is no true sense in which it can be employed.
   Let heresy forthwith abandon these groundless fears, and refrain from
   claiming to be the protector of the Church's faith on the score of a
   reputation for zeal earned so dishonestly. For we allow nothing bodily,
   nothing lifeless, to have a place among the attributes of God; whatever
   is God is perfect God. In Him is nothing but power, life, light,
   blessedness, Spirit. That nature contains no dull, material elements;
   being immutable, it has no incongruities within it. God, because He is
   God, is unchangeable; and the unchangeable God begat God. Their bond of
   union is not, like that of two flames, two wicks of one lamp, something
   outside Themselves. The birth of the Only-begotten Son from God is not
   a prolongation in space, but a begetting; not an extension [779] , but
   Light from Light. For the unity of light with light is a unity of
   nature, not unbroken continuation.

   13. And again, what a wonderful example of heretical ingenuity is
   this:--"Nor as if He were previously in being, and afterwards born or
   created afresh, to be a Son." God, since He was born from God, was
   assuredly not born from nothing, nor from things non-existent. His
   birth was that of the eternally living nature. Yet, though He is God,
   He is not identical with the pre-existing God; God was born from God
   Who existed before Him; in, and by, His birth He partook of the nature
   of His Source. If we are speaking words of our own, all this is mere
   irreverence; but if, as we shall prove, God Himself has taught us how
   to speak, then the necessity is laid upon us of confessing the Divine
   birth in the sense revealed by God. And it is this unity of nature in
   Father and in Son, this ineffable mystery of the living birth, which
   the madness of heresy is struggling to banish from belief, when it
   says, "Nor as if He were previously in being, and afterwards born, or
   created afresh, to be a Son." Now who is senseless enough to suppose
   that the Father ceased to be Himself; that the same Person Who had
   previously existed was afterwards born, or created afresh, to be the
   Son? That God disappeared, and that His disappearance was followed by
   an emergence in birth, when, in fact, that birth is evidence of the
   continuous existence of its Author? Or who is so insane as to suppose
   that a Son can come into existence otherwise than through birth? Who so
   void of reason as to say that the birth of God resulted in anything
   else than in God being born? The abiding God was not born, but God was
   born from the abiding God; the nature bestowed in that birth was the
   very nature of the Begetter. And God by His birth, which was from God
   into God, received, because His was a true birth, not things
   new-created but things which were and are the permanent possession of
   God. Thus it is not the pre-existent God that was born; yet God was
   born, and began to exist, out of and with the properties of God. And
   thus we see how heresy, throughout this long prelude, has been
   treacherously leading up to this most blasphemous doctrine. Its object
   being to deny God the Only-begotten, it starts with what purports to be
   a defence of truth, to go on to the assertion that Christ is born not
   from God but out of nothing, and that His birth is due to the Divine
   counsel of creation from the non-existent.

   14. And then again, after an interval designed to prepare us for what
   is coming, their heresy delivers this assault;--"While the Son, put
   forth outside time, and created and established before the worlds, did
   not exist before He was born." This "He did not exist before He was
   born" is a form of words by which the heresy flatters itself that it
   gains two ends; support for its blasphemy, and a screen for itself if
   its doctrine be arraigned. A support for its blasphemy, because, if He
   did not exist before He was born, He cannot be of one nature with His
   eternal Origin. He must have His beginning out of nothing, if He have
   no powers but such as are coeval with His birth. And a screen for its
   heresy, for if this statement be condemned, it furnishes a ready
   answer. He that did exist, it will be said, could not be born; being in
   existence already, He could not possibly come into being by passing
   through the process of birth, for the very meaning of birth is the
   entry into existence of the being that is born. Fool and blasphemer!
   Who dreams of birth in the case of Him Who is the unborn and eternal?
   How can we think of God, Who is [780] , being born, when being born
   implies the process of birth? It is the birth of God the Only-begotten
   from God His Father that you are striving to disprove, and it was your
   purpose to escape the confession of that truth by means of this "He did
   not exist before He was born;" the confession that God, from Whom the
   Son of God was born, did exist eternally, and that it is from His
   abiding nature that God the Son draws His existence through birth. If,
   then, the Son is born from God, you must confess that His is a birth of
   that abiding nature; not a birth of the pre-existing God, but a birth
   of God from God the pre-existent.

   15. But the fiery zeal of this heresy is such that it cannot restrain
   itself from passionate outbreak. In its effort to prove, in conformity
   with its assertion that He did not exist before He was born, that the
   Son was born from the non-existent, that is, that He was not born from
   God the Father to be God the Son by a true and perfect birth, it winds
   up its confession by rising in rage and hatred to the highest pitch of
   possible blasphemy:--"As to such phrases as from Him, and from the
   womb, and I went out from the Father and am come, if they be understood
   to denote that the Father extends a part, and, as it were, a
   development of that one substance, then the Father will be of a
   compound nature and divisible and changeable and corporeal, according
   to them; and thus, as far as their words go, the incorporeal God will
   be subjected to the properties of matter." The defence of the true
   faith against the falsehoods of heresy would indeed be a task of toil
   and difficulty, if it were needful for us to follow the processes of
   thought as far as they have plunged into the depths of godlessness.
   Happily for our purpose it is shallowness of thought that has
   engendered their eagerness to blaspheme. And hence, while it is easy to
   refute the folly, it is difficult to amend the fool, for he will
   neither think out right conclusions for himself, nor accept them when
   offered by another. Yet I trust that they who in pious ignorance, not
   in wilful folly bred of self-conceit, are enchained by error, will
   welcome correction. For our demonstration of the truth will afford
   convincing proof that heresy is nothing else than folly.

   16. You said in your unreason, and you are still repeating to-day,
   ignorant that your wisdom is a defiance of God, "As to such phrases as
   from Him, and from the womb, and I went out from the Father and am
   come," I ask you, Are these phrases, or are they not, words of God?
   They certainly are His; and, since they are spoken by God about
   Himself, we are bound to accept them exactly as they were spoken.
   Concerning the phrases themselves, and the precise force of each, we
   shall speak in the proper place. For the present I will only put this
   question to the intelligence of every reader; When we see From Himself,
   are we to take it as equivalent to "From some one else," or to "From
   nothing," or are we to accept it as the truth? It is not "From some one
   else," for it is From Himself; that is, His Godhead has no other source
   than God. It is not "From nothing," for it is From Himself; a
   declaration of the nature from which His birth is. It is not "Himself,"
   but From Himself; a statement that They are related as Father and Son.
   And next, when the revelation From the womb is made, I ask whether we
   can possibly believe that He is born from nothing, when the truth of
   His birth is clearly indicated in terms borrowed from bodily functions.
   It is not because He has bodily members, that God records the
   generation of the Son in the words, I bore Thee from the womb before
   the morning star [781] . He uses language which assists our
   understanding to assure us that His Only-begotten Son was ineffably
   born of His own true Godhead. His purpose is to educate the faculties
   of men up to the knowledge of the faith, by clothing Divine verities in
   words descriptive of human circumstances. Thus, when He says, From the
   womb, He is teaching us that His Only-begotten was, in the Divine
   sense, born, and did not come into existence by means of creation out
   of nothing. And lastly, when the Son said, I went forth from the Father
   and am come, did He leave it doubtful whether His Divinity were, or
   were not, derived from the Father? He went out from the Father; that
   is, He had a birth, and the Father, and no other, gave Him that birth.
   He bears witness that He, from Whom He declares that He came forth, is
   the Author of His being. The proof and interpretation of all this shall
   be given hereafter.

   17. But meanwhile let us see what ground these men have for the
   confidence with which they forbid us to accept as true the utterances
   of God concerning Himself; utterances, the authenticity of which they
   do not deny. What more grievous insult could be flung by human folly
   and insolence at God's self-revelation, than a condemnation of it,
   shewn in correction? For not even doubt and criticism will satisfy
   them. What more grievous than this profane handling and disputing of
   the nature and power of God? Than the presumption of saying that, if
   the Son is from God, then God is changeable and corporeal, since He has
   extended or developed a part of Himself to be His Son? Whence this
   anxiety to prove the immutability of God? We confess the birth, we
   proclaim the Only-begotten, for so God has taught us. You, in order to
   banish the birth and the Only-begotten from the faith of the Church,
   confront us with an unchangeable God, incapable, by His nature, of
   extension or development. I could bring forward instances of birth,
   even in natures belonging to this world, which would refute this
   wretched delusion that every birth must be an extension. And I could
   save you from the error that a being can come into existence only at
   the cost of loss to that which begets it, for there are many examples
   of life transmitted, without bodily intercourse, from one living
   creature to another. But it would be impious to deal in evidences, when
   God has spoken; and the utmost excess of madness to deny His authority
   to give us a faith, when our worship is a confession that He alone can
   give us life. For if life comes through Him alone, must not He be the
   Author of the faith which is the condition of that life? And if we hold
   Him an untrustworthy witness concerning Himself, how can we be sure of
   the life which is His gift?

   18. For you attribute, most godless of heretics, the birth of the Son
   to an act of creative will; you say that He is not born from God, but
   that He was created and came into existence by the choice of the
   Creator. And the unity of the Godhead, as you interpret it, will not
   allow Him to be God, for, since God remains One, the Son cannot retain
   His original nature in that state into which He has been born. He has
   been endowed, through creation, you say, with a substance different
   from the Divine, although, being in a sense the Only-begotten, He is
   superior to God's other creatures and works. You say that He was raised
   up, that He in His turn might perform the task committed to Him of
   raising up the created world; but that His birth did not confer upon
   Him the Divine nature. He was born, according to you, in the sense that
   He came into existence out of nothing. You call Him a Son, not because
   He was born from God, but because He was created by God. For you call
   to mind that God has deemed even holy men worthy of this title, and you
   consider that it is assigned to the Son in exactly the same sense in
   which the words, I have said, Ye are Gods, and all of you sons of the
   Most High [782] , were spoken; that is, that He bears the name through
   the Giver's condescension, and not by right of nature. Thus, in your
   eyes, He is Son by adoption, God by gift of the title, Only-begotten by
   favour, First-born in date, in every sense a creature, in no sense God.
   For you hold that His generation was not a birth from God, in the
   natural sense, but the beginning of the life of a created substance.

   19. And now, Almighty God, I first must pray Thee to forgive my excess
   of indignation, and permit me to address Thee; and next to grant me,
   dust and ashes as I am, yet bound in loyal devotion to Thyself, freedom
   of utterance in this debate. There was a time when I, poor wretch, was
   not; before my life and consciousness and personality began to exist.
   It is to Thy mercy that I owe my life; and I doubt not that Thou, in
   Thy goodness, didst give me my birth for my good, for Thou, Who hast no
   need of me, wouldst never have made the beginning of my life the
   beginning of evil. And then, when Thou hadst breathed into me the
   breath of life and endowed me with the power of thought, Thou didst
   instruct me in the knowledge of Thyself, by means of the sacred volumes
   given us through Thy servants Moses and the prophets. From them I
   learnt Thy revelation, that we must not worship Thee as a lonely God.
   For their pages taught me of God, not different from Thee in nature but
   One with Thee in mysterious unity of substance. I learnt that Thou art
   God in God, by no mingling or confusion but by Thy very nature, since
   the Divinity which is Thyself dwells in Him Who is from Thee. But the
   true doctrine of the perfect birth revealed that Thou, the Indwelt, and
   Thou, the Indweller, are not One Person, yet that Thou dost dwell in
   Him Who is from Thee. And the voices of Evangelists and Apostles repeat
   the lesson, and the very words which fell from the holy mouth of Thy
   Only-begotten are recorded, telling how Thy Son, God the Only-begotten
   from Thee the Unbegotten God, was born of the Virgin as man to fulfil
   the mystery of my salvation; how Thou dwellest in Him, by virtue of His
   true generation from Thyself, and He in Thee, because of the nature
   given in His abiding birth from Thee.

   20. What is this hopeless quagmire of error into which Thou hast
   plunged me? For I have learnt all this and have come to believe it;
   this faith is so ingrained into my mind that I have neither the power
   nor the wish to change it. Why this deception of an unhappy man, this
   ruin of a poor wretch in body and soul, by deluding him with falsehoods
   concerning Thyself? After the Red Sea had been divided, the splendour
   on the face of Moses, descending from the Mount, deceived me. He had
   gazed, in Thy presence, upon all the mysteries of heaven, and I
   believed his words, dictated by Thee, concerning Thyself. And David,
   the man that was found after Thine own heart, has betrayed me to
   destruction, and Solomon, who was thought worthy of the gift of Divine
   Wisdom, and Isaiah, who saw the Lord of Sabaoth and prophesied, and
   Jeremiah consecrated in the womb, before he was fashioned, to be the
   prophet of nations to be rooted out and planted in, and Ezekiel, the
   witness of the mystery of the Resurrection, and Daniel, the man
   beloved, who had knowledge of times, and all the hallowed band of the
   Prophets; and Matthew also, chosen to proclaim the whole mystery [783]
   of the Gospel, first a publican, then an Apostle, and John, the Lord's
   familiar friend, and therefore worthy to reveal the deepest secrets of
   heaven, and blessed Simon, who after his confession of the mystery was
   set to be the foundation-stone of the Church, and received the keys of
   the kingdom of heaven, and all his companions who spoke by the Holy
   Ghost, and Paul, the chosen vessel, changed from persecutor into
   Apostle, who, as a living man abode under the deep sea [784] and
   ascended into the third heaven, who was in Paradise before his
   martyrdom, whose martyrdom was the perfect offering of a flawless
   faith; all have deceived me.

   21. These are the men who have taught me the doctrines which I hold,
   and so deeply am I impregnated with their teaching that no antidote can
   release me from their influence. Forgive me, O God Almighty, my
   powerlessness to change, my willingness to die in this belief. These
   propagators of blasphemy, for so they seem to me, are a product of
   these last times, too modern to avail me. It is too late for them to
   correct the faith which I received from Thee. Before I had ever heard
   their names, I had put my trust in Thee, had received regeneration from
   Thee and become Thine, as still I am. I know that Thou art omnipotent;
   I look not that Thou shouldst reveal to me the mystery of that
   ineffable birth which is secret between Thyself and Thy Only-begotten.
   Nothing is impossible with Thee, and I doubt not that in begetting Thy
   Son Thou didst exert Thy full omnipotence. To doubt it would be to deny
   that Thou art omnipotent. For my own birth teaches me that Thou art
   good, and therefore I am sure that in the birth of Thine Only-begotten
   Thou didst grudge Him no good gift. I believe that all that is Thine is
   His, and all that is His is Thine. The creation of the world is
   sufficient evidence to me that Thou art wise; and I am sure that Thy
   Wisdom, Who is like Thee, must have been begotten from Thyself. And
   Thou art One God, in very truth, in my eyes; I will never believe that
   in Him, Who is God from Thee, there is ought that is not Thine. Judge
   me in Him, if it be sin in me that, through Thy Son, I have trusted too
   well in Law and Prophets and Apostles.

   22. But this wild talk must cease; the rhetoric of exposing heretical
   folly must give place to the drudgery of framing arguments. So, I
   trust, those among them who are capable of being saved will set their
   faces towards the true faith taught by the Evangelists and Apostles,
   and recognise Him Who is the true Son of God, not by adoption but by
   nature. For the plan of our reply must be that of first proving that He
   is the Son of God, and therefore fully endowed with that Divine nature
   in the possession of which His Sonship consists. For the chief aim of
   the heresy, which we are considering, is to deny that our Lord Jesus
   Christ is true God and truly the Son of God. Many evidences assure us
   that our Lord Jesus Christ is, and is revealed to be, God the
   Only-begotten, truly the Son of God. His Father bears witness to it, He
   Himself asserts it, the Apostles proclaim it, the faithful believe it,
   devils confess it, Jews deny it, the heathen at His passion recognised
   it. The name of God is given Him in the right of absolute ownership,
   not because He has been admitted to joint use with others of the title.
   Every work and word of Christ transcends the power of those who bear
   the title of sons; the foremost lesson that we learn from all that is
   most prominent in His life is that He is the Son of God, and that He
   does not hold the name of Son as a title shared with a widespread
   company of friends.

   23. I will not weaken the evidence for this truth by intermixing words
   of my own. Let us hear the Father, when the baptism of Jesus Christ was
   accomplished, speaking, as often, concerning His Only-begotten, in
   order to save us from being misled by His visible body into a failure
   to recognise Him as the Son. His words are:--This is My beloved Son, in
   Whom I am well pleased [785] . Is the truth presented here with dim
   outlines? Is the proclamation made in uncertain tones? The promise of
   the Virgin birth brought by the angel from the Holy Ghost, the guiding
   star of the Magi, the reverence paid Him in His cradle, the majesty,
   attested by the Baptist, of Him Who condescended to be baptized; all
   these are deemed an insufficient witness to His glory. The Father
   Himself speaks from heaven, and His words are, This is My Son. What
   means this evidence, not of titles, but of pronouns? Titles may be
   appended to names at will; pronouns are a sure indication of the
   persons to whom they refer. And here we have, in This and My, the
   clearest of indications. Mark the true meaning and the purpose of the
   words. You have read, I have begotten sons, and have raised them up
   [786] ; but you did not read there My sons, for He had begotten Himself
   those sons by division among the Gentiles, and from the people of His
   inheritance. And lest we should suppose that the name Son was given as
   an additional title to God the Only-begotten, to signify His share by
   adoption in some joint heritage, His true nature is expressed by the
   pronoun which gives the indubitable sense of ownership. I will allow
   you to interpret the word Son, if you will, as signifying that Christ
   is one of a number, if you can furnish an instance where it is said of
   another of that number, This is My Son. If, on the other hand, This is
   My Son be His peculiar designation, why accuse the Father, when He
   asserts His ownership, of making an unfounded claim? When He says This
   is My Son, may we not paraphrase His meaning thus:--"He has given to
   others the title of sons, but He Himself is My own Son; I have given
   the name to multitudes by adoption, but this Son is My very own. Seek
   not for another lest you lose your faith that This is He. By gesture
   and by voice, by This, and My, and Son, I declare Him to you." And now
   what reasonable excuse remains for lack of faith? This, and nothing
   less than this, it was that the Father's voice proclaimed. He willed
   that we should not be left in ignorance of the nature of Him Who came
   to be baptized, that He might fulfil all righteousness; that by the
   voice of God we might recognise as the Son of God Him Who was visible
   as Man, to accomplish the mystery of our salvation.

   24. And again, because the life of believers was involved in the
   confession of this faith,--for there is no other way to eternal life
   than the assurance that Jesus Christ, God the Only-begotten, is the Son
   of God--the Apostles heard once more the voice from heaven repeating
   the same message, in order to strengthen this life-giving belief, in
   negation of which is death. When the Lord, apparelled in splendour, was
   standing upon the Mountain, with Moses and Elias at His side, and the
   three Pillars of the churches who had been chosen as witnesses to the
   truth of the vision and the voice, the Father spoke thus from
   heaven:--This is My beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased; hear Him
   [787] . The glory which they saw was not sufficient attestation of His
   majesty; the voice proclaims, This is My Son. The Apostles cannot face
   the glory of God; mortal eyes grow dim in its presence. The trust of
   Peter and James and John fails them, and they are prostrate in fear.
   But this solemn declaration, spoken from the Father's knowledge, comes
   to their relief; He is revealed as His Father's own true Son. And over
   and above the witness of This and My to His true Sonship, the words are
   uttered, Hear Him. It is the witness of the Father from heaven, in
   confirmation of the witness borne by the Son on earth; for we are
   bidden to hear Him. Though this recognition by the Father of the Son
   removes all doubt, yet we are bidden also to accept the Son's
   self-revelation. When the Father's voice commands us to shew our
   obedience by hearing Him, we are ordered to repose an absolute
   confidence in the words of the Son. Since, therefore, the Father has
   manifested His will in this message to us to hear the Son, let us hear
   what it is that the Son has told us concerning Himself.

   25. I can conceive of no man so destitute of ordinary reason as to
   recognise in each of the Gospels confessions by the Son of the
   humiliation to which He has submitted in taking a body upon Him,--as
   for instance His words, often repeated, Father, glorify Me [788] , and
   Ye shall see the Son of Man [789] , and The Father is greater than I
   [790] , and, more strongly, Now is My soul troubled exceedingly [791] ,
   and even this, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken me [792] "? and
   many more, of which I shall speak in due time,--and yet, in the face of
   these constant expressions of His humility, to charge Him with
   presumption because He calls God His Father, as when He says, Every
   plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up
   [793] , or, Ye have made my Father's house an house of merchandise
   [794] . I can conceive of no one foolish enough to regard His
   assertion, consistently made, that God is His Father, not as the simple
   truth sincerely stated from certain knowledge, but as a bold and
   baseless claim. We cannot denounce this constantly professed humility
   as an insolent demand for the rights of another, a laying of hands on
   what is not His own, an appropriation of powers which only God can
   wield. Nor, when He calls Himself the Son, as in, For God sent not His
   Son into this world to condemn the world, but that the world through
   Him might be saved [795] , and in, Dost thou believe on the Son of God
   [796] ? can we accuse Him of what would be an equal presumption with
   that of calling God His Father. But what else is it than such an
   accusation, if we allow to Jesus Christ the name of Son by adoption
   only? Do we not charge Him, when He calls God His Father, with daring
   to make a baseless claim? The Father's voice from heaven says Hear Him.
   I hear Him saying, Father, I thank Thee [797] , and Say ye that I
   blasphemed, because l said, I am the Son of God [798] ? If I may not
   believe these names, and assume that they mean what they assert, how am
   I to trust and to understand? No hint is given of an alternative
   meaning. The Father bears witness from heaven, This is My Son; the Son
   on His part speaks of My Father's house, and My Father. The confession
   of that name gives salvation, when faith is demanded in the question,
   Dost thou believe on the Son of God? The pronoun My indicates that the
   noun which follows belongs to the speaker. What right, I demand, have
   you heretics to suppose it otherwise? You contradict the Father's word,
   the Son's assertion; you empty language of its meaning, and distort the
   words of God into a sense they cannot bear. On you alone rests the
   guilt of this shameless blasphemy, that God has lied concerning
   Himself.

   26. And thus, although nothing but a sincere belief that these names
   are truly significant,--that, when we read, This is My Son and My
   Father, the words really indicate Persons of Whom, and to Whom, they
   were spoken--can make them intelligible, yet, lest it be supposed that
   Son and Father are titles the one merely of adoption, the other merely
   of dignity, let us see what are the attributes attached, by the Son
   Himself, to His name of Son. He says, All things are delivered Me of My
   Father, and no one knoweth the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any
   the Father save the Son, and he to Whom the Son will reveal Him [799] .
   Are the words of which we are speaking, This is My Son and My Father,
   consistent, or are they not, with No one knoweth the Son but the
   Father, neither knoweth any the Father save the Son? For it is only by
   witness mutually borne that the Son can be known through the Father,
   and the Father through the Son. We hear the voice from heaven; we hear
   also the words of the Son. We have as little excuse for not knowing the
   Son, as we have for not knowing the Father. All things are delivered
   unto Him; from this All there is no exception. If They possess an equal
   might; if They share an equal mutual knowledge, hidden from us; if
   these names of Father and Son express the relation between Them, then,
   I demand, are They not in truth what They are in name, wielders of the
   same omnipotence, shrouded in the same impenetrable mystery? God does
   not speak in order to deceive. The Fatherhood of the Father, the
   Sonship of the Son, are literal truths. And now learn how facts bear
   out the verities which these names reveal.

   27. The Son speaks thus:--For the works which the Father hath given Me
   to finish, the same works which I do, bear witness of Me that the
   Father hath sent Me ; and the Father Himself which hath sent Me hath
   borne witness of Me [800] . God the Only-begotten proves His Sonship by
   an appeal not only to the name, but to the power; the works which He
   does are evidence that He has been sent by the Father. What, I ask, is
   the fact which these works prove? That He was sent. That He was sent,
   is used as a proof of His sonlike obedience and of His Father's
   authority: for the works which He does could not possibly be done by
   any other than Him Who is sent by the Father. Yet the evidence of His
   works fails to convince the unbelieving that the Father sent Him. For
   He proceeds, And the Father Himself which hath sent Me hath borne
   witness of Me; and ye have neither heard His voice nor seen His shape
   [801] . What was this witness of the Father concerning Him? Turn over
   the pages of the Gospels and review their contents. Read us other of
   the attestations given by the Father beside those which we have heard
   already; This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased, and Thou
   art My Son. John, who heard these words, needed them not, for He knew
   the truth already. It was for our instruction that the Father spoke.
   But this is not all. John in the wilderness was honoured with this
   revelation; the Apostles were not to be denied the same assurance. It
   came to them in the very same words, but with an addition which John
   did not receive. He had been a prophet from the womb, and needed not
   the commandment, Hear Him. Yes; I will hear Him, and will hear none but
   Him and His Apostle, who heard for my instruction. Even though the
   books contained no further witness, borne by the Father to the Son,
   than that He is the Son, I have, for confirmation of the truth, the
   evidence of His Father's works which He does. What is this modern
   slander that His name is a gift by adoption, His Godhead a lie, His
   titles a pretence? We have the Father's witness to His Sonship; by
   works, equal to the Father's, the Son bears witness to His own equality
   with the Father. Why such blindness to His obvious possession of the
   true Sonship which He both claims and displays. It is not through
   condescending kindness on the part of God the Father that Christ bears
   the name of Son; not by holiness that He has earned the title, as many
   have won it by enduring hardness in confession of the faith. Such
   sonship is not of right; it is by a favour, worthy of Himself, that God
   bestows the title. But that which is indicated by This, and My, and
   Hear Him, is different in kind from the other. It is the true and real
   and genuine Sonship.

   28. And indeed the Son never makes for Himself a lower claim than is
   contained in this designation, given Him by His Father. The Father's
   words, This is My Son, reveal His nature; those which follow, Hear Him,
   are a summons to us to listen to the mystery and the faith which He
   came down from heaven to bring; to learn that, if we would be saved,
   our confession must be a copy of His teaching. And in like manner the
   Son Himself teaches us, in words of His own, that He was truly born and
   truly came;--Ye neither know Me, nor know ye whence I am, for I am not
   come of Myself, but He that sent Me is true, Whom ye know not, but I
   know Him, for I am from Him, and He hath sent Me [802] . No man knows
   the Father; the Son often assures us of this. The reason why He says
   that none knows Him but Himself, is that He is from the Father. Is it,
   I ask, as the result of an act of creation, or of a genuine birth, that
   He is from Him? If it be an act of creation, then all created things
   are from God. How then is it that none of them know the Father, when
   the Son says that the reason why He has this knowledge is that He is
   from Him? If He be created, not born, we shall observe in Him a
   resemblance to other beings who are from God. Since all, on this
   supposition, are from God, why is He not as ignorant of the Father as
   are the others? But if this knowledge of the Father be peculiar to Him,
   Who is from the Father, must not this circumstance also, that He is
   from the Father, be peculiar to Him? That is, must He not be the true
   Son born from the nature of God? For the reason why He alone knows God
   is that He alone is from God. You observe, then, a knowledge, which is
   peculiar to Himself, resulting from a birth which also is peculiar to
   Himself. You recognise that it is not by an act of creative power, but
   through a true birth, that He is from the Father; and that this is why
   He alone knows the Father, Who is unknown to all other beings which are
   from Him.

   29. But He immediately adds, For I am from Him, and He hath sent Me, to
   debar heresy from the violent assumption that His being from God dates
   from the time of His Advent. The Gospel revelation of the mystery
   proceeds in a logical sequence; first He is born, then He is sent.
   Similarly, in the previous declaration, we were told of ignorance [803]
   , first as to Who He is, and then as to whence He is. For the words, I
   am from Him, and He hath sent Me, contain two separate statements, as
   also do the words, Ye neither know Me, nor know ye whence I am. Every
   man is born in the flesh; yet does not universal consciousness make
   every man spring from God? How then can Christ assert that either He,
   or the source of His being, is unknown? He can only do so by assigning
   His immediate parentage to the ultimate Author of existence; and, when
   He has done this, He can demonstrate their ignorance of God by their
   ignorance of the fact that He is the Son of God. Let the victims of
   this wretched delusion reflect upon the words, Ye neither know Me, nor
   know ye whence I am. All things, they argue, are from nothing; they
   allow of no exception. They even dare to misrepresent God the
   Only-begotten as sprung from nothing. How can we explain this ignorance
   of Christ, and of the origin of Christ, on the part of the blasphemers?
   The very fact that, as the Scripture says, they know not whence He is,
   is an indication of that unknowable origin from which He springs. If we
   can say of a thing that it came into existence out of nothing, then we
   are not ignorant of its origin; we know that it was made out of
   nothing, and this is a piece of definite knowledge. Now He Who came is
   not the Author of His own being; but He Who sent Him is true, Whom the
   blasphemers know not. He it was Who sent Him; and they know not that He
   was the Sender. Thus the Sent is from the Sender; from Him Whom they
   know not as His Author. The reason why they know not Who Christ is, is
   that they know not from Whom He is. None can confess the Son who denies
   that He was born; none can understand that He was born who has formed
   the opinion that He is from nothing. And indeed He is so far from being
   made out of nothing, that the heretics cannot tell whence He is.

   30. They are blankly ignorant who separate the Divine name from the
   Divine nature; ignorant, and content to be ignorant. But let them
   listen to the reproof which the Son inflicts upon unbelievers for their
   want of this knowledge, when the Jews said that God was their
   Father:--If God were your Father, ye would surely love Me; for I went
   forth from God, and am come; neither am I come of Myself, but He sent
   Me [804] . The Son of God has here no word of blame for the devout
   confidence of those who combine the confession that He is true God, the
   Son of God, with their own claim to be God's sons. What He is blaming
   is the insolence of the Jews in daring to claim God as their Father,
   when meanwhile they did not love Him, the Son:--If God were your
   Father, ye would surely love Me; for I went forth from God. All, who
   have God for their Father through faith, have Him for Father through
   that same faith whereby we confess that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
   But to confess that He is the Son in a sense which covers the whole
   company of saints; to say, in effect, that He is one of the sons of
   God;--what faith is there in that? Are not all the rest, feeble created
   beings though they be, in that sense sons? In what does the eminence of
   a faith, which has confessed that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
   consist, if He, as one of a multitude of sons, have the name only, and
   not the nature, of the Son? This unbelief has no love for Christ; it is
   a mockery of the faith for these perverters of the truth to claim God
   as their Father. If He were their Father, they would love Christ
   because He had gone forth from God. And now I must enquire the meaning
   of this going forth from God. His going forth is obviously different
   from His coming, for the two are mentioned side by side in this
   passage, I went forth from God and am come. In order to elucidate the
   separate meanings of I went forth from God and I am come, He
   immediately subjoins, Neither am I come of Myself, but He sent Me. He
   tells us that He is not the source of His own existence in the words,
   Neither am I come of Myself. In them He tells us that He has proceeded
   forth a second time from God [805] , and has been sent by Him. But when
   He tells us that they who call God their Father must love Himself
   because He has gone forth from God, He makes His birth the reason for
   their love. Went forth carries back our thoughts to the incorporeal
   birth, for it is by love of Christ, Who was born from Him, that we must
   gain the right of devoutly claiming God for our Father. For when the
   Son says, He that hateth Me hateth My Father also [806] , this My is
   the assertion of a relation to the Father which is shared by none. On
   the other hand, He condemns the man who claims God as his Father, and
   loves not the Son, as using a wrongful liberty with the Father's name;
   since he who hates Him, the Son, must hate the Father also, and none
   can be devoted to the Father save those who love the Son. For the one
   and only reason which He gives for loving the Son is His origin from
   the Father. The Son, therefore, is from the Father, not by His Advent,
   but by His birth [807] ; and love for the Father is only possible to
   those who believe that the Son is from Him.

   31. To this the Lord's words bear witness;--I will not say unto you
   that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father Himself loveth you,
   because ye have loved Me, and believe that I went forth from God, and
   am come from the Father into this world [808] . A complete faith
   concerning the Son, which accepts and loves the truth that He went
   forth from God, has access to the Father without need of His
   intervention. The confession that the Son was born and sent from God
   wins for it direct audience and love from Him. Thus the narrative of
   His birth and coming must be taken in the strictest and most literal
   sense. I went forth from God, He says, conveying that His nature is
   exactly that which was given Him by His birth; for what being but God
   could go forth from God, that is, could enter upon existence by birth
   from Him? Then He continues, And am come from the Father into this
   world. To assure us that this going forth from God means birth from the
   Father, He tells us that He came from the Father into this world. The
   latter statement refers to His incarnation, the former to His nature.
   And again, His putting on record first the fact of His going forth from
   God, and then His coming from the Father, forbids us to identify the
   going with the coming. Coming from the Father, and going forth from
   God, are not synonymous; they might be paraphrased as Birth' and
   Presence,' and are as different in meaning as these. It is one thing to
   have gone forth from God, and entered by birth upon a substantial
   existence; another to have come from the Father into this world to
   accomplish the mysteries of our salvation.

   32. In the order of our defence, as I have arranged it in my mind, this
   has seemed the most convenient place for proving that, thirdly [809] ,
   the Apostles believed our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, not
   merely in name but in nature, not by adoption but by birth. It is true
   that there remain unmentioned many and most weighty words of God the
   Only-begotten concerning Himself, in which the truth of His Divine
   birth is set so clearly forth as to silence any whisper of objection.
   Yet since it would be unwise to burden the reader's mind with an
   accumulation of evidence, and ample proof has been already given of the
   genuineness of His birth, I will hold back the remainder of His
   utterances till later stages of our enquiry. For we have so arranged
   the course of our argument that now, after hearing the Father's witness
   and the Son's self-revelation, we are to be instructed by the Apostles'
   faith in the true and, as we must confess, the truly born Son of God.
   We must see whether they could find in the words of the Lord, I went
   forth from God, any other meaning than this, that there was in Him a
   birth of the Divine nature.

   33. After many dark sayings, spoken in parables by Him Whom they
   already knew as the Christ foretold by Moses and the Prophets, Whom
   Nathanael had confessed as the Son of God and King of Israel, Who had
   Himself reproached Philip, in his question about the Father, for not
   perceiving, by the works which He did, that the Father was in Him and
   He in the Father; after He had already often taught them that He was
   sent from the Father; still, it was not till they had heard Him assert
   that He had gone forth from God that they confessed, in the words which
   immediately follow in the Gospel;--His disciples say unto Him, Now
   speakest Thou plainly, and speakest no proverb. Now therefore we are
   sure that Thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should
   ask Thee; by this we believe that Thou wentest forth from God [810] .
   What was there so marvellous in this form of words, Went forth from
   God, which He had used? Had ye seen, O holy and blessed men, who for
   the reward of your faith have received the keys of the kingdom of
   heaven and power to bind and to loose in heaven and earth, works so
   great, so truly Divine, wrought by our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
   God; and do ye yet profess that it was not until He had first told you
   that He had gone forth from God that ye attained the knowledge of the
   truth? And yet ye had seen water at the marriage turned into the
   marriage wine; one nature becoming another nature, whether it were by
   change, or by development, or by creation. And your hands had broken up
   the five loaves into a meal for that great multitude, and when all were
   satisfied ye had found that twelve baskets were needed to contain the
   fragments of the loaves; a small quantity of matter, in the process of
   relieving hunger, had multiplied into a great quantity of matter of the
   same nature. And ye had seen withered hands recover their suppleness,
   the tongues of dumb men loosened into speech, the feet of the lame made
   swift to run, the eyes of the blind endowed with vision, and life
   restored to the dead. Lazarus, who stank already, had risen to his feet
   at a word. He was summoned from the tomb and instantly came forth,
   without a pause between the word and its fulfilment. He was standing
   before you, a living man, while yet the air was carrying the odour of
   death to your nostrils. I speak not of other exertions of His mighty,
   His Divine powers. And is it, in spite of all this, only after ye heard
   Him say, I went forth from God, that ye understood Who He is that had
   been sent from heaven? Is this the first time that the truth had been
   told you without a proverb? The first time that the powers of His
   nature made it manifest to you that He went forth from God? And this in
   spite of His silent scrutiny of the purposes of your will, of His
   needing not to ask you concerning anything as though He were ignorant,
   of His universal knowledge? For all these things, done in the power and
   in the nature of God, are evidence that He must have gone forth from
   God.

   34. By this the holy Apostles did not understand that He had gone
   forth, in the sense of having been sent, from God. For they had often
   heard Him confess, in His earlier discourses, that He was sent; but
   what they hear now is the express statement that He had gone forth from
   God. This opens their eyes to perceive from His works His Divine
   nature. The fact that He had gone forth from God makes clear to them
   His true Divinity, and so they say, Now therefore we are sure that Thou
   knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask Thee; by
   this we believe that Thou wentest forth from God. The reason why they
   believe that He went forth from God is that He both can, and does,
   perform the works of God. Their perfect assurance of His Divine nature
   is the result of their knowledge, not that He is come from God, but
   that He did go forth from God. Accordingly we find that it is this
   truth, now heard for the first time, which clenches their faith. The
   Lord had made two statements; I went forth from God, and I am come from
   the Father into this world. One of these, I am come from the Father
   into this world, they had often heard, and it awakens no surprise. But
   their reply makes it manifest that they now believe and understand the
   other, that is, I went forth from God. Their answer, By this we believe
   that Thou wentest forth from God, is a response to it, and to it only;
   they do not add, And art come from the Father into this world.' The one
   statement is welcomed with a declaration of faith; the other is passed
   over in silence. The confession was wrung from them by the sudden
   presentation of a new truth, which convinced their reason and
   constrained them to avow their certainty. They knew already that He,
   like God, could do all things; but His birth, which accounted for that
   omnipotence, had not been revealed. They knew that He had been sent
   from God, but they knew not that He had gone forth from God. Now at
   last, taught by this utterance to understand the ineffable and perfect
   birth of the Son, they confess that He had spoken to them without a
   proverb.

   35. For God is not born from God by the ordinary process of a human
   childbirth; this is no case of one being issuing from another by the
   exertion of natural forces. That birth is pure and perfect and
   stainless; indeed, we must call it rather a proceeding forth than a
   birth. For it is One from One; no partition, or withdrawing, or
   lessening, or efflux, or extension, or suffering of change, but the
   birth of living nature from living nature. It is God going forth from
   God, not a creature picked out to bear the name of God. His existence
   did not take its beginning out of nothing, but went forth from the
   Eternal; and this going forth is rightly entitled a birth, though it
   would be false to call it a beginning. For the proceeding forth of God
   from God is a thing entirely different from the coming into existence
   of a new substance. And though our apprehension of this truth, which is
   ineffable, cannot be defined in words, yet the teaching of the Son, as
   He reveals to us that He went forth from God, imparts to it the
   certainty of an assured faith.

   36. A belief that the Son of God is Son in name only and not in nature,
   is not the faith of the Gospels and of the Apostles. If this be a mere
   title, to which adoption is His only claim; if He be not the Son in
   virtue of having proceeded forth from God, whence, I ask, was it that
   the blessed Simon Bar-Jona confessed to Him, Thou art the Christ, the
   Son of the living God [811] ? Because He shared with all mankind the
   power of being born as one of the sons of God through the sacrament of
   regeneration? If Christ be the Son of God only in this titular way,
   what was the revelation made to Peter, not by flesh and blood, but by
   the Father in heaven? What praise could he deserve for making a
   declaration which was universally applicable? What credit was due to
   Him for stating a fact of general knowledge? If He be Son by adoption,
   wherein lay the blessedness of Peter's confession, which offered a
   tribute to the Son to which, in that case, He had no more title than
   any member of the company of saints? The Apostle's faith penetrates
   into a region closed to human reasoning. He had, no doubt, often heard,
   He that receiveth you receiveth Me, and He that receiveth Me receiveth
   Him that sent Me [812] . Hence he knew well that Christ had been sent;
   he had heard Him, Whom he knew to have been sent, making the
   declaration, All things are delivered unto Me of the Father, and no one
   knoweth the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any one the Father save
   the Son [813] . What then is this truth, which the Father now reveals
   to Peter, which receives the praise of a blessed confession? It cannot
   have been that the names of Father' and Son' were novel to him; he had
   heard them often. Yet he speaks words which the tongue of man had never
   framed before:--Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. For
   though Christ, while dwelling in the body, had avowed Himself to be the
   Son of God, yet now for the first time the Apostle's faith had
   recognised in Him the presence of the Divine nature. Peter is praised
   not merely for his tribute of adoration, but for his recognition of the
   mysterious truth; for confessing not Christ only, but Christ the Son of
   God. It would clearly have sufficed for a payment of reverence, had he
   said, Thou art the Christ, and nothing more. But it would have been a
   hollow confession, had Peter only hailed Him as Christ, without
   confessing Him the Son of God. And so his words Thou art [814] declare
   that what is asserted of Him is strictly and exactly true to His
   nature. Next, the Father's utterance, This is My Son, had revealed to
   Peter that he must confess Thou art the Son of God, for in the words
   This is, God the Revealer points Him out, and the response, Thou art,
   is the believer's welcome to the truth. And this is the rock of
   confession whereon the Church is built. But the perceptive faculties of
   flesh and blood cannot attain to the recognition and confession of this
   truth. It is a mystery, Divinely revealed, that Christ must be not only
   named, but believed, the Son of God. Was it only the Divine name; was
   it not rather the Divine nature that was revealed to Peter? If it were
   the name, he had heard it often from the Lord, proclaiming Himself the
   Son of God. What honour, then, did he deserve for announcing the name?
   No; it was not the name; it was the nature, for the name had been
   repeatedly proclaimed.

   37. This faith it is which is the foundation of the Church; through
   this faith the gates of hell cannot prevail against her. This is the
   faith which has the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatsoever this
   faith shall have loosed or bound on earth shall be loosed or bound in
   heaven. This faith is the Father's gift by revelation; even the
   knowledge that we must not imagine a false Christ, a creature made out
   of nothing, but must confess Him the Son of God, truly possessed of the
   Divine nature. What blasphemous madness and pitiful folly is it, that
   will not heed the venerable age and faith of that blessed martyr, Peter
   himself, for whom the Father was prayed that his faith might not fail
   in temptation; who twice repeated the declaration of love for God that
   was demanded of him, and was grieved that he was tested by a third
   renewal of the question, as though it were a doubtful and wavering
   devotion, and then, because this third trial had cleansed him of his
   infirmities, had the reward of hearing the Lord's commission, Feed My
   sheep, a third time repeated; who, when all the Apostles were silent,
   alone recognised by the Father's revelation the Son of God, and won the
   pre-eminence of a glory beyond the reach of human frailty by his
   confession of his blissful faith! What are the conclusions forced upon
   us by the study of his words? He confessed that Christ is the Son of
   God; you, lying bishop of the new apostolate, thrust upon us your
   modern notion that Christ is a creature, made out of nothing. What
   violence is this, that so distorts the glorious words? The very reason
   why he is blessed is that he confessed the Son of God. This is the
   Father's revelation, this the foundation of the Church, this the
   assurance of her permanence. Hence has she the keys of the kingdom of
   heaven, hence judgment in heaven and judgment on earth. Through
   revelation Peter learnt the mystery hidden from the beginning of the
   world, proclaimed the faith, published the Divine nature, confessed the
   Son of God. He who would deny all this truth and confess Christ a
   creature, must first deny the apostleship of Peter, his faith, his
   blessedness, his episcopate, his martyrdom. And when he has done all
   this, he must learn that he has severed himself from Christ; for it was
   by confessing Him that Peter won these glories.

   38. Do you think, wretched heretic of today, that Peter would have been
   the more blessed now, if he had said, Thou art Christ, God's perfect
   creature, His handiwork, though excelling all His other works. Thy
   beginning was from nothing, and through the goodness of God, Who alone
   is good, the name of Son has been given Thee by adoption, although in
   fact Thou wast not born from God?' What answer, think you, would have
   been given to such words as these, when this same Peter's reply to the
   announcement of the Passion, Be it far from Thee, Lord; this shall not
   be, was rebuked with, Get thee behind Me, Satan, thou art an offence
   unto Me [815] ? Yet [816] Peter could plead his human ignorance in
   extenuation of his guilt, for as yet the Father had not revealed all
   the mystery of the Passion; still, mere defect of faith was visited
   with this stern condemnation. Now, why was it that the Father did not
   reveal to Peter your true confession, this faith in an adopted
   creature? I fancy that God must have grudged him the knowledge of the
   truth; that He wanted to postpone it to a later age, and keep it as a
   novelty for your modern preachers. Yes; you may have a change of faith,
   if the keys of heaven are changed. You may have a change of faith, if
   there is a change in that Church against which the gates of hell shall
   not prevail. You may have a change of faith, if there shall be a fresh
   apostolate, binding and loosing in heaven what it has bound and loosed
   on earth. You may have a change of faith, if another Christ the Son of
   God, beside the true Christ, shall be preached. But if that faith which
   confesses Christ as the Son of God, and that faith only, received in
   Peter's person every accumulated blessing, then perforce the faith
   which proclaims Him a creature, made out of nothing, holds not the keys
   of the Church and is a stranger to the apostolic faith and power. It is
   neither the Church's [817] faith, nor is it Christ's.

   39. Let us therefore cite every example of a statement of the faith
   made by an Apostle. All of them, when they confess the Son of God,
   confess Him not as a nominal and adoptive Son, but as Son by possession
   of the Divine nature. They never degrade Him to the level of a
   creature, but assign Him the splendour of a true birth from God. Let
   John speak to us, while he is waiting, just as he is, for the coming of
   the Lord; John, who was left behind and appointed to a destiny hidden
   in the counsel of God, for he is not told that he shall not die, but
   only that he shall tarry. Let him speak to us in his own familiar
   voice:--No one hath seen God at any time, except the Only-begotten Son,
   Which is in the bosom of the Father [818] . It seemed to him that the
   name of Son did not set forth with sufficient distinctness His true
   Divinity, unless he gave an external support to the peculiar majesty of
   Christ by indicating the difference between Him and all others. Hence
   he not only calls Him the Son, but adds the further designation of the
   Only-begotten, and so cuts away the last prop from under this imaginary
   adoption. For the fact that He is Only-begotten is proof positive of
   His right to the name of Son.

   40. I defer the consideration of the words, which is in the bosom of
   the Father, to a more appropriate place. My present enquiry is into the
   sense of Only-begotten, and the claim upon us which that sense may
   make. And first let us see whether the word mean, as you assert, a
   perfect creature of God; Only-begotten being equivalent to perfect, and
   Son a synonym for creature. But John described the Only-begotten Son as
   God, not as a perfect creature. His words, Which is in the bosom of the
   Father, shew that he anticipated these blasphemous designations; and,
   indeed, he had heard his Lord say, For God so loved the world that He
   gave His Only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not
   perish but have everlasting life [819] . God, Who loved the world, gave
   His Only-begotten Son as a manifest token of His love. If the evidence
   of His love be this, that He bestowed a creature upon creatures, gave a
   worldly being on the world's behalf, granted one raised up from nothing
   for the redemption of objects equally raised up from nothing, this
   cheap and petty sacrifice is a poor assurance of His favour towards us.
   Gifts of price are the evidence of affection: the greatness of the
   surrender of the greatness of the love. God, Who loved the world, gave
   not an adopted Son, but His own, His Only-begotten. Here is personal
   interest, true Sonship, sincerity; not creation, or adoption, or
   pretence. Herein is the proof of His love and affection, that He gave
   His own, His Only-begotten Son.

   41. I appeal not now to any of the titles which are given to the Son;
   there is no loss in delay when it is the result of an embarrassing
   abundance of choice. My present argument is that a successful result
   implies a sufficient cause; some clear and cogent motive must underlie
   every effectual performance. And so the Evangelist has been obliged to
   reveal his motive in writing. Let us see what is the purpose which he
   confesses;--But these things are written that ye may believe that Jesus
   is the Christ, the Son of God [820] . The one reason which he alleges
   for writing his Gospel is that all may believe that Jesus is the
   Christ, the Son of God. If it be sufficient for salvation to believe
   that He is the Christ, why does he add The Son of God? But if the true
   faith be nothing less than the belief that Christ is not merely Christ,
   but Christ the Son of God, then assuredly the name of Son is not
   attached to Christ as a customary appendage due to adoption, seeing
   that it is essential to salvation. If then salvation consists in the
   confession of the name, must not the name express the truth? If the
   name express the truth, by what authority can He be called a creature?
   It is not the confession of a creature, but the confession of the Son,
   which shall give us salvation.

   42. To believe, therefore, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God is true
   salvation, is the acceptable service of an unfeigned faith. For we have
   no love within us towards God the Father except through faith in the
   Son. Let us hear Him speaking to us in the words of the Epistle;--Every
   one that loveth the Father loveth Him that is born from Him [821] .
   What, I ask, is the meaning of being born from Him? Can it mean,
   perchance, being created by Him? Does the Evangelist lie in saying that
   He was born from God, while the heretic more correctly teaches that He
   was created? Let us all listen to the true character of this teacher of
   heresy. It is written, He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and
   the Son [822] . What will you do now, champion of the creature,
   conjurer up of a novel Christ out of nothing? Hear the title which
   awaits you, if you persist in your assertion. Or do you think that
   perhaps you may still describe the Father and the Son as Creator and
   Creature, and yet by an ingenious ambiguity of language escape being
   recognised as antichrist? If your confession embraces a Father in the
   true sense, and a Son in the true sense, then I am a slanderer,
   assailing you with a title of infamy which you have not deserved. But
   if in your confession all Christ's attributes are spurious and nominal,
   and not His own, then learn from the Apostle the right description of
   such a faith as yours; and hear what is the true faith which believes
   in the Son. The words which follow are these;--He that denieth the Son,
   the same hath not the Father: he that confesseth the Son hath both the
   Son and the Father [823] . He that denies the Son is destitute of the
   Father; he that confesses and has the Son has the Father also. What
   room is there here for adoptive names? Does not every word tell of the
   Divine nature? Learn how completely that nature is present.

   43. John speaks thus;--For we know that the Son of God is come, and was
   incarnate for us, and suffered, and rose again from the dead and took
   us for Himself, and gave us a good understanding that we may know Him
   that is true, and may be in His true Son Jesus Christ. He is true and
   is life eternal and our resurrection [824] . Wisdom doomed to an evil
   end, void of the Spirit of God, destined to possess the spirit and the
   name of Antichrist, blind to the truth that the Son of God came to
   fulfil the mystery of our salvation, and unworthy in that blindness to
   perceive the light of that sovereign knowledge! For this wisdom asserts
   that Jesus Christ is no true Son of God, but a creature of His, Who
   bears the Divine name by adoption. In what dark oracle of hidden
   knowledge was the secret learnt? To whose research do we owe this, the
   great discovery of the day? Were you he that lay upon the bosom of the
   Lord? You he to whom in the familiar intercourse of love He revealed
   the mystery? Was it you that alone followed Him to the foot of the
   Cross? And while He was charging you to receive Mary as your Mother,
   did He teach you this secret, as the token of His peculiar love for
   yourself? Or did you run to the Sepulchre, and reach it sooner even
   than Peter, and so gain this knowledge there? Or was it amid the
   throngs of angels, and sealed books whose clasps none can open, and
   manifold influences of the signs of heaven, and unknown songs of the
   eternal choirs, that the Lamb, your Guide, revealed to you this godly
   doctrine, that the Father is no Father, the Son no Son, nor nature, nor
   truth? For you transform all these into lies. The Apostle, by that most
   excellent knowledge that was granted him, speaks of the Son of God as
   true. You assert His creation, proclaim His adoption, deny His birth.
   While the true Son of God is eternal life and resurrection to us, for
   him, in whose eyes He is not true, there is neither eternal life nor
   resurrection. And this is the lesson taught by John, the disciple
   beloved of the Lord.

   44. And the persecutor, who was converted to be an Apostle and a chosen
   vessel, delivers the very same message. What discourse is there of his
   which does not presuppose the confession of the Son? What Epistle of
   his that does not begin with a confession of that mysterious truth?
   When he says, We were reconciled to God by the death of His Son [825] ,
   and, God sent His Son to be the likeness of the flesh of sin [826] ,
   and again, God is faithful, by Whom ye were called unto the fellowship
   of His Son [827] , is any loophole left for heretical
   misrepresentation? His Son, Son of God; so we read, but nothing is said
   of His adoption, or of God's creature. The name expresses the nature;
   He is God's Son, and therefore the Sonship is true. The Apostle's
   confession asserts the genuineness of the relation. I see not how the
   Divine nature of the Son could have been more completely stated. That
   Chosen Vessel has proclaimed in no weak or wavering voice that Christ
   is the Son of Him Who, as we believe, is the Father. The Teacher of the
   Gentiles, the Apostle of Christ, has left us no uncertainty, no opening
   for error in his presentation of the doctrine. He is quite clear upon
   the subject of children by adoption; of those who by faith attain so to
   be and so to be named. in his own words, For as many as are led by the
   Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the
   spirit of bondage again unto fear, but ye have received the Spirit of
   adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father [828] . This is the name granted
   to us, who believe, through the sacrament of regeneration; our
   confession of the faith wins us this adoption. For our work done in
   obedience to the Spirit of God gives us the title of sons of God. Abba,
   Father, is the cry which we raise, not the expression of our essential
   nature. For that essential nature of ours is untouched by that tribute
   of the voice. It is one thing for God to be addressed as Father;
   another thing for Him to be the Father of His Son.

   45. But now let us learn what is this faith concerning the Son of God,
   which the Apostle holds. For though there is no single discourse, among
   the many which he delivered concerning the Church's doctrine, in which
   he mentions the Father without also making confession of the Son, yet,
   in order to display the truth of the relation which that name conveys
   with the utmost definiteness of which human language is capable, he
   speaks thus:--What then? If God be for us, who can be against us? Who
   spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us [829] . Can Son, by
   any remaining possibility, be a title received through adoption, when
   He is expressly called God's own Son? For the Apostle, wishing to make
   manifest the love of God towards us, uses a kind of comparison, to
   enable us to estimate how great that love is, when He says that it was
   His own Son Whom God did not spare. He suggests the thought that this
   was no sacrifice of an adopted Son, on behalf of those whom He purposed
   to adopt, of a creature for creatures, but of His Son for strangers,
   His own Son for those to whom He had willed to give a share in the name
   of sons. Seek out the full import of the term, that you may understand
   the extent of the love. Consider the meaning of own; mark the
   genuineness of the Sonship which it implies. For the Apostle now
   describes Him as God's own Son; previously he had often spoken of Him
   as God's Son, or Son of God. And though many manuscripts, through a
   want of apprehension on the part of the translators, read in this
   passage His Son, instead of His own Son, yet the original Greek, the
   tongue in which the Apostle wrote, is more exactly rendered by His own
   than by His [830] . And though the casual reader may discern no great
   difference between His own and His, yet the Apostle, who in all his
   other statements had spoken of His Son, which is, in the Greek, ton
   heautou hui& 231;n, in this passage uses the words hos ge tou idiou
   huiou ouk epheisato, that is, Who spared not His own Son, expressly and
   emphatically indicating His true Divine nature. Previously he had
   declared that through the Spirit of adoption there are many sons; now
   his object is to point to God's own Son, God the Only-begotten.

   46. This is no universal and inevitable error; they who deny the Son
   cannot lay the fault upon their ignorance, for ignorance of the truth
   which they deny is impossible. They describe the Son of God as a
   creature who came into being out of nothing. If the Father has never
   asserted this, nor the Son confirmed it, nor the Apostles proclaimed
   it, then the dating which prompts their allegation is bred not of
   ignorance, but of hatred for Christ. When the Father says of His Son,
   This is [831] , and the Son of Himself, It is He that talketh with Thee
   [832] , and when Peter confesses Thou art [833] , and John assures us,
   This is the true God [834] , and Paul is never weary of proclaiming Him
   as God's own Son, I can conceive of no other motive for this denial
   than hatred. The plea of want of familiarity with the subject cannot be
   urged in extenuation of their guilt. It is the suggestion of that Evil
   One, uttered now through these prophets and forerunners of his coming;
   he will utter it himself hereafter when he comes as Antichrist. He is
   using this novel engine of assault to shake us in our saving confession
   of the faith. His first object is to pluck from our hearts the
   confident assurance of the Divine nature of the Son; next, he would
   fill our minds with the notion of Christ's adoption, and leave no room
   for the memory of His other claims. For they who hold that Christ is
   but a creature, must regard Christ as Antichrist, since a creature
   cannot be God's own Son, and therefore He must lie in calling Himself
   the Son of God. Hence also they who deny that Christ is the Son of God
   must have Antichrist for their Christ.

   47. What is the hope of which this futile passion of yours is in
   pursuit? What is the assurance of your salvation which emboldens you
   with blasphemous licence of tongue to maintain that Christ is a
   creature, and not a Son? It was your duty to know this mystery, from
   the Gospels, and to hold the knowledge fast. For though the Lord can do
   all things, yet He resolved that every one who prays for His effectual
   help must earn it by a true confession of Himself. Not, indeed, that
   the suppliant's confession could augment the power of Him, Who is the
   Power of God; but the earning was to be the reward of faith. So, when
   He asked Martha, who was entreating Him for Lazarus, whether she
   believed that they who had believed in Him should not die eternally,
   her answer expressed the trust of her soul;--Yea, Lord, I believe that
   Thou art the Christ, the Son of God, Who art come into this world [835]
   . This confession is eternal life; this faith has immortality. Martha,
   praying for her brother's life, was asked whether she believed this.
   She did so believe. What life does the denier expect, from whom does he
   hope to receive it, when this belief, and this only, is eternal life?
   For great is the mystery of this faith, and perfect the blessedness
   which is the fruit of this confession.

   48. The Lord had given sight to a man blind from his birth; the Lord of
   nature had removed a defect of nature. Because this blind man had been
   born for the glory of God, that God's work might be made manifest in
   the work of Christ, the Lord did not delay till the man had given
   evidence of his faith by a confession of it. But though he knew not at
   the time Who it was that had bestowed the great gift of eyesight, yet
   afterwards he earned a knowledge of the faith. For it was not the
   dispelling of his blindness that won him eternal life. And so, when the
   man was already healed and had suffered ejection from the synagogue,
   the Lord put to him the question, Dost thou believe on the Son of God
   [836] ? This was to save him from the thought of loss, in exclusion
   from the synagogue, by the certainty that confession of the true faith
   had restored him to immortality. When the man, his soul still
   unenlightened, made answer, Who is He, Lord, that I may believe on Him
   [837] ? The Lord's reply was, Thou hast both seen Him, and it is He
   that talketh with thee. For He was minded to remove the ignorance of
   the man whose sight he had restored, and whom He was now enriching with
   the knowledge of so glorious a faith. Does the Lord demand from this
   man, as from others, who prayed Him to heal them, a confession of faith
   as the price of their recovery? Emphatically not. For the blind man
   could already see when he was thus addressed. The Lord asked the
   question in order to receive the answer, Lord, I believe [838] . The
   faith which spoke in that answer was to receive not sight, but life
   [839] . And now let us examine carefully the force of the words. The
   Lord asks of the man, Dost thou believe on the Son of God? Surely, if a
   simple confession of Christ, leaving His nature in obscurity, were a
   complete expression of the faith, the terms of the question would have
   been, Dost thou believe in Christ?' But in days to come almost every
   heretic was to make a parade of that name, confessing Christ and yet
   denying that He is the Son; and therefore He demands, as the condition
   of faith, that we should believe in what is peculiar to Himself, that
   is, in His Divine Sonship. What is the profit of faith in the Son of
   God, if it be faith in a creature, when He requires of us faith in
   Christ, not the creature, but the Son, of God.

   49. Did devils fail to understand the full meaning of this name of Son?
   For we are valuing the heretics at their true worth if we refute them
   no longer by the teaching of Apostles, but out of the mouth of devils.
   They cry, and cry often, What have I to do with Thee, Jesus, Thou Son
   of God most High [840] ? Truth wrung this confession from them against
   their will; their reluctant obedience is a witness to the force of the
   Divine nature within Him. When they fly from the bodies they have long
   possessed, it is His might that conquers them; their confession of His
   nature is an act of reverence. These transactions display Christ as the
   Son of God both in power and in name. Can you hear, amid all these
   cries of devils confessing Him, Christ once styled a creature, or God's
   condescension in adopting Him once named?

   50. If you will not learn Who Christ is from those that know Him, learn
   it at least from those that know Him not. So shall the confession,
   which their ignorance is forced to make, rebuke your blasphemy. The
   Jews did not recognise Christ, come in the body, though they knew that
   the true Christ must be the Son of God. And so, when they were
   employing false witnesses, without one word of truth in their
   testimony, against Him, their priest asked Him, Art Thou the Christ,
   the Son of the Blessed [841] ? They knew not that in Him the mystery
   was fulfilled; they knew that the Divine nature was the condition of
   its fulfilment. They did not ask whether Christ be the Son of God; they
   asked whether He were Christ, the Son of God. They were wrong as to the
   Person, not as to the Sonship, of Christ. They did not doubt that
   Christ is the Son of God; and thus, while they asked whether He were
   the Christ, they asked without denying that the Christ is the Son of
   God. What, then, of your faith, which leads you to deny what even they,
   in their blindness, confessed? The perfect knowledge is this, to be
   assured that Christ, the Son of God, Who existed before the worlds, was
   also born of the Virgin. Even they, who know nothing of His birth from
   Mary, know that He is the Son of God. Mark the fellowship with Jewish
   wickedness in which your denial of the Divine Sonship has involved you!
   For they have put on record the reason of their condemnation:--And by
   our Law He ought to die, because He made Himself the Son of God [842] .
   Is not this the same charge which you are blasphemously bringing
   against Him, that, while you pronounce Him a creature, He calls Himself
   the Son? He confesses Himself the Son, and they declare Him guilty of
   death: you too deny that He is the Son of God. What sentence do you
   pass upon Him? You have the same repugnance to His claim as had the
   Jews. You agree with their verdict; I want to know whether you will
   quarrel about the sentence. Your offence, in denying that He is the Son
   of God, is exactly the same as theirs, though their guilt is less, for
   they sinned in ignorance. They knew not that Christ was born of Mary,
   yet they never doubted that Christ must be the Son of God. You are
   perfectly aware of the fact that Christ was born of Mary, yet you
   refuse Him the name of Son of God. If they come to the faith, there
   awaits them an un-imperilled salvation, because of their past
   ignorance. Every gate of safety is shut to you, because you persist in
   denying a truth which is obvious to you. For you are not ignorant that
   He is the Son of God; you know it so well that you allow Him the name
   as a title of adoption, and feign that He is a creature adorned, like
   others, with the right to call Himself a Son. You rob Him, as far as
   you can, of the Divine nature; if you could, you would rob Him of the
   Divine name as well. But, because you cannot, you divorce the name from
   the nature; He is called a Son, but He shall not be the true Son of
   God.

   51. The confession of the Apostles, for whom by a word of command the
   raging wind and troubled sea were restored to calm, was an opportunity
   for you. You might have confessed, as they did, that He is God's true
   Son; you might have borrowed their very words, Of a truth, this is the
   Son of God [843] . But an evil spirit of madness is driving you on to
   shipwreck of your life; your reason is distracted and overwhelmed, like
   the ocean tormented by the fury of the storm.

   52. If this witness of the voyagers seem inconclusive to you because
   they were Apostles,--though to me it comes with the greater weight for
   the same reason, though it surprises me the less,--accept at any rate a
   corroboration given by the Gentiles. Hear how the soldier of the Roman
   cohort, one of the stern guard around the Cross, was humbled to the
   faith. The centurion sees the mighty workings of Christ's power; and
   this is the witness borne by him:--Truly this was the Son of God [844]
   . The truth was forced upon him, after Christ had given up the ghost,
   by the torn veil of the Temple, and the earth that shook, and the rocks
   that were rent, and the sepulchres that were opened, and the dead that
   rose. And it was the confession of an unbeliever. The deeds that were
   done convinced him that Christ's nature was omnipotent; he names Him
   the Son of God, being assured of His true Divinity. So cogent was the
   proof, so strong the man's conviction, that the force of truth
   conquered his will, and even he who had nailed Christ to the Cross was
   driven to confess that He is the Lord of eternal glory, truly the Son
   of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [774] St. John v. 23.

   [775] Reading quarto instead of primo; but cf. v. § 3.

   [776] The Epistola Arii ad Alexandrum, repeated from Book iv. §§ 12,
   13, where see the notes. The only difference in the text is that this
   copy omits alone true, at the beginning.

   [777] E.g. i. § 10, iv. § 2; reading non semel.

   [778] Reading virginem.

   [779] I.e. a line of lights.

   [780] Exod. iii. 14.

   [781] Psalm cix. (cx.) 3.

   [782] Psalm lxxxi. (lxxxii.) 6.

   [783] Reading et ad omne.

   [784] Cf. 2 Cor. xi. 25.

   [785] St. Matt. iii. 17.

   [786] Isai. i. 2.

   [787] St. Matt. xvii. 5.

   [788] St. John xvii. 5; cf. xiii. 32, xvi. 14, xvii. 1.

   [789] St. Matt. xxvi. 64.

   [790] St. John xiv. 28.

   [791] Ib. xii. 27.

   [792] St. Matt. xxvii. 46.

   [793] Ib. xv. 13.

   [794] St. John ii. 16.

   [795] Ib. iii. 17.

   [796] Ib. ix. 35.

   [797] St. John xi. 41.

   [798] Ib. x. 36.

   [799] St. Matt. xi. 27.

   [800] St. John v. 36, 37.

   [801] Ib. v. 37.

   [802] St. John vii. 28, 29.

   [803] Reading nesciretur; cf. St. John vii. 28 in § 28.

   [804] St. John viii. 42.

   [805] i.e. in the Incarnation.

   [806] St. John xv. 23.

   [807] Nativitas here, as normally in Hilary, means the eternal
   generation.

   [808] St. John xvi. 26-28.

   [809] Firstly, the Father's witness is given in §§ 23-27; secondly, the
   Son's, §§ 28-31; thirdly, that of the Apostles, §§ 32-46.

   [810] St. John xvi. 29, 30.

   [811] St. Matt. xvi. 16.

   [812] St. Matt. x. 40.

   [813] Ib. xi. 27.

   [814] St. Hilary takes them as an allusion to the I am (qui est) of
   Exodus iii. 14.

   [815] St. Matt. xvi. 22, 23.

   [816] Omitting nec.

   [817] Reading ecclesiæ.

   [818] St. John i. 18.

   [819] Ib. iii. 16.

   [820] St. John xx. 31.

   [821] 1 John v. 1.

   [822] Ib. ii. 22.

   [823] Ib. 23.

   [824] 1 John v. 20, the long interpolation, which resembles a creed, is
   only found twice elsewhere (Codex Toletanus and the so-called Speculum
   of Augustine), and, though evidently from the Greek, never in that
   language.

   [825] Rom. v. 10.

   [826] 1 John viii. 3.

   [827] 1 Cor. i. 9.

   [828] Rom. viii. 14, 15.

   [829] Ib. 31, 32.

   [830] Yet His own (proprius) is on the whole characteristic of the Old
   Latin mss., still in existence. This passage is important as indicating
   the independence of scribes. Hilary seems to take it for granted that
   each will modify at his discretion the text from which he is copying.

   [831] St. Matt. iii. 17, again an allusion to Exod. iii. 14.

   [832] St. John ix. 37.

   [833] St. Matt. xvi. 16; cf. Exod. iii. 14.

   [834] 1 John v. 20.

   [835] St. John xi. 27.

   [836] St. John ix. 35.

   [837] Ib. ix. 36.

   [838] Ib. 38.

   [839] Reading vitam.

   [840] St. Luke viii. 28.

   [841] St. Mark xiv. 61.

   [842] St. John xix. 7.

   [843] St. Matt. xiv. 33.

   [844] St. Matt. xxvii. 54.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book VII.

   1. This is the seventh book of our treatise against the wild
   extravagance of modern heresy. In order of place it must follow its
   predecessors; in order of importance, as an exposition of the mysteries
   of the right faith, it precedes and excels them all. I am well aware
   how hard and steep is the path of evangelical instruction up which we
   are mounting. The fears inspired by consciousness of my own incapacity
   are plucking me back, but the warmth of faith urges me on; the assaults
   of heresy heat my blood, and the dangers of the ignorant excite my
   compassion. I fear to speak, and yet I cannot be silent. A double dread
   subdues my spirit; it may be that speech, it may be that silence, will
   render me guilty of a desertion of the truth. For this cunning heresy
   has hedged itself round with marvellous devices of perverted ingenuity.
   First there is the semblance of devotion; then the language carefully
   chosen to lull the suspicions of a candid listener; and again, the
   accommodation of their views to secular philosophy; and finally, their
   withdrawing of attention from manifest truth by a pretended explanation
   of Divine methods. Their loud profession of the unity of God is a
   fraudulent imitation of the faith; their assertion that Christ is the
   Son of God a play upon words for the delusion of their hearers; their
   saying that He did not exist before He was born a bid for the support
   of the world's philosophers; their confession of God as incorporeal and
   immutable leads, by a display of fallacious logic, up to a denial of
   the birth of God from God. They turn our arguments against ourselves;
   the Church's faith is made the engine of its own destruction. They have
   contrived to involve us in the perplexing position of an equal danger,
   whether we reason with them or whether we refrain. For they use the
   fact that we allow certain of their assumptions to pass unchallenged as
   an argument on behalf of those which we do contradict.

   2. We call to mind that in the preceding books the reader has been
   urged to study the whole of that blasphemous manifesto [845] , and mark
   how it is animated throughout by the one aim of propagating the belief
   that our Lord Jesus Christ is neither God, nor Son of God. Its authors
   argue that He is permitted to use the names of God and of Son by virtue
   of a certain adoption, though neither Godhead nor Sonship be His by
   nature. They use the fact, true in itself, that God is immutable and
   incorporeal, as an argument against the birth of the Son from Him. They
   value the truth, that God the Father is One, only as a weapon against
   our faith in the Godhead of Christ; pleading that an incorporeal nature
   cannot be rationally conceived as generating another, and that our
   faith in One God is inconsistent with the confession of God from God.
   But our earlier books have already refuted and foiled this argument of
   theirs by an appeal to the Law and the Prophets. Our defence has
   followed, step by step, the course of their attack. We have set forth
   God from God, and at the same time confessed One true God; shewing that
   this presentation of the faith neither falls short of the truth by
   ascribing singleness of Person to the One true God, nor adds to the
   faith by asserting the existence of a second Deity. For we confess
   neither an isolated God, nor yet two Gods. Thus, neither denying that
   God is One nor maintaining that He is alone, we hold the straight road
   of truth. Each Divine Person is in the Unity, yet no Person is the One
   God. Next, our purpose being to demonstrate the irrefragable truth of
   this mystery by the evidence of the Evangelists and Apostles, our first
   duty has been to make our readers acquainted with the nature, truly
   subsisting and truly born, of the Son of God; to demonstrate that He
   has no origin external to God, and was not created out of nothing, but
   is the Son, born from God. This is a truth which the evidence adduced
   in the last book has placed beyond all doubt. The assertion that He
   bears the name of Son by virtue of adoption has been put to silence,
   and He stands forth as a true Son by a true birth. Our present task is
   to prove from the Gospels that, because He is true Son, He is true God
   also. For unless He be true Son He cannot be true God, nor true God
   unless He be true Son.

   3. Nothing is more harassing to human nature than the sense of
   impending danger. If calamities unknown or unanticipated befall us, we
   may need pity, yet we have been free from care; no load of anxiety has
   oppressed us. But he whose mind is full of possibilities of trouble
   suffers already a torment in his fear. I who now am venturing out to
   sea, am a mariner not unused to shipwreck, a traveller who knows by
   experience holy brigands lurk in the forests, an explorer of African
   deserts aware of the danger from scorpions and asps and basilisks [846]
   . I enjoy no instant of relief from the knowledge and fear of present
   danger. Every heretic is on the watch, noting every word as it drops
   from my mouth. The whole progress of my argument is infested with
   ambuscades and pitfalls and snares. It is not of the road, of its
   hardness or steepness, that I complain; I am following in the footsteps
   of the Apostles, not choosing my own path. My trouble is the constant
   peril, the constant dread, of wandering into some ambush, of stumbling
   into some pit, of being entangled in some net. My purpose is to
   proclaim the unity of God, in the sense of the Law and Prophets and
   Apostles. Sabellius is at hand, eager with cruel kindness to welcome
   me, on the strength of this unity, and swallow me up in his own
   destruction. If I withstand him, and deny that, in the Sabellian sense,
   God is One a fresh heresy is ready to receive me, pointing out that I
   teach the existence of two Gods. Again, if I undertake to tell how the
   Son of God was born from Mary, Photinus, the Ebion of our day, will be
   prompt to twist this assertion of the truth into a confirmation of his
   lie. I need mention no other heresies save one; all the world knows
   that they are alien from the Church. It is one that has been often
   denounced, often rejected, yet it preys upon our vitals still. Galatia
   [847] has reared a large brood of godless assertors of the unity of
   God. Alexandria [848] has sown broadcast, over almost the whole world,
   her denial, which is an affirmation, of the doctrine of two Gods.
   Pannonia [849] upholds her pestilent doctrine that the only birth of
   Jesus Christ was from the Virgin. And the Church, distracted by these
   rival faiths, is in danger of being led by means of truth into a
   rejection of truth. Doctrines are being forced upon her for godless
   ends, which, according to the use that is made of them, will either
   support or overthrow the faith. For instance, we cannot, as true
   believers, assert that God is One, if we mean by it that He is alone;
   for faith in a lonely God denies the Godhead of the Son. If, on the
   other hand, we assert, as we truly can, that the Son is God, we are in
   danger, so they fondly imagine, of deserting the truth that God is One.
   We are in peril on either hand; we may deny the unity or we may
   maintain the isolation. But it is a danger which has no terrors for the
   foolish things of the world [850] . Our adversaries are blind to the
   fact that His assertion that He is not alone is consistent with unity;
   that though He is One He is not solitary.

   4. But I trust that the Church, by the light of her doctrine, will so
   enlighten the world's vain wisdom, that, even though it accept not the
   mystery of the faith, it will recognise that in our conflict with
   heretics we, and not they, are the true representatives of that
   mystery. For great is the force of truth; not only is it its own
   sufficient witness, but the more it is assailed the more evident it
   becomes; the daily shocks which it receives only increase its inherent
   stability. It is the peculiar property of the Church that when she is
   buffeted she is triumphant, when she is assaulted with argument she
   proves herself in the right, when she is deserted by her supporters she
   holds the field. It is her wish that all men should remain at her side
   and in her bosom; if it lay with her, none would become unworthy to
   abide under the shelter of that august mother, none would be cast out
   or suffered to depart from her calm retreat. But when heretics desert
   her or she expels them, the loss she endures, in that she cannot save
   them, is compensated by an increased assurance that she alone can offer
   bliss. This is a truth which the passionate zeal of rival heresies
   brings into the clearest prominence. The Church, ordained by the Lord
   and established by His Apostles, is one for all; but the frantic folly
   of discordant sects has severed them from her. And it is obvious that
   these dissensions concerning the faith result from a distorted mind,
   which twists the words of Scripture into conformity with its opinion,
   instead of adjusting that opinion to the words of Scripture. And thus,
   amid the clash of mutually destructive errors, the Church stands
   revealed not only by her own teaching, but by that of her rivals. They
   are ranged, all of them, against her; and the very fact that she stands
   single and alone is her sufficient answer to their godless delusions.
   The hosts of heresy assemble themselves against her; each of them can
   defeat all the others, but not one can win a victory for itself. The
   only victory is the triumph which the Church celebrates over them all.
   Each heresy wields against its adversary some weapon already shattered,
   in another instance, by the Church's condemnation. There is no point of
   union between them, and the outcome of their internecine struggles is
   the confirmation of the faith.

   5. Sabellius sweeps away the birth of the Son, and then preaches the
   unity of God; but he does not doubt that the mighty Nature, which acted
   in the human Christ, was God. He shuts his eyes to the revealed mystery
   of the Sonship; the works done seem to him so marvellous that he cannot
   believe that He who performed them could undergo a true generation.
   When he hears the words, He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also
   [851] , he jumps to the blasphemous conclusion of an inseparable and
   indistinguishable identity of nature in Father and Son, because he
   fails to see that the revelation of the birth is the mode in which
   Their unity of nature is manifested to us. For the fact that the Father
   is seen in the Son is a proof of the Son's Divinity, not a disproof of
   His birth. Thus our knowledge of Each of Them is conditioned by our
   knowledge of the Other, for there is no difference of nature between
   them and, since in this respect they are One, a reverent study of the
   character of Either will give us a true insight into the nature of
   Both. For, indeed, it is certain that He, Who was in the form of God,
   must in His self-revelation present Himself to us in the exact aspect
   of the form of God [852] . Again, this perverse and insane delusion
   derives a further encouragement from the words, I and the Father are
   One [853] . From the fact of unity in the same nature they have
   impiously deduced a confusion of Persons; their interpretation, that
   the words signify a single Power, contradicts the tenour of the
   passage. For I and the Father are One does not indicate a solitary God.
   The use of the conjunction and shews clearly that more than one Person
   is signified; and are requires a plurality of subject. Moreover, the
   One is not incompatible with a birth. Its sense is, that the Two
   Persons have the one nature in common. The One is inconsistent with
   difference; the are with identity.

   6. Set our modern heresy in array against the delusion, equally wild,
   of Sabellius; let them make the best of their case. The new heretics
   will advance the passage. The Father is greater than I [854] .
   Neglecting the mystery of the Divine birth, and the mystery of God's
   emptying Himself and taking flesh, they will argue the inferiority of
   His nature from His assertion that the Father is the greater. They will
   plead against Sabellius that Christ is a Son, in so far as One can be a
   Son who is inferior to the Father and needs to ask for restoration to
   His glory, and fears to die and indeed did die. In reply Sabellius will
   adduce His deeds in evidence of His Divine nature; and while our novel
   heresy, to escape the admission of Christ's true Sonship, will heartily
   agree with him that God is One, Sabellius will emphatically assert the
   same article of the faith, in the sense that no Son exists. The one
   side lays stress upon the action of the Son; the other urges that in
   that action God is manifest. The one will demonstrate the unity, the
   other disprove the identity. Sabellius will defend his position
   thus:--"The works that were done could have been done by no other
   nature than the Divine. Sins were remitted, the sick were healed, the
   lame ran, the blind saw, the dead lived. God alone has power for this.
   The words I and the Father are One could only have been spoken from
   self-knowledge; no nature, outside the Father's, could have uttered
   them. Why then suggest a second substance, and urge me to believe in a
   second God? These works are peculiar to God; the One God wrought them."
   His adversaries, animated by a hatred, equally venomous, for the faith,
   will argue that the Son is unlike in nature to God the Father:--"You
   are ignorant of the mystery of your salvation. You must believe in a
   Son through Whom the worlds were made, through Whom man was fashioned,
   Who gave the Law through Angels, Who was born of Mary, Who was sent by
   the Father, was crucified, dead and buried, Who rose again from the
   dead and is at the right hand of God, Who is the Judge of quick and
   dead. Unto Him we must rise again, we must confess Him, we must earn
   our place in His kingdom." Each of the two enemies of the Church is
   fighting the Church's battle. Sabellius displays Christ as God by the
   witness of the Divine nature manifested in His works; Sabellius'
   antagonists confess Christ, on the evidence of the revealed faith, to
   be the Son of God.

   7. Again, how glorious a victory for our faith is that in which
   Ebion--in other words, Photinus--both wins the day and loses it! He
   castigates Sabellius for denying that the Son of God is Man, and in his
   turn has to submit to the reproaches of Arian fanatics for failing to
   see that this Man is the Son of God. Against Sabellius he calls the
   Gospels to his aid, with their evidence concerning the Son of Mary;
   Arius deprives him of this ally by proving that the Gospels make Christ
   something more than the Son of Mary. Sabellius denies that there is a
   Son of God; against him Photinus elevates man to the place of Son.
   Photinus will hear nothing of a Son born before the worlds; against
   him, Arius denies that the only birth of the Son of God was His human
   birth. Let them defeat one another to their hearts' content, for every
   victory which each of them wins is balanced by a defeat. Our present
   adversaries are ranted in the matter of the Divine nature of the Son;
   Sabellius in the matter of the Son's revealed existence; Photinus is
   convicted of ignorance, or else of falsehood, in his denial of the
   Son's birth before the worlds. Meanwhile the Church, whose faith is
   based upon the teaching of Evangelists and Apostles, holds fast,
   against Sabellius, her assertion that the Son exists; against Arius,
   that He is God by nature; against Photinus, that He created the
   universe. And she is the more convinced of her faith, in that they
   cannot combine to contradict it. For Sabellius points to the works of
   Christ in proof of the Divinity of Him Who wrought them, though he
   knows not that the Son was their Author. The Arians grant Him the name
   of Son, though they confess not that the true nature of God dwelt in
   Him. Photinus maintains His manhood, though in maintaining it he
   forgets that Christ was born as God before the worlds. Thus, in their
   several assertions and denials, there are points in which each heresy
   is in the right in defence or attack; and the result of their conflicts
   is that the truth of our confession is brought into clearer light.

   8. I felt that I must spare a little space to point this out. It has
   been from no love for amplification, but that it might serve as a
   warning. First, I wished to expose the vague and confused character of
   this crowd of heresies, whose mutual feuds turn, as we have seen, to
   our advantage. Secondly, in my warfare against the blasphemous
   doctrines of modern heresy; that is, in my task of proclaiming that
   both God the Father and God the Son are God,--in other words, that
   Father and Son are One in name, One in nature, One in the kind of
   Divinity which they possess,--I wished to shield myself from any charge
   which might be brought against me, either as an advocate of two Gods or
   of one lonely and isolated Deity. For in God the Father and God the
   Son, as I have set them forth, no confusion of Persons can be detected;
   nor in my exposition of Their common nature can any difference between
   the Godhead of the One and of the Other be discerned. In the preceding
   book I have sufficiently refuted, by the witness of the Gospels, those
   who deny the subsistence of God the Son by a true birth from God; my
   present duty is to shew that He, Who in the truth of His nature is Son
   of God, is also in the truth of His nature God. But this proof must not
   degenerate into the fatal profession of a solitary God, or of a second
   God. It shall manifest God as One yet not alone; but in its care to
   avoid the error of making Him lonely it shall not fall into the error
   of denying His unity.

   9. Thus we have all these different assurances of the Divinity of our
   Lord Jesus Christ:--His name, His birth, His nature, His power, His own
   assertion. As to the name, I conceive that no doubt is possible. It is
   written, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
   the Word was God [855] . What reason can there be for suspecting that
   He is not what His name indicates? And does not this name clearly
   describe His nature? If a statement be contradicted, it must be for
   some reason. What reason, I demand, is there in this instance for
   denying that He is God? The name is given Him, plainly and distinctly,
   and unqualified by any incongruous addition which might raise a doubt.
   The Word, we read, which was made flesh, was none other than God. Here
   is no loophole for any such conjecture as that He has received this
   name as a favour or taken it upon Himself, so possessing a titular
   Godhead which is not His by nature.

   10. Consider the other recorded instances in which this name was given
   by favour or assumed. To Moses it was said, I have made thee a god to
   Pharaoh [856] . Does not this addition, to Pharaoh, account for the
   title? Did God impart to Moses the Divine nature? Did He not rather
   make Moses a god in the sight of Pharaoh, who was to be smitten with
   terror when Moses' serpent swallowed the magic serpents and returned
   into a rod, when he drove back the venomous flies which he had called
   forth, when he stayed the hail by the same power wherewith he had
   summoned it, and made the locusts depart by the same might which had
   brought them; when in the wonders that he wrought the magicians saw the
   finger of God? That was the sense in which Moses was appointed to be
   god to Pharaoh; he was feared and entreated, he chastised and healed.
   It is one thing to be appointed a god; it is another thing to be God.
   He was made a god to Pharaoh; he had not that nature and that name
   wherein God consists. I call to mind another instance of the name being
   given as a title; that where it is written, I have said, Ye are gods
   [857] . But this is obviously the granting of a favour. I have said
   proves that it is no definition, but only a description by One Who
   chooses to speak thus. A definition gives us knowledge of the object
   defined; a description depends on the arbitrary will of the speaker.
   When a speaker is manifestly conferring a title, that title has its
   origin only in the speaker's words, not in the thing itself. The title
   is not the name which expresses its nature and kind.

   11. But in this case the Word in very truth is God; the essence of the
   Godhead exists in the Word, and that essence is expressed in the Word's
   name. For the name Word is inherent in the Son of God as a consequence
   of His mysterious birth, as are also the names Wisdom and Power. These,
   together with the substance which is His by a true birth, were called
   into existence to be the Son of God [858] ; yet, since they are the
   elements of God's nature, they are still immanent in Him in
   undiminished extent, although they were born from Him to be His Son.
   For, as we have said so often, the mystery which we preach is that of a
   Son Who owes His existence not to division but to birth. He is not a
   segment cut off, and so incomplete, but an Offspring born, and
   therefore perfect; for birth involves no diminution of the Begetter,
   and has the possibility of perfection for the Begotten. And therefore
   the titles of those substantive properties [859] are applied to God the
   Only-begotten, for when He came into existence by birth it was they
   which constituted His perfection; and this although they did not
   thereby desert the Father, in Whom, by the immutability of His nature,
   they are eternally present. For instance, the Word is God the
   Only-begotten, and yet the Unbegotten Father is never without His Word.
   Not that the nature of the Son is that of a sound which is uttered. He
   is God from God, subsisting through a true birth; God's own Son, born
   from the Father, indistinguishable from Him in nature, and therefore
   inseparable. This is the lesson which His title of the Word is meant to
   teach us. And in the same way Christ is the Wisdom and the Power of
   God; not that He is, as He is often regarded [860] , the inward
   activity of the Father's might or thought, but that His nature,
   possessing through birth a true substantial existence, is indicated by
   these names of inward forces. For an object, which has by birth an
   existence of its own, cannot be regarded as a property; a property is
   necessarily inherent in some being and can have no independent
   existence. But it was to save us from concluding that the Son is alien
   from the Divine nature of His Father that He, the Only-begotten from
   the eternal God His Father, born as God into a substantial existence of
   His own, has had Himself revealed to us under these names of
   properties, of which the Father, out of Whom He came into existence,
   has suffered no diminution. Thus He, being God, is nothing else than
   God. For when I hear the words, And the Word was God, they do not
   merely tell me that the Son was called God; they reveal to my
   understanding that He is God. In those previous instances, where Moses
   was called god and others were styled gods, there was the mere addition
   of a name by way of title. Here a solid essential truth is stated; The
   Word was God. That was indicates no accidental title, but an eternal
   reality, a permanent element of His existence, an inherent character of
   His nature.

   12. And now let us see whether the confession of Thomas the Apostle,
   when he cried, My Lord and My God, corresponds with this assertion of
   the Evangelist. We see that he speaks of Him, Whom he confesses to be
   God, as My God. Now Thomas was undoubtedly familiar with those words of
   the Lord, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One. How then could the
   faith of an Apostle become so oblivious of that primary command as to
   confess Christ as God, when life is conditional upon the confession of
   the Divine unity? It was because, in the light of the Resurrection, the
   whole mystery of the faith had become visible to the Apostle. He had
   often heard such words as, I and the Father are One, and, All things
   that the Father hath are Mine, and, I in the Father and the Father in
   Me [861] ; and now he can confess that the name of God expresses the
   nature of Christ, without peril to the faith. Without breach of loyalty
   to the One God, the Father, his devotion could now regard the Son of
   God as God, since he believed that everything contained in the nature
   of the Son was truly of the same nature with the Father. No longer need
   he fear that such a confession as his was the proclamation of a second
   God, a treason against the unity of the Divine nature; for it was not a
   second God Whom that perfect birth of the Godhead had brought into
   being. Thus it was with full knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel
   that Thomas confessed his Lord and his God. It was not a title of
   honour; it was a confession of nature. He believed that Christ was God
   in substance and in power. And the Lord, in turn, shews that this act
   of worship was the expression not of mere reverence, but of faith, when
   He says, Because thou hast seen, thou hast believed; blessed are they
   which have not seen, and have believed. For Thomas had seen before he
   believed. But, you ask, What was it that Thomas believed? That, beyond
   a doubt, which is expressed in his words, My Lord and my God. No nature
   but that of God could have risen by its own might from death to life;
   and it is this fact, that Christ is God, which was confessed by Thomas
   with the confidence of an assured faith. Shall we, then, dream that His
   name of God is not a substantial reality, when that name has been
   proclaimed by a faith based upon certain evidence? Surely a Son devoted
   to His Father, One Who did not His own will but the will of Him that
   sent Him, Who sought not His own glory but the glory of Him from Whom
   He came, would have rejected the adoration involved in such a name as
   destructive of that unity of God which had been the burden of His
   teaching. Yet, in fact, He confirms this assertion of the mysterious
   truth, made by the believing Apostle; He accepts as His own the name
   which belongs to the nature of the Father. And He teaches that they are
   blessed who, though they have not seen Him rise from the dead, yet have
   believed, on the assurance of the Resurrection, that He is God.

   13. Thus the name which expresses His nature proves the truth of our
   confession of the faith. For the name, which indicates any single
   substance, points out also any other substance of the same kind; and,
   in this instance, there are not two substances but one substance, of
   the one kind. For the Son of God is God; this is the truth expressed in
   His name. The one name does not embrace two Gods; for the one name God
   is the name of one indivisible nature. For since the Father is God and
   the Son is God, and that name which is peculiar to the Divine nature is
   inherent in Each, therefore the Two are One. For the Son, though He
   subsists through a birth from the Divine nature, yet preserves the
   unity in His name; and this birth of the Son does not compel loyal
   believers to acknowledge two Gods, since our confession declares that
   Father and Son are One, both in nature and in name. Thus the Son of God
   has the Divine name as the result of His birth. Now the second step in
   our demonstration was to be that of shewing that it is by virtue of His
   birth that He is God. I have still to bring forward the evidence of the
   Apostles that the Divine name is used of Him in an exact sense; but for
   the present I purpose to continue our enquiry into the language of the
   Gospels.

   14. And first I ask what new element, destructive of His Godhead, can
   have been imported by birth into the nature of the Son? Universal
   reason rejects the supposition that a being can become different in
   nature, by the process of birth, from the being to which its birth is
   due; although we recognise the possibility that from parents, different
   in kind, an offspring sharing the nature of both, yet diverse from
   either, may be propagated. The fact is familiar in the case of beasts,
   both tame and wild. But even in this case there is no real novelty; the
   new qualities already exist, concealed in the two different parental
   natures, and are only developed by the connexion. The birth of their
   joint offspring is not the cause of that offspring's difference from
   its parents. The difference is a gift from them of various diversities,
   which are received and combined in one frame. When this is the case as
   to the transmission and reception even of bodily differences, is it not
   a form of madness to assert that the birth of God the Only-begotten was
   the birth from God of a nature inferior to Himself? For the giving of
   birth is a function of the true nature of the transmitter of life; and
   without the presence and action of that true nature there can be no
   birth. The object of all this heat and passion is to prove that there
   was no birth, but a creation, of the Son of God; that the Divine nature
   is not His origin and that He does not possess that nature in His
   personal subsistence, but draws, from what was non-existent, a nature
   different in kind from the Divine. They are angry because He says, That
   which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
   Spirit is Spirit [862] . For, since God is a Spirit, it is clear that
   in One born from Him there can be nothing alien or different from that
   Spirit from which He was born. Thus the birth of God constitutes Him
   perfect God. And hence also it is clear that we must not say that He
   began to exist, but only that He was born. For there is a sense in
   which beginning is different from birth. A thing which begins to exist
   either comes into existence out of nothing, or developes out of one
   state into another, ceasing to be what it was before; so, for instance,
   gold is formed out of earth, solids melt into liquids, cold changes to
   warmth, white to red, water breeds moving creatures, lifeless objects
   turn into living. In contrast to all this, the Son of God did not
   begin, out of nothing, to be God, but was born as God; nor had He an
   existence of another kind before the Divine. Thus He Who was born to be
   God had neither a beginning of His Godhead, nor yet a development up to
   it. His birth retained for Him that nature out of which He came into
   being; the Son of God, in His distinct existence, is what God is, and
   is nothing else.

   15. Again, any one who is in doubt concerning this matter may gain from
   the Jews an accurate knowledge of Christ's nature; or rather learn that
   He was truly born from the Gospel, where it is written, Therefore the
   Jews sought the more to kill Him because He not only broke the Sabbath,
   but said also that God was His own Father, making Himself equal with
   God [863] . This passage is unlike most others in not giving us the
   words spoken by the Jews, but the Apostle's explanation of their motive
   in wishing to kill the Lord. We see that no plea of misapprehension can
   excuse the wickedness of these blasphemers; for we have the Apostle's
   evidence that the true nature of Christ was fully revealed to them.
   They could speak of His birth:--He said that God was His Father, making
   Himself equal with God. Was not His clearly a birth of nature from
   nature, when He published the equality of His nature by speaking of
   God, by name, as His own Father? Now it is manifest that equality
   consists in the absence of difference between those who are equal. Is
   it not also manifest that the result of birth must be a nature in which
   there is an absence of difference between Son and Father? And this is
   the only possible origin of true equality; birth can only bring into
   existence a nature equal to its origin. But again, we can no more hold
   that there is equality where there is confusion, than we can where
   there is difference. Thus equality, as of the image [864] , is
   incompatible with isolation and with diversity; for equality cannot
   dwell with difference, nor yet in solitude.

   16. And now, although we have found the sense of Scripture, as we
   understand it, in harmony with the conclusions of ordinary reason, the
   two agreeing that equality is incompatible either with diversity or
   with isolation, yet we must seek a fresh support for our contention
   from actual words of our Lord. For only so can we check that licence of
   arbitrary interpretation whereby these bold traducers of the faith
   would even venture to cavil at the Lord's solemn self-revelation. His
   answer to the Jews was this:--The Son can do nothing of Himself but
   what He seeth the Father do; for what things soever He doeth, these
   also doeth the Son likewise. For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth
   Him all things that Himself doeth; and He will shew Him greater works
   than these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father raiseth up the dead
   and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will. For the
   Father judgeth no man, but hath given all judgment to the Son, that all
   may honour the Son even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth
   not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent Him [865] . The
   course of our argument, as I had shaped it in my mind, required that
   each several point of the debate should be handled singly; that, since
   we had been taught that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God
   in name, in birth, in nature, in power, in self-revelation, our
   demonstration of the faith should establish each successive point in
   that order. But His birth is a barrier to such a treatment of the
   question; for a consideration of it includes a consideration of His
   name and nature and power and self-revelation. For His birth involves
   all these, and they are His by the fact that He is born. And thus our
   argument concerning His birth has taken such a course that it is
   impossible for us to keep these other matters back for separate
   discussion in their turn.

   17. The chief reason why the Jews wished to kill the Lord was that, in
   calling God His Father, He had made Himself equal with God; and
   therefore He put His answer, in which He reproved their evil passion,
   into the form of an exposition of the whole mystery of our faith. For
   just before this, when He had healed the paralytic and they had passed
   their judgment upon Him that He was worthy of death for breaking the
   Sabbath, He had said, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work [866] .
   Their jealousy had been inflamed to the utmost by the raising of
   Himself to the level of God which was involved in this use of the name
   of Father. And now He wishes to assert His birth and to reveal the
   powers of His nature, and so He says, I say unto you, the Son can do
   nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do. These opening
   words of His reply are aimed at that wicked zeal of the Jews, which
   hurried them on even to the desire of slaying Him. It is in reference
   to the charge of breaking the Sabbath that He says, My Father worketh
   hitherto, and I work. He wished them to understand that His practice
   was justified by Divine authority; and He taught them by the same words
   that His work must be regarded as the work of the Father, Who was
   working in Him all that He wrought. And again, it was to subdue the
   jealousy awakened by His speaking of God as His Father that He uttered
   those words, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of
   Himself, but what He seeth the Father do. Lest this making of Himself
   equal to God, as having the name and nature of God's Son, should
   withdraw men's faith from the truth that He had been born, He says that
   the Son can do nothing but what He sees the Father do. Next, in
   confirmation of the saving harmony of truths in our confession of
   Father and of Son, He displays this nature which is His by birth; a
   nature which derives its power of action not from successive gifts of
   strength to do particular deeds, but from knowledge. He shews that this
   knowledge is not imparted by the Father's performance of any bodily
   work, as a pattern, that the Son may imitate what the Father has
   previously done; but that, by the action of the Divine nature, He had
   come to share the subsistence of the Divine nature, or, in other words,
   had been born as Son from the Father. He told them that, because the
   power and the nature of God dwelt consciously within Him, it was
   impossible for Him to do anything which He had not seen the Father
   doing; that, since it is in the might of the Father that God the
   Only-begotten performs His works His liberty of action coincides in its
   range with His knowledge of the powers of the nature of God the Father;
   a nature inseparable from Himself, and lawfully owned by Him in virtue
   of His birth. For God sees not after a bodily fashion, but possesses,
   by His nature, the vision of Omnipotence.

   18. The next words are, For what things soever He--the Father--doeth,
   these also doeth the Son likewise. This likewise is added to indicate
   His birth; whatsoever and same to indicate the true Divinity of His
   nature. Whatsoever and same make it impossible that there should be any
   actions of His that are different from or outside, the actions of the
   Father. Thus He, Whose nature has power to do all the same things as
   the Father, is included in the same nature with the Father. But when,
   in contrast with this, we read that all these same things are done by
   the Son likewise, the fact that the works are like those of Another is
   fatal to the supposition that He Who does them works in isolation. Thus
   the same things that the Father does are all done likewise by the Son.
   Here we have clear proof of His true birth, and at the same time a
   convincing attestation of the Mystery of our faith, which, with its
   foundation in the Unity of the nature of God, confesses that there
   resides in Father and Son an indivisible Divinity. For the Son does the
   same things as the Father, and does them likewise; while acting in like
   manner He does the same things. Two truths are combined in one
   proposition; that His works are done likewise proves His birth; that
   they are the same works proves His nature.

   19. Thus the progressive revelation contained in our Lord's reply is at
   one with the progressive statement of truth in the Church's confession
   of faith. Neither of them divides the nature, and both declare the
   birth. For the next words of Christ are, For the Father loveth the Son,
   and sheweth Him all things that Himself doeth; and He will shew Him
   greater works than these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father raiseth
   up the dead, and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He
   will. Can there be any other purpose in this revelation of the manner
   in which God works, except that of inculcating the true birth; the
   faith in a subsisting Son born from the subsisting God, His Father? The
   only other explanation is that God the Only-begotten was so ignorant
   that He needed the instruction conveyed in this showing; but the
   reckless blasphemy of the suggestion makes this alternative impossible.
   For He, knowing, as He does, everything that He is taught, has no need
   of the teaching. And accordingly, after the words, The Father loveth
   the Son, and sheweth Him all things that Himself doeth, we are next
   informed that all this shewing is for our instruction in the faith;
   that the Father and the Son may have their equal share in our
   confession, and we be saved, by this statement that the Father shews
   all that He does to the Son, from the delusion that the Son's knowledge
   is imperfect. With this object He goes on to say, And He will shew Him
   greater works than these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father raiseth
   up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He
   will. We see that the Son has full knowledge of the future works which
   the Father will shew Him hereafter. He knows that He will be shewn how,
   after His Father's example, He is to give life to the dead. For He says
   that the Father will shew to the Son things at which they shall marvel;
   and at once proceeds to tell them what these things are; For as the
   Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
   quickeneth whom He will. The power is equal because the nature is one
   and the same. The shewing of the works is an aid, not to ignorance in
   Him, but to faith in us. It conveys to the Son no knowledge of things
   unknown, but it imparts to us the confidence to proclaim His birth, by
   assuring us that the Father has shewn to Him all the works that He
   Himself can do. The terms used in this Divine discourse have been
   chosen with the utmost deliberation, lest any vagueness of language
   should suggest a difference of nature between the Two. Christ says that
   the Father's works were shewn Him, instead of saying that, to enable
   Him to perform them, a mighty nature was given Him. Hereby He wishes to
   reveal to us that this shewing was a substantive part of the process of
   His birth, since, simultaneously with that birth, there was imparted to
   Him by the Father's love a knowledge of the works which the Father
   willed that He should do. And again, to save us from being led, by this
   declaration of the shewing, to suppose that the Son's nature is
   ignorant and therefore different from the Father's, He makes it clear
   that He already knows the things that are to be shewn Him. So far,
   indeed, is He from needing the authority of precedent to enable Him to
   act, that He is to give life to whom He will. To will implies a free
   nature, subsisting with power to choose in the blissful exercise of
   omnipotence.

   20. And next, lest it should seem that to give life to whom He will is
   not within the power of One Who has been truly born, but is only the
   prerogative of ingenerate Omnipotence, He hastens to add, For the
   Father judgeth no man, but hath given all judgment to the Son. The
   statement that all judgment is given teaches both His birth and His
   Sonship; for only a nature which is altogether one with the Father's
   could possess all things; and a Son can possess nothing, except by
   gift. But all judgment has been given Him for He quickens whom He will.
   Now we cannot suppose that judgment is taken away from the Father,
   although He does not exercise it; for the Son's whole power of judgment
   proceeds from the Father's, being a gift from Him. And there is no
   concealment of the reason why judgment has been given to the Son, for
   the words which follow are, But He hath given all judgment to the Son,
   that all men may honour the Son even as they honour the Father. He that
   honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father Which hath sent Him.
   What possible excuse remains for doubt, or for the irreverence of
   denial? The reason for the gift of judgment is that the Son may receive
   an honour equal to that which is paid to the Father; and thus he who
   dishonours the Son is guilty of dishonouring the Father also. How,
   after this proof, can we imagine that the nature given Him by birth is
   different from the Father's, when He is the Father's equal in work, in
   power, in honour, in the punishment awarded to gainsayers? Thus this
   whole Divine reply is nothing else than an unfolding of the mystery of
   His birth. And the only distinction that it is right or possible to
   make between Father and Son is that the Latter was born; yet born in
   such a sense as to be One with His Father.

   21. Thus the Father works hitherto and the Son works. In Father and Son
   you have the names which express Their nature in relation to Each
   other. Note also that it is the Divine nature, that through which God
   works, that is working here. And remember, lest you fall into the error
   of imagining that the operation of two unlike natures is here
   described, how it was said concerning the blind man, But that the works
   of God may be made manifest in him, I must work the works of Him that
   sent Me [867] . You see that in his case the work wrought by the Son is
   the Father's work; and the Son's work is God's work. The remainder of
   the discourse which we are considering also deals with works; but my
   defence is at present only concerned with assigning the whole work to
   Both, and pointing out that They are at one in Their method of working,
   since the Son is employed upon that work which the Father does
   hitherto. The sanction contained in this fact that, by virtue of His
   Divine birth, the Father is working with Him in all that He does, will
   save us from supposing that the Lord of the Sabbath was doing wrong in
   working on the Sabbath. His Sonship is not affected, for there is no
   confusion of His Divinity with the Father's, and no negation of it; His
   Godhead is not affected, for His Divine nature is untouched. Their
   unity is not affected, for no difference is revealed to sever Them; and
   Their unity is not presented in such a light as to contradict Their
   distinct existence. First recognise the Sonship of the Son; The Son can
   do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do. Here His birth
   is manifest; because of it He can do nothing of Himself till He sees it
   being done. He cannot be unbegotten, because He can do nothing of
   Himself; He has no power of initiation, and therefore He must have been
   born. But the fact that He can see the Father's works proves that He
   has the comprehension which belongs to the conscious Possessor of
   Divinity. Next, mark that He does possess this true Divine nature;--For
   what things soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. And now
   that we have seen Him endowed with the powers of that nature, note how
   this results in unity, how one nature dwells in the Two;--That all men
   may honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. And then, lest
   reflection on this unity entangle you in the delusion of a solitary and
   self-contained God, take to heart the mystery of the faith manifested
   in these words, He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father
   Which hath sent Him. The rage and cunning of heresy may do their worst;
   our position is impregnable. He is the Son, because He can do nothing
   of Himself; He is God, because, whatever the Father does, He does the
   same; They Two are One, because He is equal in honour to the Father and
   does the very same works; He is not the Father, because He is sent. So
   great is the wealth of mysterious truth contained in this one doctrine
   of the birth! It embraces His name, His nature, His power, His
   self-revelation; for everything conveyed to Him in His birth must be
   contained in that nature from which His birth is derived. Into His
   nature no element of any substance different in kind from that of His
   Author is introduced, for a nature which springs from one nature only
   must be entirely one with that nature which is its parent. An unity is
   that which, containing no discordant elements, is one in kind with
   itself; an unity constituted through birth cannot be solitary; for
   solitude can have but a single occupant, while an unity constituted
   through birth implies the conjunction of Two.

   22. And furthermore, let His own Divine words bear witness to Himself.
   He says, They that are of My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and
   they follow Me; and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
   perish, neither shall any man pluck them of My hand. That which My
   Father hath given Me is greater than all, and no man shall be able to
   pluck them out of My Father's hand. I and the Father are one [868] .
   What lethargy can blunt so utterly the edge of our understanding as to
   render so precise a statement for one moment obscure to us? What proud
   sophistry can play such pranks with human docility as to persuade
   those, who have learnt from these words the knowledge of what God is
   that they must not recognise God in Him Whose Godhead was here revealed
   to them? Heresy ought either to bring forward other Gospels in support
   of its doctrine; or else, if our existing Gospels are the only
   documents which teach of God, why do they not believe the lessons
   taught? If they are the only source of knowledge, why not draw faith,
   as well as knowledge, from them? Yet now we find that their faith is
   held in defiance of their knowledge; and hence it is a faith rooted not
   in knowledge, but in sin; a faith of bold irreverence, instead of
   reverent humility, towards the truth confessedly known. God the
   Only-begotten, as we have seen, fully assured of His own nature,
   reveals with the utmost precision of language the mystery of His birth.
   He reveals it, ineffable though it is, in such wise that we can believe
   and confess it; that we can understand that He was born and believe
   that He has the nature of God and is One with the Father, and One with
   Him in such a sense that God is not alone nor Son another name for
   Father, but that in very truth He is the Son. For, firstly, He assures
   us of the powers of His Divine nature, saying of His sheep, and no man
   shall pluck them out of My hand. It is the utterance of conscious
   power, this confession of free and irresistible energy, that will allow
   no man to pluck His sheep from His hand. But more than this; not only
   has He the nature of God, but He would have us know that nature is His
   by birth from God, and hence He adds, That which the Father has given
   Me is greater than all. He makes no secret of His birth from the
   Father, for what He received from the Father He says is greater than
   all. And He Who received it, received it at His birth, not after His
   birth, and yet it came to Him from Another, for He received it [869] .
   But He, Who received this gift from Another, forbids us to suppose that
   He Himself is different in kind from That Other, and does not eternally
   subsist with the same nature as that of Him Who gave the gift, by
   saying, No man shall be able to pluck them out of My Father's hand.
   None can pluck them out of His hand, for He has received from His
   Father that which is greater than all things. What, then, means this
   contradictory assertion that none can pluck them from His Father's
   hand? It is the Son's hand which received them from the Father, the
   Father's hand which gave them to the Son: in what sense is it said that
   what cannot be plucked from the Son's hand cannot be plucked from the
   Father's hand? Hear, if you wish to know:--I and the Father are one.
   The Son's hand is the Father's hand. For the Divine nature does not
   deteriorate or cease to be the same in passing through birth: nor yet
   is this sameness a bar to our faith in the birth, for in that birth no
   alien element was admitted into His nature. And here He speaks of the
   Son's hand, which is the hand of the Father, that by a bodily
   similitude you may learn the power of the one Divine nature which is in
   Both; for the nature and the power of the Father is in the Son. And
   lastly, that in this mysterious truth of the birth you may discern the
   true and indistinguishable unity of the nature of God, the words were
   spoken, I and the Father are One. They were spoken that in this unity
   we might see neither difference nor solitude; for They are Two, and yet
   no second nature came into being through that true birth and
   generation.

   23. There still remains, if I read them aright, the same desire in
   these maddened souls, though their opportunity for fulfilling it is
   lost. Their bitter hearts still cherish a longing for mischief which
   they can no longer hope to satisfy. The Lord is on His throne in
   heaven, and the furious hatred of heresy cannot drag Him, as the Jews
   did, to the Cross. But the spirit of unbelief is the same, though now
   it takes the form of rejecting His Godhead. They bid defiance to His
   words, though they cannot deny that He spoke them. They vent their
   hatred in blasphemy; instead of stones they shower abuse. If they could
   they would bring Him down from His throne to a second crucifixion. When
   the Jews were moved to wrath by the novelty of Christ's teaching we
   read, The Jews therefore took up stones to stone Him. He answered them,
   Many good works have I shewed you from the Father; for which of those
   works do ye stone Me? The Jews answered Him, For a good work we stone
   Thee not, but for blasphemy; and because Thou, being a man, makest
   Thyself God [870] . I bid you, heretic, to recognise herein your own
   deeds, your own words. Be sure that you are their partner, for you have
   made their unbelief your pattern. It was at the words, I and the Father
   are One, that the Jews took up stones. Their godless irritation at the
   revelation of that saving mystery hurried them on even to an attempt to
   slay. There is no one whom you can stone; but is your guilt in denying
   Him less than theirs? The will is the same, though it is frustrated by
   His throne in heaven. Nay, it is you that are more impious than the
   Jew. He lifted his stone against the Body, you lift yours against the
   Spirit; he as he thought, against man, you against God; he against a
   sojourner on earth, you against Him that sits upon the throne of
   majesty; he against One Whom he knew not, you against Him Whom you
   confess; he against the mortal Christ, you against the Judge of the
   universe. The Jew says, Being Man; you say, Being a creature.' You and
   he join in the cry, Makest Thyself God, with the same insolence of
   blasphemy. You deny that He is God begotten of God; you deny that He is
   the Son by a true birth; you deny that His words, I and the Father are
   One, contain the assertion of one and the same nature in Both. You
   foist upon us in His stead a modern, a strange, an alien god; you make
   Him God of another kind from the Father, or else not God at all, as not
   subsisting by a birth from God.

   24. The mystery contained in those words, I and the Father are One,
   moves you to wrath. The Jew answered, Thou, being a man makest Thyself
   God; your blasphemy is a match for his:--Thou, being a creature, makest
   Thyself God.' You say, in effect, Thou art not a Son by birth, Thou art
   not God in truth; Thou art a creature, excelling all other creatures.
   But Thou wast not born to be God, for I refuse to believe that the
   incorporeal God gave birth to Thy nature. Thou and the Father are not
   One. Nay more. Thou art not the Son, Thou art not like God, Thou art
   not God.' The Lord had His answer for the Jews; an answer that meets
   the case of your blasphemy even better than it met theirs:--Is it not
   written in the Law, I said, Ye are gods? If, therefore, He called them
   gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be
   broken, say ye of Me, Whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into
   this world, that I have blasphemed, because I said I am the Son of God?
   If I do not the works of the Father, believe Me not; but if I do, and
   ye will not believe Me, believe the works, that ye may know and be sure
   that the Father is in Me, and I in Him [871] . The matter of this reply
   was dictated by that of the blasphemous attack upon Him. The accusation
   was that He, being a man, made Himself God. Their proof of this
   allegation was His own statement, I and the Father are One. He
   therefore sets Himself to prove that the Divine nature, which is His by
   birth, gives Him the right to assert that He and the Father are One. He
   begins by exposing the absurdity, as well as the insolence, of such a
   charge as that of making Himself God, though He was a man. The Law had
   conferred the title upon holy men; the word of God, from which there is
   no appeal, had given its sanction to the public use of the name. What
   blasphemy, then, could there be in the assumption of the title of Son
   of God by Him Whom the Father had sanctified and sent into the world?
   The unalterable record of the Word of God has confirmed the title to
   those to whom the Law assigned it. There is an end, therefore, of the
   charge that He, being a man, makes Himself God, when the Law gives the
   name of gods to those who are confessedly men. And further, if other
   men may use this name without blasphemy, there can obviously be no
   blasphemy in its use by the Man Whom the Father has sanctified,--and
   note here that throughout this argument He calls Himself Man, for the
   Son of God is also Son of Man--since He excels the rest, who yet are
   guilty of no irreverence in styling themselves gods. He excels them, in
   that He has been hallowed to be the Son, as the blessed Paul says, who
   teaches us of this sanctification:--Which He had promised afore by His
   prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning His Son, Which was made of
   the seal of David according to the flesh, and was appointed to be the
   Son of God with power, according to the spirit of sanctification [872]
   . Thus the accusation of blasphemy on His part, in making Himself God,
   falls to the ground. For the Word of God has conferred this name upon
   many men; and He, Who was sanctified and sent by the Father, did no
   more than proclaim Himself the Son of God.

   25. There remains, I conceive, no possibility of doubt but that the
   words, I and the Father are One, were spoken with regard to the nature
   which is His by birth. The Jews had rebuked Him because by these words
   He, being a man, made Himself God. The course of His answer proves
   that, in this I and the Father are One, He did profess Himself the Son
   of God, first in name, then in nature, and lastly by birth. For I and
   Father are the names of substantive Beings; One is a declaration of
   Their nature, namely, that it is essentially the same in Both; are
   forbids us to confound Them together; are one, while forbidding
   confusion, teaches that the unity of the Two is the result of a birth.
   Now all this truth is drawn out from that name, the Son of God, which
   He being sanctified by the Father, bestows upon Himself; a name, His
   right to which is confirmed by His assertion, I and the Father are One.
   For birth cannot confer any nature upon the offspring other than that
   of the parent from whom that offspring is born.

   26. Once more, God the Only-begotten has summed up for us, in words of
   His own, the whole revealed mystery of the faith. When He had given His
   answer to the charge that He, being a man, made Himself God, He
   determined to shew that His words, I and the Father are One, are a
   clear and necessary conclusion; and therefore He thus pursued His
   argument;--Ye say that I have blasphemed, because I said, I am the Son
   of God. If I do not the works of the Father, believe Me not; but if I
   do, and ye will not believe Me, believe the works, that ye may know and
   be sure that the Father is in Me, and I in the Father. After this,
   heresy that still persists in its course perpetrates a wilful outrage
   in conscious despair; the assertion of unbelief is deliberate
   shamelessness. They who make it take pride in folly and are dead to the
   faith, for it is not ignorance, but madness, to contradict this saying.
   The Lord had said, I and the Father are One; and the mystery of His
   birth, which He revealed, was the unity in nature of Father and Son.
   Again, when He was accused for claiming the Divine nature, He justified
   His claim by advancing a reason;--If I do not the works of the Father,
   believe Me not. We are not to believe His assertion that He is the Son
   of God, unless He does His Father's works. Hence we see that His birth
   has given Him no new or alien nature, for His doing of the Father's
   works is to be the reason why we must believe that He is the Son. What
   room is there here for adoption, or for leave to use the name, or for
   denial that He was born from the nature of God, when the proof that He
   is God's Son is that He does the works which belong to the Father's
   nature? No creature is equal or like to God, no nature external to His
   is comparable in might to Him; it is only the Son, born from Himself,
   Whom we can without blasphemy liken and equal to Him. Nothing outside
   Himself can be compared to God without insult to His august majesty. If
   any being, not born from God's self, can be discovered that is like Him
   and equal to Him in power, then God, in admitting a partner to share
   His throne, forfeits His pre-eminence. No longer is God One, for a
   second, indistinguishable from Himself, has arisen. On the other hand,
   there is no insult in making His own true Son His equal. For then that
   which is like Him is His own; that which is compared with Him is born
   from Himself; the Power that can do His own works is not external to
   Him. Nay more, it is an actual heightening of His glory, that He has
   begotten Omnipotence, and yet not severed that Omnipotent nature from
   Himself. The Son performs the Father's works, and on that ground
   demands that we should believe that He is God's Son. This is no claim
   of mere arrogance; for He bases it upon His works, and bids us examine
   them. And He bears witness that these works are not His own, but His
   Father's. He would not have our thoughts distracted by the splendour of
   the deeds from the evidence for His birth. And because the Jews could
   not penetrate the mystery of the Body which He had taken, the Humanity
   born of Mary, and recognise the Son of God, He appeals to His deeds for
   confirmation of His right to the name;--But if I do them, and ye will
   not believe Me, believe the works. First, He would not have them
   believe that He is the Son of God, except on the evidence of God's
   works which He does. Next, if He does the works, yet seems unworthy, in
   His bodily humility, to bear the Divine name, He demands that they
   shall believe the works. Why should the mystery of His human birth
   hinder our recognition of His birth as God, when He that is Divinely
   born fulfils every Divine task by the agency of that Manhood which He
   has assumed? If we believe not the Man, for the works' sake, when He
   tells us that He is the Son of God, let us believe the works when they,
   which are beyond a doubt the works of God, are manifestly wrought by
   the Son of God. For the Son of God possesses, in virtue of His birth,
   everything that is God's; and therefore the Son's work is the Father's
   work because His birth has not excluded Him from that nature which is
   His source and wherein He abides, and because He has in Himself that
   nature to which He owes it that He exists eternally.

   27. And so the Son, Who does the Father's works and demands of us that,
   if we believe not Him, at least we believe His works, is bound to tell
   us what the point is as to which we are to believe the works. And He
   does tell us in the words which follow:--But if I do, and ye will not
   believe Me, believe the works, that ye may know and be sure that the
   Father is in Me, and I in Him. It is the same truth as is contained in
   I am the Son of God, and I and the Father are One. This is the nature
   which is His by birth; this the mystery of the saving faith, that we
   must not divide the unity, nor separate the nature from the birth, but
   must confess that the living God was in truth born from the living God.
   God, Who is Life, is not a Being built up of various and lifeless
   portions; He is Power, and not compact of feeble elements, Light,
   intermingled with no shades of darkness, Spirit, that can harmonise
   with no incongruities. All that is within Him is One; what is Spirit is
   Light and Power and Life, and what is Life is Light and Power and
   Spirit. He Who says, I am, and I change not [873] , can suffer neither
   change in detail nor transformation in kind. For these attributes,
   which I have named, are not attached to different portions of Him, but
   meet and unite, entirely and perfectly, in the whole being of the
   living God. He is the living God, the eternal Power of the living
   Divine nature; and that which is born from Him, according to the
   mysterious truth which He reveals, could not be other than living. For
   when He said, As the living Father hath sent Me, and I live through the
   Father [874] , He taught that it is through the living Father that He
   has life in Himself. And, moreover, when He said, For as the Father
   hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son also to have life in
   Himself [875] , He bore witness that life, to the fullest extent, is
   His gift from the living God. Now if the living Son was born from the
   living Father, that birth took place without a new nature coming into
   existence. Nothing new comes into existence when the Living is begotten
   by the Living; for life was not sought out from the non-existent to
   receive birth; and Life, which receives its birth from Life, must
   needs, because of that unity of nature and because of the mysterious
   event of that perfect and ineffable birth, live always in Him that
   lives and have the life of the Living in Himself.

   28. I call to mind that, at the beginning of our treatise [876] , I
   gave the warning that human analogies correspond imperfectly to their
   Divine counterparts, yet that our understanding receives a real, if
   incomplete, enlightenment by comparing the latter with visible types.
   And now I appeal to human experience in the matter of birth, whether
   the source of their children's being remain not within the parents. For
   though the lifeless and ignoble matter, which sets in motion the
   beginnings of life, pass from one parent into the other, yet these
   retain their respective natural forces. They have brought into
   existence a nature one with their own, and therefore the begetter is
   bound up with the existence of the begotten; and the begotten,
   receiving birth through a force transmitted, yet not lost, by the
   begetter, abides in that begetter. This may suffice as a statement of
   what happens in a human birth. It is inadequate as a parallel to the
   perfect birth of God the Only-begotten; for humanity is born in
   weakness and from the union of two unlike natures, and maintained in
   life by a combination of lifeless substances. Again, humanity does not
   enter at once into the exercise of its appointed life, and never fully
   lives that life, being always encumbered with a multitude of members
   which decay and are insensibly discarded. In God, on the other hand,
   the Divine life is lived in the fullest sense, for God is Life; and
   from Life nothing that is not truly living can be born. And His birth
   is not by way of emanation but results from an act of power. Thus,
   since God's life is perfect in its intensity, and since that which is
   born from Him is perfect in power, God has the power of giving birth
   but not of suffering change. His nature is capable of increase [877] ,
   not of diminution, for He continues in, and shares the life of, that
   Son to Whom He gave in birth a nature like to, and inseparable from,
   His own. And that Son, the Living born from the Living, is not
   separated by the event of His birth from the nature that begat Him.

   29. Another analogy which casts some light upon the meaning of the
   faith is that of fire as containing fire in itself and as abiding in
   fire. Fire contains the brightness of light, the heat which is its
   essential nature, the property of destroying by combustion the
   flickering inconstancy of flame. Yet all the while it is fire, and in
   all these manifestations there is but one nature. Its weakness is that
   it is dependent for its existence upon inflammable matter, and that it
   perishes with the matter on which it has lived. A comparison with fire
   gives us, in some measure, an insight into the incomparable nature of
   God; it helps us to believe in the properties of God that we find them,
   to a certain extent, present in an earthly element. I ask, then,
   whether in fire derived from fire there is any division or separation.
   When one flame is kindled from another, is the original nature cut off
   from the derived, so as not to abide in it? Does it not rather follow
   on, and dwell in the second flame by a kind of increase, as it were by
   birth? For no portion has been cut off from the nature of the first
   flame, and yet there is light from light. Does not the first flame live
   on in the second, which owes its existence, though not by division, to
   the first? Does not the second still dwell in the first, from which it
   was not cut off; from which it went forth, retaining its unity with the
   substance to which its nature belongs? Are not the two one, when it is
   physically impossible to derive light from light by division, and
   logically impossible to distinguish between them in nature.

   30. These illustrations, I repeat, must only be used as aids to
   apprehension of the faith, not as standards of comparison for the
   Divine majesty. Our method is that of using bodily instances as a clue
   to the invisible. Reverence and reason justify us in using such help,
   which we find used in God's witness to Himself, while yet we do not
   aspire to find a parallel to the nature of God. But the minds of simple
   believers have been distressed by the mad heretical objection that it
   is wrong to accept a doctrine concerning God which needs, in order to
   become intelligible, the help of bodily analogies. And therefore, in
   accordance with that word of our Lord which we have already cited, That
   which is born of the flesh is flesh, but that which is born of the
   Spirit is Spirit [878] , we have thought it expedient, since God is
   Spirit, to give to these comparisons a certain place in our argument.
   By so doing we shall avert from God the charge that He has deceived us
   in using these analogies; shewing, as we have done, that such
   illustrations from the nature of His creatures enable us to grasp the
   meaning of God's self-revelation to us.

   31. We see how the living Son of the living Father, He Who is God from
   God, reveals the unity of the Divine nature, indissolubly One and the
   same, and the mystery of His birth in these words, I and the Father are
   One. Because the seeming arrogance of them engendered a prejudice
   against Him, He made it more clear that He had spoken in the conscious
   possession of Divinity by saying, Ye say that I have blasphemed because
   I said, I am the Son of God; thus shewing that the oneness of His
   nature with that of God was due to birth from God. And then, to clench
   their faith in His birth by a positive assertion, and to guard them, at
   the same time, from imagining that the birth involves a difference of
   nature, He crowns His argument with the words, Believe the works, that
   the Father is in Me, and I in the Father. Does His birth, as here
   revealed, display His Divinity as not His by nature, as not His own by
   right? Each is in the Other; the birth of the Son is from the Father
   only; no alien or unlike nature has been raised to Godhead and subsists
   as God. God from God, eternally abiding, owes His Godhead to none other
   than God. Import, if you see your opportunity, two gods into the
   Church's faith; separate Son from Father as far as you can,
   consistently with the birth which you admit; yet still the Father is in
   the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and this by no interchange of
   emanations but by the perfect birth of the living nature. Thus you
   cannot add together God the Father and God the Son, and count Them as
   two Gods, for They Two are One God. You cannot confuse Them together,
   for They Two are not One Person. And so the Apostolic faith rejects two
   gods; for it knows nothing of two Fathers or two Sons. In confessing
   the Father it confesses the Son; it believes in the Son in believing in
   the Father. For the name of Father involves that of Son, since without
   having a son none can be a father. Evidence of the existence of a son
   is proof that there has been a father, for a son cannot exist except
   from a father. When we confess that God is One we deny that He is
   single; for the Son is the complement of the Father, and to the Father
   the Son's existence is due. But birth works no change in the Divine
   nature; both in Father and in Son that nature is true to its kind. And
   the right expression for us of this unity of nature is the confession
   that They, being Two by birth and generation, are One God, not one
   Person.

   32. We will leave it to him to preach two Gods, who can preach One God
   without confessing the unity; he shall proclaim that God is solitary,
   who can deny that there are two Persons, Each dwelling in the Other by
   the power of Their nature and the mystery of birth given and received.
   And that man may assign a different nature to Each of the Two, who is
   ignorant that the unity of Father and of Son is a revealed truth. Let
   the heretics blot out this record of the Son's self-revelation I in the
   Father and the Father in Me; then, and not till then, shall they assert
   that there are two Gods, or one God in loneliness. There is no hint of
   more natures than one in what we are told of Their possession of the
   one Divine nature. The truth that God is from God does not multiply God
   by two; the birth destroys the supposition of a lonely God. And again,
   because They are interdependent They form an unity; and that They are
   interdependent is proved by Their being One from One. For the One, in
   begetting the One, conferred upon Him nothing that was not His own; and
   the One, in being begotten, received from the One only what belongs to
   one. Thus the apostolic faith, in proclaiming the Father, will proclaim
   Him as One God, and in confessing the Son will confess Him as One God;
   since one and the same Divine nature exists in Both, and because, the
   Father being God and the Son being God, and the one name of God
   expressing the nature of Both, the term One God' signifies the Two. God
   from God, or God in God, does not mean that there are two Gods, for God
   abides, One from One, eternally with the one Divine nature and the one
   Divine name; nor does God dwindle down to a single Person, for One and
   One can never be in solitude.

   33. The Lord has not left in doubt or obscurity the teaching conveyed
   in this great mystery; He has not abandoned us to lose our way in dim
   uncertainty. Listen to Him as He reveals the full knowledge of this
   faith to His Apostles;--I am the Way and the Truth and the Life; no man
   cometh unto the Father but through Me. If ye know Me, ye know My Father
   also; and from henceforth ye shall know Him, and have seen Him. Philip
   saith unto Him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus
   saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and ye have not
   known Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also. How
   sayest thou, Shew us the Father? Dost thou not believe Me, that I am in
   the Father, and the Father is in Me? The words that I speak unto you I
   speak not of Myself, but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth His
   works. Believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me; or
   else believe for the very works' sake [879] . He Who is the Way leads
   us not into by-paths or trackless wastes: He Who is the Truth mocks us
   not with lies; He Who is the Life betrays us not into delusions which
   are death. He Himself has chosen these winning names to indicate the
   methods which He has appointed for our salvation. As the Way, He will
   guide us to the Truth; the Truth will establish us in the Life. And
   therefore it is all-important for us to know what is the mysterious
   mode, which He reveals, of attaining this life. No man cometh to the
   Father but through Me. The way to the Father is through the Son. And
   now we must enquire whether this is to be by a course of obedience to
   His teaching, or by faith in His Godhead. For it is conceivable that
   our way to the Father may be through adherence to the Son's teaching,
   rather than through believing that the Godhead of the Father dwells in
   the Son. And therefore let us, in the next place, seek out the true
   meaning of the instruction given us here. For it is not by cleaving to
   a preconceived opinion, but by studying the force of the words, that we
   shall enter into possession of this faith.

   34. The words which follow those last cited are, If ye know Me, ye know
   My Father also. It is the Man, Jesus Christ, Whom they behold. How can
   a knowledge of Him be a knowledge of the Father? For the Apostles see
   Him wearing the aspect of that human nature which belongs to Him; but
   God is not encumbered with body and flesh, and is incognisable by those
   who dwell in our weak and fleshly body. The answer is given by the
   Lord, Who asserts that under the flesh, which, in a mystery, He had
   taken, His Father's nature dwells within Him. He sets the facts in
   their due order thus;--If ye know Me, ye know My Father also; and from
   henceforth ye shall know Him, and have seen Him. He makes a distinction
   between the time of sight, and the time of knowledge. He says that from
   henceforth they shall know Him Whom they had already seen; and so shall
   possess, from the time of this revelation onward, the knowledge of that
   nature, on which, in Him, they long had gazed.

   35. But the novel sound of these words disturbed the Apostle Philip. A
   Man is before their eyes; this Man avows Himself the Son of God, and
   declares that when they have known Him they will know the Father. He
   tells them that they have seen the Father, and that, because they have
   seen Him, they shall know Him hereafter. This truth is too broad for
   the grasp of weak humanity; their faith fails in the presence of these
   paradoxes. Christ says that the Father has been seen already and shall
   now be known; and this, although sight, is knowledge. He says that if
   the Son has been known, the Father has been known also; and this though
   the Son has imparted knowledge of Himself through the bodily senses of
   sight and sound, while the Father's nature, different altogether from
   that [880] of the visible Man, which they know, could not be learnt
   from their knowledge of the nature of Him Whom they have seen. He has
   also often borne witness that no man has seen the Father. And so Philip
   broke forth, with the loyalty and confidence of an Apostle, with the
   request, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us. He was not
   tampering with the faith; it was but a mistake made in ignorance. For
   the Lord had said that the Father had been seen already and henceforth
   should be known; but the Apostle had not understood that He had been
   seen. Accordingly he did not deny that the Father had been seen, but
   asked to see Him. He did not ask that the Father should be unveiled to
   his bodily gaze, but that he might have such an indication as should
   enlighten him concerning the Father Who had been seen. For he had seen
   the Son under the aspect of Man, but cannot understand how he could
   thereby have seen the Father. His adding, And it sufficeth us, to the
   prayer, Lord, shew us the Father, reveals clearly that it was a mental,
   not a bodily vision of the Father which he desired. He did not refuse
   faith to the Lord's words, but asked for such enlightenment to his mind
   as should enable him to believe; for the fact that the Lord had spoken
   was conclusive evidence to the Apostle that faith was his duty. The
   consideration which moved him to ask that the Father might be shewn,
   was that the Son had said that He had been seen, and should be known
   because He had been seen. There was no presumption in this prayer that
   He, Who had already been seen, should now be made manifest.

   36. And therefore the Lord answered Philip thus;--Have I been so long
   time with you, and ye have not known Me, Philip? He rebukes the Apostle
   for defective knowledge of Himself; for previously He had said that
   when He was known the Father was known also. But what is the meaning of
   this complaint that for so long they had not known Him? It means this;
   that if they had known Him, they must have recognised in Him the
   Godhead which belongs to His Father's nature. For His works were the
   peculiar works of God. He walked upon the waves, commanded the winds,
   manifestly, though none could tell how, changed the water into wine and
   multiplied the loaves, put devils to flight, healed diseases, restored
   injured limbs and repaired the defects of nature, forgave sins and
   raised the dead to life. And all this He did while wearing flesh; and
   He accompanied the works with the assertion that He was the Son of God.
   Hence it is that He justly complains that they did not recognise in His
   mysterious human birth and life the action of the nature of God,
   performing these deeds through the Manhood which He had assumed.

   37. And therefore the Lord reproached them that they had not known Him,
   though He had so long been doing these works, and answered their prayer
   that He would shew them the Father by saying, He that hath seen Me hath
   seen the Father also. He was not speaking of a bodily manifestation, of
   perception by the eye of flesh, but by that eye of which He had once
   spoken;--Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh
   harvest? Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes and look on the
   fields; for they are white to harvest [881] . The season of the year,
   the fields white to harvest are allusions equally incompatible with an
   earthly and visible prospect. He was bidding them lift the eyes of
   their understanding to contemplate the bliss of the final harvest. And
   so it is with His present words, He that hath seen Me hath seen the
   Father also. It was not the carnal body, which He had received by birth
   from the Virgin, that could manifest to them the image and likeness of
   God. The human aspect which He wore could be no aid towards the mental
   vision of the incorporeal God. But God was recognised in Christ, by
   such as recognised Christ as the Son on the evidence of the powers of
   His Divine nature; and a recognition of God the Son produces a
   recognition of God the Father. For the Son is in such a sense the
   Image, as to be One in kind with the Father, and yet to indicate that
   the Father is His Origin. Other images, made of metals or colours or
   other materials by various arts, reproduce the appearance of the
   objects which they represent. Yet can lifeless copies be put on a level
   with their living originals? Painted or carved or molten effigies with
   the nature which they imitate? The Son is not the Image of the Father
   after such a fashion as this; He is the living Image of the Living. The
   Son that is born of the Father has a nature in no wise different from
   His; and, because His nature is not different, He possesses the power
   of that nature which is the same as His own. The fact that He is the
   Image proves that God the Father is the Author of the birth of the
   Only-begotten, Who is Himself revealed as the Likeness and Image of the
   invisible God. And hence the likeness, which is joined in union with
   the Divine nature, is indelibly His, because the powers of that nature
   are inalienably His own.

   38. Such is the meaning of this passage, Have I been so long time with
   you, and ye have not known Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me hath seen
   the Father also. How sayest thou, Shew us the Father? Dost thou not
   believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me? It is
   only the Word of God, of Whom we men are enabled, in our discourse
   concerning Divine things, to reason. All else that belongs to the
   Godhead is dark and difficult, dangerous and obscure. If any man
   propose to express what is known in other words than those supplied by
   God, he must inevitably either display his own ignorance, or else leave
   his readers' minds in utter perplexity. The Lord, when He was asked to
   shew the Father, said, He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also.
   He that would alter this is an antichrist, he that would deny it is a
   Jew, he that is ignorant a Pagan. If we find ourselves in difficulty,
   let us lay the fault to our own reason; if God's declaration seem
   involved in obscurity, let us assume that our want of faith is the
   cause. These words state with precision that God is not solitary, and
   yet that there are no differences within the Divine nature. For the
   Father is seen in the Son, and this could be the case neither if He
   were a lonely Being, nor yet if He were unlike the Son. It is through
   the Son that the Father is seen: and this mystery which the Son reveals
   is that They are One God, but not one Person. What other meaning can
   you attach to this saying of the Lord's, He that hath seen Me hath seen
   the Father also? This is no case of identity; the use of the
   conjunction also shews that the Father is named in addition to the Son.
   These words, The Father also, are incompatible with the notion of an
   isolated and single Person. No conclusion is possible but that the
   Father was made visible through the Son, because They are One and are
   alike in nature. And, lest our faith in this regard should be left in
   any doubt, the Lord proceeded, How sayest thou, Shew us the Father? The
   Father had been seen in the Son; how then could men be ignorant of the
   Father? What need could there be for Him to be shewn?

   39. Again, the unity of Begetter and Begotten, manifested in sameness
   of nature and true oneness of kind, proves that the Father was seen in
   His true nature. And this is shewn by the Lord's next words, Believe ye
   not that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me? In no other words
   than these, which the Son has used, can the fact be stated that Father
   and Son, being alike in nature, are inseparable. The Son, Who is the
   Way and the Truth and the Life, is not deceiving us by some theatrical
   transformation of names and aspects, when He, while wearing Manhood,
   styles Himself the Son of God. He is not falsely concealing the fact
   that He is God the Father [882] ; He is not a single Person [883] Who
   hides His features under a mask, that we may imagine that Two are
   present. He is not a solitary Being, now posing as His own Son, and
   again calling Himself the Father; tricking out one unchanging nature
   with varying names. Far removed from this is the plain honesty of the
   words. The Father is the Father, and the Son is the Son. But these
   names, and the realities which they represent, contain no innovation
   upon the Divine nature, nothing inconsistent, nothing alien. For the
   Divine nature, being true to itself, persists in being itself; that
   which is from God is God. The Divine birth imports neither diminution
   nor difference into the Godhead, for the Son is born into, and subsists
   with, a nature that is within the Divine nature and is like to it, and
   the Father sought out no alien element to be mingled in the nature of
   His Only-begotten Son, but endowed Him with all things that are His
   own, and this without loss to the Giver. And thus the Son is not
   destitute of the Divine nature, for, being God, He is from God and from
   none other; and He is not different from God, but is indeed nothing
   else than God, for that which is begotten from God is the Son, and the
   Son only, and the Divine nature, in receiving birth as a Son, has not
   forfeited its Divinity. Thus the Father is in the Son, the Son is in
   the Father, God is in God. And this is not by the combination of two
   harmonious, though different, kinds of being, nor by the incorporating
   power of an ampler substance exercised upon a lesser; for the
   properties of matter make it impossible that things which enclose
   others should also be enclosed by them. It is by the birth of living
   nature from living nature. The substance remains the same, birth causes
   no deterioration in the Divine nature; God is not born from God to be
   ought else than God. Herein is no innovation, no estrangement, no
   division. It is sin to believe that Father and Son are two Gods,
   sacrilege to assert that Father and Son are one solitary God, blasphemy
   to deny the unity, consisting in sameness of kind, of God from God.

   40. Lest they, whose faith conforms to the Gospel, should regard this
   mystery as something vague and obscure, the Lord has expounded it in
   this order;--Dost thou not believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the
   Father is in Me? The words that I speak unto you I speak not of Myself,
   but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth His works. In what other
   words than these could, or can, the possession of the Divine nature by
   Father and Son be declared, consistently with prominence for the Son's
   birth? When He says, The words that I speak unto you I speak not of
   Myself, He neither suppresses His personality, nor denies His Sonship,
   nor conceals the presence in Himself of His Father's Divine nature.
   While speaking of Himself--and that He does so speak is proved by the
   pronoun I--He speaks as abiding in the Divine substance; while speaking
   not of Himself, He bears witness to the birth which took place in Him
   of God from God His Father. And He is inseparable and indistinguishable
   in unity of nature from the Father; for He speaks, though He speaks not
   of Himself. He Who speaks, though He speak not of Himself, necessarily
   exists, inasmuch as He speaks; and, inasmuch as He speaks not of
   Himself, He makes it manifest that His words are not His own. For He
   has added, But the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth His works. That
   the Father dwells in the Son proves that the Father is not isolated and
   alone; that the Father works through the Son proves that the Son is not
   an alien or a stranger. There cannot be one Person only, for He speaks
   not of Himself; and, conversely, They cannot be separate and divided
   when the One speaks through the voice of the Other. These words are the
   revelation of the mystery of Their unity. And again, They Two are not
   different One from the Other, seeing that by Their inherent nature Each
   is in the Other; and They are One, seeing that He, Who speaks, speaks
   not of Himself, and He, Who speaks not of Himself, yet does speak. And
   then, having taught that the Father both spoke and wrought in Him, the
   Son establishes this perfect unity as the rule of our faith;--But the
   Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth His works. Believe Me, that I am
   in the Father, and the Father in Me; or else believe for the very
   works' sake. The Father works in the Son; but the Son also works the
   works of His Father.

   41. And so, lest we should believe and say that the Father works in the
   Son through His own omnipotent energy, and not through the Son's
   possession, as His birthright, of the Divine nature, Christ says,
   Believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me. What means
   this, Believe Me? Clearly it refers back to the previous, Shew us the
   Father. Their faith--that faith which had demanded that the Father
   should be shewn--is confirmed by this command to believe. He was not
   satisfied with saying, He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also.
   He goes further, and expands our knowledge, so that we can contemplate
   the Father in the Son, remembering meanwhile that the Son is in the
   Father. Thus He would save us from the error of imagining a reciprocal
   emanation of the One into the Other, by teaching Their unity in the One
   nature through birth given and received. The Lord would have us take
   Him at His word, lest our hold upon the faith be shaken by His
   condescension in assuming Humanity. If His flesh, His body, His passion
   seem to make His Godhead doubtful, let us at least believe, on the
   evidence of the works, that God is in God and God is from God, and that
   They are One. For by the power of Their nature Each is in the Other.
   The Father loses nothing that is His because it is in the Son, and the
   Son receives His whole Sonship from the Father. Bodily natures are not
   created after such a fashion that they mutually contain each other, or
   possess the perfect unity of one abiding nature. In their case it would
   be impossible that an Only-begotten Son could exist eternally,
   inseparable from the true Divine nature of His Father. Yet this is the
   peculiar property of God the Only-begotten, this the faith revealed in
   the mystery of His true birth, this the work of the Spirit's power,
   that to be, and to be in God, is for Christ the same thing; and that
   this being in God is not the presence of one thing within another, as a
   body inside another body, but that the life and subsistence of Christ
   is such that He is within the subsisting God, and within Him, yet
   having a subsistence of His own. For Each subsists in such wise as not
   to exist apart from the Other, since They are Two through birth given
   and received, and therefore only one Divine nature exists. This is the
   meaning of the words, I and the Father are One, and He that hath seen
   Me hath seen the Father also, and I in the Father and the Father in Me.
   They tell us that the Son Who is born is not different or inferior to
   the Father; that His possession, by right of birth, of the Divine
   nature as Son of God, and therefore nothing else than God, is the
   supreme truth conveyed in the mysterious revelation of the One Godhead
   in Father and Son. And therefore the doctrine of the generation of the
   Only-begotten is guiltless of ditheism, for the Son of God, in being
   born into the Godhead, manifested in Himself the nature of God His
   Begetter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [845] The Epistola Arii ad Alexandrum; see Books iv. 12, vi. 5.

   [846] Cf. Lucan. IX. 696 ff.

   [847] Marcellus of Ancyra.

   [848] Arius.

   [849] Photinus of Sirmium.

   [850] 1 Cor. i. 27.

   [851] St. John xiv. 9.

   [852] Cf. Phil. ii. 6.

   [853] St. John x. 30.

   [854] Ib. xiv. 28.

   [855] St. John i. 1.

   [856] Exod. vii. 1.

   [857] Psalm lxxxi. (lxxxii.) 6.

   [858] I.e. These are the elements of which His Person is composed by
   the eternal generation.

   [859] Word, Wisdom, Power.

   [860] By the Sabellians.

   [861] St. John x. 30, xvi. 15, xiv. 11.

   [862] St. John iii. 6.

   [863] St. John v. 18.

   [864] Heb. i. 3.

   [865] St. John v. 19-22.

   [866] Ib. v. 17.

   [867] St. John ix. 3.

   [868] St. John x. 27-30.

   [869] I.e. He is not Unbegotten.

   [870] St. John x. 31-33.

   [871] St. John x. 34-38.

   [872] Rom. i. 2-4.

   [873] Mal. iii. 6.

   [874] St. John vi. 57.

   [875] Ib. v. 26.

   [876] Book i. § 19, iv. § 2, vi. § 9.

   [877] Cf. the next section.

   [878] St. John ii. 6.

   [879] St. John xiv. 6-11.

   [880] Reading ab ea.

   [881] St. John iv. 35.

   [882] Sabellianism.

   [883] Personalis occurs here for the first time; persona is found in
   iii. 23, v. 26.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book VIII.

   1. The Blessed Apostle Paul in laying down the form for appointing a
   bishop and creating by his instructions an entirely new type of member
   of the Church, has taught us in the following words the sum total of
   all the virtues perfected in him:--Holding fast the word according to
   the doctrine of faith that he may be able to exhort to sound doctrine
   and to convict gainsayers. For there are many unruly men, vain talkers
   and deceivers [884] . For in this way he points out that the essentials
   of orderliness and morals are only profitable for good service in the
   priesthood if at the same time the qualities needful for knowing how to
   teach and preserve the faith are not lacking, for a man is not
   straightway made a good and useful priest [885] by a merely innocent
   life or by a mere knowledge of preaching. For an innocent minister is
   profitable to himself alone unless he be instructed also; while he that
   is instructed has nothing to support his teaching unless he be
   innocent. For the words of the Apostle do not merely fit a man for his
   life in this world by precepts of honesty and uprightness, nor on the
   other hand do they educate in expertness of teaching a mere Scribe of
   the Synagogue for the expounding of the Law: but the Apostle is
   training a leader of the Church, perfected by the perfect
   accomplishment of the greatest virtues, so that his life may be adorned
   by his teaching, and his teaching by his life. Accordingly he has
   provided Titus, the person to whom his words were addressed, with an
   injunction as to the perfect practice of religion to this effect:--In
   all things shewing thyself an ensample of good works, teaching with
   gravity sound words that cannot be condemned, that the adversary may be
   ashamed, having nothing disgraceful or evil to say of us [886] . This
   teacher of the Gentiles and elect doctor of the Church, from his
   consciousness of Christ who spoke and dwelt within him, knew well that
   the infection of tainted speech would spread abroad, and that the
   corruption of pestilent doctrine would furiously rage against the sound
   form of faithful words, and infusing the poison of its own evil tenets
   into the inmost soul, would creep on with deep-seated mischief. For it
   is of these that he says, Whose word spreadeth like a cancer [887] ,
   tainting the health of the mind, invaded by it with a secret and
   stealthy contagion. For this reason, he wished that there should be in
   the bishop the teaching of sound words, a good conscience in the faith
   and expertness in exhortation to withstand wicked and false and wild
   gainsayings. For there are many who pretend to the faith, but are not
   subject to the faith, and rather set up a faith for themselves than
   receive that which is given, being puffed up with the thoughts of human
   vanity, knowing the things they wish to know and unwilling to know the
   things that are true; since it is a mark of true wisdom sometimes to
   know what we do not like. However, this will-wisdom is followed by
   foolish preaching, for what is foolishly learnt must needs be foolishly
   preached. Yet how great an evil to those who hear is foolish preaching,
   when they are misled into foolish opinions by conceit of wisdom! And
   for this cause the Apostle described them thus: There are many unruly,
   vain talkers and deceivers [888] . Hence we must utter our voice
   against arrogant wickedness and boastful arrogance and seductive
   boastfulness,--yes, we must speak against such things through the
   soundness of our doctrine, the truth of our faith, the sincerity of our
   preaching, so that we may have the purity of truth and the truth of
   sound doctrine.

   2. The reason why I have just mentioned this utterance of the Apostle
   is this; men of crooked minds and false professions, void of hope and
   venomous of speech, lay upon me the necessity of inveighing against
   them, because under the guise of religion they instil deadly doctrines,
   infectious thoughts and corrupt desires into the simple minds of their
   hearers. And this they do with an utter disregard of the true sense of
   the apostolic teaching, so that the Father is not a Father, nor the
   Son, Son, nor the Faith, the Faith. In resisting their wild falsehoods,
   we have extended the course of our reply so far, that after proving
   from the Law that God and God were distinct and that very God was in
   very God, we then shewed from the teaching of evangelists and apostles
   the perfect and true birth of the Only-begotten God; and lastly, we
   pointed out in the due course of our argument that the Son of God is
   very God, and of a nature identical with the Father's, so that the
   faith of the Church should neither confess that God is single nor that
   there are two Gods. For neither would the birth of God allow God to be
   solitary, nor would a perfect birth allow different natures to be
   ascribed to two Gods. Now in refuting their vain speaking we have a
   twofold object, first that we may teach what is holy and perfect and
   sound, and, that our discourse should not by straying through any
   by-paths and crooked ways, and struggling out of devious and winding
   tunnels, seem rather to search for the truth than declare it. Our
   second object is that we should reveal to the conviction of all men the
   folly and absurdity of those crafty arguments of their vain and
   deceitful opinions which are adapted to a plausible show of seductive
   truth. For it is not enough for us to have pointed out what things are
   good, unless they are understood to be absolutely good by our
   refutation of their opposites.

   3. But as it is the nature and endeavour of the good and wise to
   prepare themselves wholly for securing either the reality or the
   opportunity of some precious hope lest their preparedness should in
   some respects fall short of that which they look for,--so in like
   manner those who are filled with the madness of heretical frenzy make
   it their chiefest anxiety to labour with all the ingenuity of their
   impiety against the truth of pious faith, in order that against those
   who are religious they may establish their own irreligion; that they
   may surpass the hope of our life in the hopelessness of their own, and
   that they may spend more thought over false than we spend over true
   teaching. For against the pious assertions of our faith they have
   carefully devised such objections of their impious misbelief, as first
   to ask whether we believe in one God, next, whether Christ also be God,
   lastly, whether the Father is greater than the Son, in order that when
   they hear us confess that God is one they may use our reply to shew
   that Christ cannot be God. For they do not enquire concerning the Son
   whether He be God; all they wish for in asking questions about Christ
   is to prove that He is not a Son, that by entrapping men of simple
   faith they may through the belief in one God divert them from the
   belief in Christ as God, on the ground that God is no longer one if
   Christ also must be acknowledged as God. Again with what subtlety of
   worldly wisdom do they contend when they say, If God is one, whosoever
   that other shall be shewn to be, he will not be God. For if there be
   another God He can no longer be one, since nature does not permit that
   where there is another there should be one only, or that where there is
   only one there should be another. Afterwards, when by the crafty
   cunning of this insidious argument they have misled those who are ready
   to believe and listen, they then apply this proposition (as if they
   could now establish it by an easier method), that Christ is God rather
   in name than in nature, because this generic name in Him can destroy in
   none that only true belief in one God: and they contend that through
   this the Father is greater than the Son, because, the natures being
   different, as there is but one God, the Father is greater from the
   essential character of His nature; and that the Other is only called
   Son while He is really a creature subsisting by the will of the Father,
   because He is less than the Father; and also that He is not God,
   because God being one does not admit of another God, since he who is
   less must necessarily be of a nature alien from that of the person who
   is greater. Again, how foolish they are in their attempts to lay down a
   law for God when they maintain that no birth can take place from one
   single being, because throughout the universe birth arises from the
   union of two; moreover, that the unchangeable God cannot accord from
   Himself birth to one who is born, because that which is changeless is
   incapable of addition, nor can the nature of a solitary and single
   being contain within itself the property of generation.

   4. We, on the contrary, having by spiritual teaching arrived at the
   faith of the evangelists and apostles, and following after the hope of
   eternal blessedness by our confession of the Father and the Son, and
   having proved out of the Law the mystery of God and God, without
   overstepping the limits of our faith in one God, or failing to proclaim
   that Christ is God, have adopted this method of reply from the Gospels,
   that we declare the true nativity of Only-begotten God from God the
   Father, because that through this He was both very God and not alien
   from the nature of the One very God, and thus neither could His Godhead
   be denied nor Himself be described as another God, because while the
   birth made Him God, the nature within him of one God of God did not
   separate Him off as another God. And although our human reason led us
   to this conclusion, that the names of distinct natures could not meet
   together in the same nature, and not be one, where the essence of each
   did not differ in kind; nevertheless, it seemed good that we should
   prove this from the express sayings of our Lord, Who after frequently
   making known that the God of our faith and hope was One, in order to
   affirm the mystery of the One God, while declaring and proving His own
   Godhead, said, I and the Father are one; and, If ye had known Me, ye
   would have known My Father also; and, He that hath seen Me hath seen
   the Father also; and, Believe Me, that the Father is in Me, and I in
   the Father: or else believe for the very works' sake [889] . He has
   signified His own birth in the name Father, and declares that in the
   knowledge of Himself the Father is known. He avows the unity of nature,
   when those who see Him see the Father. He bears witness that He is
   indivisible from the Father, when He dwells in the Father Who dwells in
   Him. He possesses the confidence of self-knowledge when He demands
   credit for His words from the operations of His power. And thus in this
   most blessed faith of the perfect birth, every error, as well that of
   two Gods as of a single God, is abolished, since They Who are one in
   essence are not one person, and He Who is not one person with Him Who
   is, is yet so free from difference from Him that They Two are One God.

   5. Now seeing that heretics cannot deny these things because they are
   so clearly stated and understood, they nevertheless pervert them by the
   most foolish and wicked lies so as afterwards to deny them. For the
   words of Christ, I and the Father are one [890] , they endeavour to
   refer to a mere concord of unanimity, so that there may be in them a
   unity of will not of nature, that is, that they may be one not by
   essence of being, but by identity of will. And they apply to the
   support of their case the passage in the Acts of the Apostles, Now of
   the multitude of them that believed the heart and soul were one [891] ,
   in order to prove that a diversity of souls and hearts may be united
   into one heart and soul through a mere conformity of will. Or else they
   cite those words to the Corinthians, Now he that planteth and he that
   watereth are one [892] , to shew that, since They are one in Their work
   for our salvation, and in the revelation of one mystery, Their unity is
   an unity of wills. Or again, they quote the prayer of our Lord for the
   salvation of the nations who should believe in Him: Neither for these
   only do I pray, but for them also that shall believe on Me through
   their Word; that they all may be one; even as Thou, Father, art in Me,
   and I in Thee, that they also may be in Us [893] , to shew that since
   men cannot, so to speak, be fused back into God or themselves coalesce
   into one undistinguished mass, this oneness must arise from unity of
   will, while all perform actions pleasing to God, and unite one with
   another in the harmonious accord of their thoughts, and that thus it is
   not nature which makes them one, but will.

   6. He clearly knows not wisdom who knows not God. And since Christ is
   Wisdom he must needs be beyond the pale of wisdom who knows not Christ
   or hates Him [894] . As, for instance, they do who will have it that
   the Lord of Glory, and King of the Universe, and Only-begotten God is a
   creature of God and not His Son, and in addition to such foolish lies
   shew a still more foolish cleverness in the defence of their falsehood.
   For even putting aside for a little that essential character of unity
   which exists in God the Father and God the Son, they can be refuted out
   of the very passages which they adduce.

   7. For as to those whose soul and heart were one, I ask whether they
   were one through faith in God? Yes, assuredly, through faith, for
   through this the soul and heart of all were one. Again I ask, is the
   faith one or is there a second faith? One undoubtedly, and that on the
   authority of the Apostle himself, who proclaims one faith even as one
   Lord, and one baptism, and one hope, and one God [895] . If then it is
   through faith, that is, through the nature of one faith, that all are
   one, how is it that thou dost not understand a natural unity in the
   case of those who through the nature of one faith are one? For all were
   born again to innocence, to immortality, to the knowledge of God, to
   the faith of hope. And if these things cannot differ within themselves
   because there is both one hope and one God, as also there is one Lord
   and one baptism of regeneration; if these things are one rather by
   agreement than by nature, ascribe a unity of will to those also who
   have been born again into them. If, however, they have been begotten
   again into the nature of one life and eternity, then, inasmuch as their
   soul and heart are one, the unity of will fails to account for their
   case who are one by regeneration into the same nature.

   8. These are not our own conjectures which we offer, nor do we falsely
   put together any of these things in order to deceive the ears of our
   hearers by perverting the meaning of words; but holding fast the form
   of sound teaching we know and preach the things which are true. For the
   Apostle shews that this unity of the faithful arises from the nature of
   the sacraments when he writes to the Galatians, For as many of you as
   were baptized into Christ did put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor
   Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
   female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus [896] . That these are one
   amid so great diversities of race, condition, sex,--is it from an
   agreement of will or from the unity of the sacrament, since these have
   one baptism and have all put on one Christ? What, therefore, will a
   concord of minds avail here when they are one in that they have put on
   one Christ through the nature of one baptism?

   9. Or, again, since he who plants and he who waters are one, are they
   not one because, being themselves born again in one baptism they form a
   ministry of one regenerating baptism? Do not they do the same thing?
   Are they not one in One? So they who are one through the same thing are
   one also by nature, not only by will, inasmuch as they themselves have
   been made the same thing and are ministers of the same thing and the
   same power.

   10. Now the contradiction of fools always serves to prove their folly,
   because with regard to the faults which they contrive by the devices of
   an unwise or crooked understanding against the truth, while the latter
   remains unshaken and immovable the things which are opposed to it must
   needs be regarded as false and foolish. For heretics in their attempt
   to deceive others by the words, I and the Father are one [897] , that
   there might not be acknowledged in them the unity and like essence of
   deity, but only a oneness arising from mutual love and an agreement of
   wills--these heretics, I say, have brought forward an instance of that
   unity, as we have shewn above, even from the words of our Lord, That
   they all may be one, as Thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they
   also may be in Us [898] . Every man is outside the promises of the
   Gospel who is outside the faith in them, and by the guilt of an evil
   understanding has lost all simple hope. For to know not what thou
   believest demands not so much excuse as a reward, for the greatest
   service of faith is to hope for that which thou knowest not. But it is
   the madness of most consummate wickedness either not to believe things
   which are understood or to have corrupted the sense in which one
   believes.

   11. But although the wickedness of man can pervert his intellectual
   powers, nevertheless the words retain their meaning. Our Lord prays to
   His Father that those who shall believe in Him may be one, and as He is
   in the Father and the Father in Him, so all may be one in Them. Why
   dost thou bring in here an identity of mind, why a unity of soul and
   heart through agreement of will? For there would have been no lack of
   suitable words for our Lord, if it were will that made them one, to
   have prayed in this fashion,--Father, as We are one in will, so may
   they also be one in will, that we may all be one through agreement. Or
   could it be that He Who is the Word was unacquainted with the meaning
   of words? and that He Who is Truth knew not how to speak the truth? and
   He Who is Wisdom went astray in foolish talk? and He Who is Power was
   compassed about with such weakness that He could not speak what He
   wished to be understood? He has clearly spoken the true and sincere
   mysteries of the faith of the Gospel. And He has not only spoken that
   we may comprehend, He has also taught that we may believe, saying, That
   they all may be one, as Thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they
   also may be in Us. For those first of all is the prayer of whom it is
   said, That they all may be one. Then the promotion of unity is set
   forth by a pattern of unity, when He says, as Thou, Father, art in Me,
   and I in Thee, that they also may be in Us, so that as the Father is in
   the Son and the Son in the Father, so through the pattern of this unity
   all might be one in the Father and the Son.

   12. But because it is proper to the Father alone and the Son that They
   should be one by nature because God is from God, and the Only-begotten
   from the Unbegotten can subsist in no other nature than that of His
   origin; so that He Who was begotten should exist in the substance of
   His birth, and the birth should possess no other and different truth of
   deity than that from which it issued; for our Lord has left us in no
   doubt as to our belief by asserting throughout the whole of the
   discourse which follows the nature of this complete unity. For the next
   words are these, That the world may believe that Thou didst send Me
   [899] . Thus the world is to believe that the Son has been sent by the
   Father because all who shall believe in Him will be one in the Father
   and the Son. And how they will be so we are soon told,--And the glory
   which Thou hast given Me I have given unto them [900] . Now I ask
   whether glory is identical with will, since will is an emotion of the
   mind while glory is an ornament or embellishment of nature. So then it
   is the glory received from the Father that the Son hath given to all
   who shall believe in Him, and certainly not will. Had this been given,
   faith would carry with it no reward, for a necessity of will attached
   to us would also impose faith upon us. However He has shewn what is
   effected by the bestowal of the glory received, That they may be one,
   even as We are one [901] . It is then with this object that the
   received glory was bestowed, that all might be one. So now all are one
   in glory, because the glory given is none other than that which was
   received: nor has it been given for any other cause than that all
   should be one. And since all are one through the glory given to the Son
   and by the Son bestowed upon believers, I ask how can the Son be of a
   different glory from the Father's, since the glory of the Son brings
   all that believe into the unity of the Father's glory. Now it may be
   that the utterance of human hope in this case may be somewhat
   immoderate, yet it will not be contrary to faith; for though to hope
   for this were presumptuous, yet not to have believed it is sinful, for
   we have one and the same Author both of our hope and of our faith. We
   will treat of this matter more clearly and at greater length in its own
   place, as is fitting. Yet in the meantime it is easily seen from our
   present argument that this hope of ours is neither vain nor
   presumptuous. So then through the glory received and given all are one.
   I hold the faith and recognise the cause of the unity, but I do not yet
   understand how it is that the glory given makes all one.

   13. Now our Lord has not left the minds of His faithful followers in
   doubt, but has explained the manner in which His nature operates,
   saying, That they may be one, as We are one: I in them and Thou in Me,
   that they may be perfected in one [902] . Now I ask those who bring
   forward a unity of will between Father and Son, whether Christ is in us
   to-day through verity of nature or through agreement of will. For if in
   truth the Word has been made flesh and we in very truth receive the
   Word made flesh as food from the Lord, are we not bound to believe that
   He abides in us naturally, Who, born as a man, has assumed the nature
   of our flesh now inseparable from Himself, and has conjoined the nature
   of His own flesh to the nature of the eternal Godhead in the sacrament
   by which His flesh is communicated to us? For so are we all one,
   because the Father is in Christ and Christ in us. Whosoever then shall
   deny that the Father is in Christ naturally must first deny that either
   he is himself in Christ naturally, or Christ in him, because the Father
   in Christ and Christ in us make us one in Them. Hence, if indeed Christ
   has taken to Himself the flesh of our body, and that Man Who was born
   from Mary was indeed Christ, and we indeed receive in a mystery the
   flesh of His body--(and for this cause we shall be one, because the
   Father is in Him and He in us),--how can a unity of will be maintained,
   seeing that the special property of nature received through the
   sacrament is the sacrament of a perfect unity [903] ?

   14. The words in which we speak of the things of God must be used in no
   mere human and worldly sense, nor must the perverseness of an alien and
   impious interpretation be extorted from the soundness of heavenly words
   by any violent and headstrong preaching. Let us read what is written,
   let us understand what we read, and then fulfil the demands of a
   perfect faith. For as to what we say concerning the reality of Christ's
   nature within us, unless we have been taught by Him, our words are
   foolish and impious. For He says Himself, My flesh is meat indeed, and
   My blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood
   abideth in Me, and I in him [904] . As to the verity of the flesh and
   blood there is no room left for doubt. For now both from the
   declaration of the Lord Himself and our own faith, it is verily flesh
   and verily blood. And these when eaten and drunk, bring it to pass that
   both we are in Christ and Christ in us. Is not this true? Yet they who
   affirm that Christ Jesus is not truly God are welcome to find it false.
   He therefore Himself is in us through the flesh and we in Him, whilst
   together with Him our own selves are in God.

   15. Now how it is that we are in Him through the sacrament of the flesh
   and blood bestowed upon us, He Himself testifies, saying, And the world
   will no longer see Me, but ye shall see Me; because I live ye shall
   live also; because I am in My Father, and ye in Me, and I in you [905]
   . If He wished to indicate a mere unity of will, why did He set forth a
   kind of gradation and sequence in the completion of the unity, unless
   it were that, since He was in the Father through the nature of Deity,
   and we on the contrary in Him through His birth in the body, He would
   have us believe that He is in us through the mystery of the sacraments?
   and thus there might be taught a perfect unity through a Mediator,
   whilst, we abiding in Him, He abode in the Father, and as abiding in
   the Father abode also in us; and so we might arrive at unity with the
   Father, since in Him Who dwells naturally in the Father by birth, we
   also dwell naturally, while He Himself abides naturally in us also.

   16. Again, how natural this unity is in us He has Himself testified on
   this wise,--He who eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood abideth in Me,
   and I in him [906] . For no man shall dwell in Him, save him in whom He
   dwells Himself, for the only flesh which He has taken to Himself is the
   flesh of those who have taken His. Now He had already taught before the
   sacrament of this perfect unity, saying, As the living Father sent Me,
   and I live through the Father, so he that eateth My flesh shall himself
   also live through Me [907] . So then He lives through the Father, and
   as He lives through the Father in like manner we live through His
   flesh. For all comparison is chosen to shape our understanding, so that
   we may grasp the subject of which we treat by help of the analogy set
   before us. This is the cause of our life that we have Christ dwelling
   within our carnal selves through the flesh, and we shall live through
   Him in the same manner as He lives through the Father. If, then, we
   live naturally through Him according to the flesh, that is, have
   partaken of the nature of His flesh, must He not naturally have the
   Father within Himself according to the Spirit since He Himself lives
   through the Father? And He lives through the Father because His birth
   has not implanted in Him an alien and different nature inasmuch as His
   very being is from Him yet is not divided from Him by any barrier of an
   unlikeness of nature, for within Himself He has the Father through the
   birth in the power of the nature.

   17. I have dwelt upon these facts because the heretics falsely maintain
   that the union between Father and Son is one of will only, and make use
   of the example of our own union with God, as though we were united to
   the Son and through the Son to the Father by mere obedience and a
   devout will, and none of the natural verity of communion were
   vouchsafed us through the sacrament of the Body and Blood; although the
   glory of the Son bestowed upon us through the Son abiding in us after
   the flesh, while we are united in Him corporeally and inseparably, bids
   us preach the mystery of the true and natural unity.

   18. So we have made our reply to the folly of our violent opponents,
   merely to prove the emptiness of their falsehoods and so prevent them
   from misleading the unwary by the error of their vain and foolish
   statements. But the faith of the Gospel did not of necessity require
   our answer. The Lord prayed on our behalf for our union with God, but
   God keeps His own unity and abides in it. It is not through any
   mysterious appointment of God that they are one, but through a birth of
   nature, for God loses nothing in begetting Him from Himself. They are
   one, for the things which are not plucked out of His hand are not
   plucked out of the hand of the Father [908] , for, when He is known,
   the Father is known, for, when He is seen, the Father is seen, for what
   He speaks the Father speaks as abiding in Him, for in His works the
   Father works, for He is in the Father and the Father in Him [909] .
   This proceeds from no creation but from birth; it is not brought about
   by will but by power; it is no agreement of mind that speaks, it is
   nature; because to be created and to be born are not one and the same,
   any more than to will and to be able; neither is it the same thing to
   agree and to abide.

   19. Thus we do not deny a unanimity between the Father and the
   Son,--for heretics are accustomed to utter this falsehood, that since
   we do not accept concord by itself as the bond of unity we declare Them
   to be at variance. But let them listen how it is that we do not deny
   such a unanimity. The Father and the Son are one in nature, honour,
   power, and the same nature cannot will things that are contrary.
   Moreover, let them listen to the testimony of the Son as touching the
   unity of nature between Himself and the Father, for He says, When that
   advocate is come, Whom I shall send to you from the Father, the Spirit
   of truth Who proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me [910] .
   The Advocate shall come and the Son shall send Him from the Father, and
   He is the Spirit of truth Who proceedeth from the Father. Let the whole
   following of heretics arouse the keenest powers of their wit; let them
   now seek for what lies they can tell to the unlearned, and declare what
   that is which the Son sends from the Father. He Who sends manifests His
   power in that which He sends. But as to that which He sends from the
   Father, how shall we regard it, as received or sent forth or begotten?
   For His words that He will send from the Father must imply one or other
   of these modes of sending. And He will send from the Father that Spirit
   of truth which proceedeth from the Father; He therefore cannot be the
   Recipient, since He is revealed as the Sender. It only remains to make
   sure of our conviction on the point, whether we are to believe an
   egress of a co-existent Being, or a procession of a Being begotten.

   20. For the present I forbear to expose their licence of speculation,
   some of them holding that the Paraclete Spirit comes from the Father or
   from the Son. For our Lord has not left this in uncertainty, for after
   these same words He spoke thus,--I have yet many things to say unto
   you, but ye cannot bear them now. When He, the Spirit of truth, is
   come, He shall guide you into all truth: for He shall not speak from
   Himself: but what things soever He shall hear, these shall He speak;
   and He shall declare unto you the things that are to come. He shall
   glorify Me: for He shall receive of Mine and shall declare it unto you.
   All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine: therefore said I, He
   shall receive of Mine and shall declare it unto you [911] . Accordingly
   He receives from the Son, Who is both sent by Him, and proceeds from
   the Father. Now I ask whether to receive from the Son is the same thing
   as to proceed from the Father. But if one believes that there is a
   difference between receiving from the Son and proceeding from the
   Father, surely to receive from the Son and to receive from the Father
   will be regarded as one and the same thing. For our Lord Himself says,
   Because He shall receive of Mine and shall declare it unto you. All
   things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine: therefore said I, He shall
   receive of Mine and shall declare it unto you. That which He will
   receive,--whether it will be power, or excellence, or teaching,--the
   Son has said must be received from Him, and again He indicates that
   this same thing must be received from the Father. For when He says that
   all things whatsoever the Father hath are His, and that for this cause
   He declared that it must be received from His own, He teaches also that
   what is received from the Father is yet received from Himself, because
   all things that the Father hath are His. Such a unity admits no
   difference, nor does it make any difference from whom that is received,
   which given by the Father is described as given by the Son. Is a mere
   unity of will brought forward here also? All things which the Father
   hath are the Son's, and all things which the Son hath are the Father's.
   For He Himself saith, And all Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine [912]
   . It is not yet the place to shew why He spoke thus, For He shall
   receive of Mine: for this points to some subsequent time, when it is
   revealed that He shall receive. Now at any rate He says that He will
   receive of Himself, because all things that the Father had were His.
   Dissever if thou canst the unity of the nature, and introduce some
   necessary unlikeness through which the Son may not exist in unity of
   nature. For the Spirit of truth proceedeth from the Father and is sent
   from the Father by the Son. All things that the Father hath are the
   Son's; and for this cause whatever He Who is to be sent shall receive,
   He shall receive from the Son, because all things that the Father hath
   are the Son's. The nature in all respects maintains its law, and
   because Both are One that same Godhead is signified as existing in Both
   through generation and nativity; since the Son affirms that that which
   the Spirit of truth shall receive from the Father is to be given by
   Himself. So the frowardness of heretics must not be allowed an
   unchecked licence of impious beliefs, in refusing to acknowledge that
   this saying of the Lord,--that because all things which the Father hath
   are His, therefore the Spirit of truth shall receive of Him,--is to be
   referred to unity of nature.

   21. Let us listen to that chosen vessel and teacher of the Gentiles,
   when he had already commended the faith of the people of Rome because
   of their understanding of the truth. For wishing to teach the unity of
   nature in the case of the Father and the Son, he speaks thus, But ye
   are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God is
   in you. But if any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.
   But if Christ is in you, the body indeed is dead through sin, but the
   Spirit is life through righteousness. But if the Spirit of Him Who
   raised up Christ from the dead dwelleth in you; He Who raised up Christ
   from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because of His
   Spirit Who dwelleth in you [913] . We are all spiritual if the Spirit
   of God dwells in us. But this Spirit of God is also the Spirit of
   Christ, and though the Spirit of Christ is in us, yet His Spirit is
   also in us Who raised Christ from the dead, and He Who raised Christ
   from the dead shall quicken our mortal bodies also on account of His
   Spirit that dwelleth in us. We are quickened therefore on account of
   the Spirit of Christ that dwelleth in us, through Him Who raised Christ
   from the dead. And since the Spirit of Him Who raised Christ from the
   dead dwells in us, and yet the Spirit of Christ is in us, nevertheless
   the Spirit Which is in us cannot but be the Spirit of God. Separate,
   then, O heretic, the Spirit of Christ from the Spirit of God, and the
   Spirit of Christ raised from the dead from the Spirit of God Which
   raises Christ from the dead; when the Spirit of Christ that dwelleth in
   us is the Spirit of God, and when the Spirit of Christ Who was raised
   from the dead is yet the Spirit of God Who raises Christ from the dead.

   22. And now I ask whether thou thinkest that in the Spirit of God is
   signified a nature or a property belonging to a nature. For a nature is
   not identical with a thing belonging to it, just as neither is a man
   identical with what belongs to a man, nor fire with what belongs to
   fire itself, and in like manner God is not the same as that which
   belongs to God.

   23. For I am aware that the Son of God is revealed under the title
   Spirit of God in order that we may understand the presence of the
   Father in Him, and that the term Spirit of God may be employed to
   indicate Either, and that this is shewn not only on the authority of
   prophets but of evangelists also, when it is said, The Spirit of the
   Lord is upon Me; therefore He hath anointed Me [914] . And again,
   Behold My Servant Whom I have chosen, My beloved in Whom My soul is
   well pleased, I will put My Spirit upon Him [915] . And when the Lord
   Himself bears witness of Himself, But if I in the Spirit of God cast
   out devils, then has the kingdom of God come upon you [916] . For the
   passages seem without any doubt to denote either Father or Son, while
   they yet manifest the excellence of nature.

   24. For I think that the expression Spirit of God' was used with
   respect to Each, lest we should believe that the Son was present in the
   Father or the Father in the Son in a merely corporeal manner, that is,
   lest God might be thought to abide in one position and exist nowhere
   else apart from Himself. For a man or any other thing like him, when he
   is in one place, cannot be in another, because what is in one place is
   confined to the place where it is: his nature cannot allow him to be
   everywhere when he exists in some one position. But God is a living
   Force, of infinite power, present everywhere and nowhere absent, and
   manifests His whole self through His own, and signifies that His own
   are naught else than Himself, so that where they are He may be
   understood to be Himself. Yet we must not think that, after a corporeal
   fashion, when He is in one place He ceases to be everywhere, for
   through His own things He is still present in all places, while the
   things which are His are none other than His own self. Now these things
   have been said to make us understand what is meant by nature.'

   25. Now I think that it ought to be clearly understood that God the
   Father is denoted by the Spirit of God, because our Lord Jesus Christ
   declared that the Spirit of the Lord was upon Him since He anoints Him
   and sends Him to preach the Gospel. For in Him is made manifest the
   excellence of the Father's nature, disclosing that the Son partakes of
   His nature even when born in the flesh through the mystery of this
   spiritual unction, since after the birth ratified in His baptism this
   intimation of His inherent Sonship was heard as a voice bore witness
   from Heaven:--Thou art My Son; this day have I begotten Thee [917] .
   For not even He Himself can be understood as resting upon Himself or
   coming to Himself from Heaven, or as bestowing on Himself the title of
   Son: but all this demonstration was for our faith, in order that under
   the mystery of a complete and true birth we should recognise that the
   unity of the nature dwells in the Son Who had begun to be also man. We
   have thus found that in the Spirit of God the Father is designated; but
   we understand that the Son is indicated in the same way, when He says:
   But if I in the Spirit of God cast out devils, then has the kingdom of
   God come upon you. That is, He shews clearly that He, by the power of
   His nature, casts out devils, which cannot be cast out save by the
   Spirit of God. The phrase Spirit of God' denotes also the Paraclete
   Spirit, and that not only on the testimony of prophets but also of
   apostles, when it is said:--This is that which was spoken through the
   Prophet, It shall come to pass on the last day, saith the Lord, I will
   pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and their
   daughters shall prophesy [918] . And we learn that all this prophecy
   was fulfilled in the case of the Apostles, when, after the sending of
   the Holy Spirit, they all spoke with the tongues of the Gentiles.

   26. Now we have of necessity set these things forth with this object,
   that in whatever direction the deception of heretics betakes itself, it
   might yet be kept in check by the boundaries and limits of the gospel
   truth. For Christ dwells in us, and where Christ dwells God dwells. And
   when the Spirit of Christ dwells in us, this indwelling means not that
   any other Spirit dwells in us than the Spirit of God. But if it is
   understood that Christ dwells in us through the Holy Spirit, we must
   yet recognise this Spirit of God as also the Spirit of Christ. And
   since the nature dwells in us as the nature of one substantive Being,
   we must regard the nature of the Son as identical with that of the
   Father, since the Holy Spirit Who is both the Spirit of Christ and the
   Spirit of God is proved to be a Being of one nature. I ask now,
   therefore, how can They fail to be one by nature? The Spirit of Truth
   proceeds from the Father, He is sent by the Son and receives from the
   Son. But all things that the Father hath are the Son's, and for this
   cause He Who receives from Him is the Spirit of God but at the same
   time the Spirit of Christ. The Spirit is a Being of the nature of the
   Son but the same Being is of the nature of the Father. He is the Spirit
   of Him Who raised Christ from the dead; but this is no other than the
   Spirit of Christ Who was so raised. The nature of Christ and of God
   must differ in some respect so as not to be the same, if it can be
   shewn that the Spirit which is of God is not the Spirit of Christ also.

   27. But you, heretic, as you wildly rave and are driven about by the
   Spirit of your deadly doctrine the Apostle seizes and constrains,
   establishing Christ for us as the foundation of our faith, being well
   aware also of that saying of our Lord, If a man love Me, he will also
   keep My word; and My Father will love him, and We will come unto him,
   and make Our abode with him [919] . For by this He testified that while
   the Spirit of Christ abides in us the Spirit of God abides in us, and
   that the Spirit of Him that was raised from the dead differs not from
   the Spirit of Him that raised Him from the dead. For they come and
   dwell in us: and I ask whether they will come as aliens associated
   together and make Their abode, or in unity of nature? Nay, the teacher
   of the Gentiles contends that it is not two Spirits--the Spirits of God
   and of Christ--that are present in those who believe, but the Spirit of
   Christ which is also the Spirit of God. This is no joint indwelling, it
   is one indwelling: yet an indwelling under the mysterious semblance of
   a joint indwelling, for it is not the case that two Spirits indwell,
   nor is one that indwells different from the other. For there is in us
   the Spirit of God and there is also in us the Spirit of Christ, and
   when the Spirit of Christ is in us there is also in us the Spirit of
   God. And so since what is of God is also of Christ, and what is of
   Christ is also of God, Christ cannot be anything different from what
   God is. Christ, therefore, is God, one Spirit with God.

   28. Now the Apostle asserts that those words in the Gospel, I and the
   Father are one [920] , imply unity of nature and not a solitary single
   Being, as he writes to the Corinthians, Wherefore I give you to
   understand, that no man in the Spirit of God calleth Jesus anathema
   [921] . Perceivest thou now, O heretic, in what spirit thou callest
   Christ a creature? For since they are under a curse who have served the
   creature more than the Creator--in affirming Christ to be a creature,
   learn what thou art, since thou knowest full well that the worship of
   the creature is accursed. And observe what follows, And no one can call
   Jesus Lord, but in the Holy Spirit [922] . Dost thou perceive what is
   lacking to thee, when thou deniest Christ what is His own? If thou
   holdest that Christ is Lord through His Divine nature, thou hast the
   Holy Spirit. But if He be Lord merely by a name of adoption thou
   lackest the Holy Spirit, and art animated by a spirit of error: because
   no one can call Jesus Lord, but in the Holy Spirit. But when thou
   sayest that He is a creature rather than God, although thou stylest Him
   Lord, still thou dost not say that He is the Lord. For to thee He is
   Lord as one of a common class and by a familiar name, rather than by
   nature. Yet learn from Paul His nature.

   29. For the Apostle goes on to say, Now there are diversities of gifts,
   but there is the same Spirit; and there are diversities of
   ministrations but one and the same Lord; and there are diversities of
   workings but the same God, Who worketh all things in all. But to each
   one is given the manifestation of the Spirit for that which profiteth
   [923] . In this passage before us we perceive a fourfold statement: in
   the diversity of gifts it is the same Spirit, in the diversity of
   ministrations it is the very same Lord, in the diversity of workings it
   is the same God, and in the bestowal of that which is profitable there
   is a manifestation of the Spirit. And in order that the bestowal of
   what is profitable might be recognised in the manifestation of the
   Spirit, he continues: To one indeed is given through the Spirit the
   word of wisdom; and to another the word of knowledge according to the
   same Spirit; to another faith in the same Spirit; to another the gift
   of healing in the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to
   another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another kinds of
   tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues [924] .

   30. And indeed that which we called the fourth statement, that is the
   manifestation of the Spirit in the bestowal of what is profitable, has
   a clear meaning. For the Apostle has enumerated the profitable gifts
   through which this manifestation of the Spirit took place. Now in these
   diverse activities that Gift is set forth in no uncertain light of
   which our Lord had spoken to the apostles when He taught them not to
   depart from Jerusalem; but wait, said He, for the promise of the Father
   which ye heard from My lips: for John indeed baptized with water, but
   ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, which ye shall also receive
   not many days hence [925] . And again: But ye shall receive power when
   the Holy Ghost cometh upon you; and ye shall be My witnesses in
   Jerusalem, and in all Judæa, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost
   part of the earth [926] . He bids them wait for the promise of the
   Father of which they had heard from His lips. We may be sure that here
   [927] we have a reference to the Father's same promise. Hence it is by
   these miraculous workings that the manifestation of the Spirit takes
   place. For the gift of the Spirit is manifest, where wisdom makes
   utterance and the words of life are heard, and where there is the
   knowledge that comes of God-given insight, lest after the fashion of
   beasts through ignorance of God we should fail to know the Author of
   our life; or by faith in God, lest by not believing the Gospel of God,
   we should be outside His Gospel; or by the gift of healings, that by
   the cure of diseases we should bear witness to His grace Who bestoweth
   these things; or by the working of miracles, that what we do may be
   understood to be the power of God, or by prophesy, that through our
   understanding of doctrine we might be known to be taught of God; or by
   discerning of spirits, that we should not be unable to tell whether any
   one speaks with a holy or a perverted spirit; or by kinds of tongues,
   that the speaking in tongues may be bestowed as a sign of the gift of
   the Holy Spirit; or by the interpretation of tongues, that the faith of
   those that hear may not be imperilled through ignorance, since the
   interpreter of a tongue explains the tongue to those who are ignorant
   of it. Thus in all these things distributed to each one to profit
   withal there is the manifestation of the Spirit, the gift of the Spirit
   being apparent through these marvellous advantages bestowed upon each.

   31. Now the blessed Apostle Paul in revealing the secret of these
   heavenly mysteries, most difficult to human comprehension, has
   preserved a clear enunciation and a carefully worded caution in order
   to shew that these diverse gifts are given through the Spirit and in
   the Spirit (for to be given through the Spirit and in the Spirit is not
   the same thing), because the granting of a gift which is exercised in
   the Spirit is yet bestowed through the Spirit. But he sums up these
   diversities of gifts thus: Now all these things worketh one and the
   same Spirit, dividing to each one as He will [928] . Now, therefore, I
   ask what Spirit works these things, dividing to each one according as
   He wills: is it He by Whom or He in Whom there is this distribution of
   gifts [929] ? But if any one shall dare to say that it is the same
   Person which is indicated, the Apostle will refute so faulty an
   opinion, for he says above, And there are diversities of workings, but
   the same God Who worketh all things in all. So there is one Who
   distributes and another in Whom the distribution is vouchsafed. Yet
   know that it is always God Who worketh all these things, but in such a
   way that Christ works, and the Son in His working performs the Father's
   work. And if in the Holy Spirit thou confessest Jesus to be Lord,
   understand the force of that threefold indication in the Apostle's
   letter; forasmuch as in the diversities of gifts, it is the same
   Spirit, and in the diversities of ministrations it is the same Lord,
   and in the diversities of workings it is the same God; and again, one
   Spirit that worketh all things distributing to each according as He
   will. And grasp the idea if thou canst that the Lord in the
   distribution of ministrations, and God in the distribution of workings,
   are this one and the same Spirit Who both works and distributes as He
   will; because in the distribution of gifts there is one Spirit, and the
   same Spirit works and distributes.

   32. But if this one Spirit of one Divinity, one in both God and Lord
   through the mystery of the birth, does not please thee, then point out
   to me what Spirit both works and distributes these diverse gifts to us,
   and in what Spirit He does this. But, thou must shew me nothing but
   what accords with our faith, because the Apostle shews us Who is to be
   understood, saying, For as the body is one, and hath many members, and
   all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so also is
   Christ [930] . He affirms that diversities of gifts come from one Lord
   Jesus Christ Who is the body of all. Because after he had made known
   the Lord in ministration, and made known also God in workings, he yet
   shews that one Spirit both works and distributes all these things,
   distributing these varieties of His gracious gifts for the perfecting
   of one body.

   33. Unless perchance we think that the Apostle did not keep to the
   principle of unity in that he said, And there are diversities of
   ministrations, and the same Lord, and there are diversities of
   workings, but the same God [931] . So that because he referred
   ministrations to the Lord and workings to God, he does not appear to
   have understood one and the same Being in ministrations and operations.
   Learn how these members which minister are also members which work,
   when he says, Ye are the body of Christ, and of Him members indeed. For
   God hath set some in the Church, first apostles, in whom is the word of
   wisdom; secondly prophets, in whom is the gift of knowledge; thirdly
   teachers, in whom is the doctrine of faith; next mighty works, among
   which are the healing of diseases, the power to help, governments by
   the prophets, and gifts of either speaking or interpreting divers kinds
   of tongues. Clearly these are the Church's agents of ministry and work
   of whom the body of Christ consists; and God has ordained them. But
   perhaps thou maintainest that they have not been ordained by Christ,
   because it was God Who ordained them. But thou shalt hear what the
   Apostle says himself: Now to each one of us was the grace given
   according to the measure of the gift of Christ. And again, He that
   descended is the same also that ascended far above all the heavens that
   He might fill all things. And he gave some to be apostles; and some,
   prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for
   the perfecting of the saints, for the work of ministering [932] . Are
   not then the gifts of ministration Christ's, while they are also the
   gifts of God?

   34. But if impiety has assumed to itself that because he says, The same
   Lord and the same God [933] , they are not in unity of nature, I will
   support this interpretation with what you deem still stronger
   arguments. For the same Apostle says, But for us there is one God, the
   Father, of Whom are all things, and we in Him, and one Lord Jesus
   Christ, through Whom are all things, and we through Him [934] . And
   again, One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, Who
   is both through all, and in us all [935] . By these words one God and
   one Lord it would seem that to God only is attributed, as to one God,
   the property of being God; since the property of oneness does not admit
   of partnership with another. Verily how rare and hard to attain are
   such spiritual gifts! How truly is the manifestation of the Spirit seen
   in the bestowal of such useful gifts! And with reason has this order in
   the distribution of graces been appointed, that the foremost should be
   the word of wisdom; for true it is, And no one can call Jesus Lord but
   in the Holy Spirit [936] , because but through this word of wisdom
   Christ could not be understood to be Lord; that then there should
   follow next the word of understanding, that we might speak with
   understanding what we know, and might know the word of wisdom; and that
   the third gift should consist of faith, seeing that those leading and
   higher graces would be unprofitable gifts did we not believe that He is
   God. So that in the true sense of this greatest and most noble
   utterance of the Apostle no heretics possess either the word of wisdom
   or the word of knowledge or the faith of religion, inasmuch as wilful
   wickedness, being incapable of understanding, is void of knowledge of
   the word and of genuineness of faith. For no one utters what he does
   not know; nor can he believe that which he cannot utter; and thus when
   the Apostle preached one God, a proselyte as He was from the Law, and
   called to the gospel of Christ, he has attained to the confession of a
   perfect faith. And lest the simplicity of a seemingly unguarded
   statement might afford heretics any opportunity for denying through the
   preaching of one God the birth of the Son, the Apostle has set forth
   one God while indicating His peculiar attribute in these words, One God
   the Father, of Whom are all things, and we in Him [937] , in order that
   He Who is God might also be acknowledged as Father. Afterwards,
   inasmuch as this bare belief in one God the Father would not suffice
   for salvation, he added, And one, our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom
   are all things, and we through Him, shewing that the purity of saving
   faith consists in the preaching of one God and one Lord, so that we
   might believe in one God the Father and one Lord Jesus Christ. For he
   knew full well how our Lord had said, For this is the will of My
   Father, that every one that seeth the Son and believeth on Him should
   have eternal life [938] . But in fixing the order of the Church's
   faith, and basing our faith upon the Father and the Son, he has uttered
   the mystery of that indivisible and indissoluble unity and faith in the
   words one God and one Lord.

   35. First of all, then, O heretic that hast no part in the Spirit which
   spoke by the Apostle, learn thy folly. If thou wrongly employest the
   confession of one God to deny the Godhead of Christ, on the ground that
   where one God exists He must be regarded as solitary, and that to be
   One is characteristic and peculiar to Him Who is One,--what sense wilt
   thou assign to the statement that Jesus Christ is one Lord? For if, as
   thou assertest, the fact that the Father alone is God has not left to
   Christ the possibility of Godhead, it must needs be also according to
   thee that the fact of Christ being one Lord does not leave God the
   possibility of being Lord, seeing that thou wilt have it that to be One
   must be the essential property of Him Who is One. Hence if thou deniest
   that the one Lord Christ is also God, thou must needs deny that the one
   God the Father is also Lord. And what will the greatness of God amount
   to if He be not Lord, and the power of the Lord if He be not God: since
   it (viz., the greatness or power) causes that to be God which is Lord,
   and makes that Lord which is God?

   36. Now the Apostle, maintaining the true sense of the Lord's saying, I
   and the Father are one [939] , whilst He asserts that Both are One,
   signifies that Both are One not after the manner of the soleness of a
   single being, but in the unity of the Spirit; for one God the Father
   and one Christ the Lord, since Each is both Lord and God, do not yet
   admit in our creed either two Gods or two Lords. So then Each is one,
   and though one, neither is sole. We shall not be able to express the
   mystery of the faith except in the words of the Apostle. For there is
   one God and one Lord, and the fact that there is one God and one Lord
   proves that there is at once Lordship in God, and Godhead in the Lord.
   Thou canst not maintain a union of person, so making God single; nor
   yet canst thou divide the Spirit, so preventing the Two from being One
   [940] . Nor in the one God and one Lord wilt thou be able to separate
   the power, so that He Who is Lord should not also be God, and He Who is
   God should not also be Lord. For the Apostle in the enunciation of the
   Names has taken care not to preach either two Gods or two Lords. And
   for this reason he has employed such a method of teaching as in the one
   Lord Christ to set forth also one God, and in the one God the Father to
   set forth also one Lord. And, not to misguide us into the blasphemy
   that God is solitary, which would destroy the birth of the
   Only-begotten God, he has confessed both Father and Christ.

   37. Unless perchance the frenzy of utter desperation will venture to
   rush to such lengths that, inasmuch as the Apostle has called Christ
   Lord, no one ought to acknowledge Him as aught else save Lord, and that
   because He has the property of Lord He has not the true Godhead. But
   Paul knows full well that Christ is God, for he says, Whose are the
   fathers, and of whom is Christ, Who is God over all [941] . It is no
   creature here who is reckoned as God; nay, it is the God of things
   created Who is God over all.

   38. Now that He Who is God over all is also Spirit inseparable from the
   Father, learn also from that very utterance of the Apostle, of which we
   are now speaking. For when he confessed one God the Father from Whom
   are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ through Whom are all things;
   what difference, I ask, did he intend by saying that all things are
   from God and that all things are through Christ? Can He possibly be
   regarded as of a nature and spirit separable from Himself, He from Whom
   and through Whom are all things? For all things have come into being
   through the Son out of nothing, and the Apostle has referred them to
   God the Father, From Whom are all things, but also to the Son, through
   Whom are all things. And I find here no difference, since by Each is
   exercised the same power. For if with regard to the subsistence of the
   universe it was an exact sufficient statement that things created are
   from God, what need was there to state that the things which are from
   God are through Christ, unless it be one and the same thing to be
   through Christ and from God? But as it has been ascribed to Each of
   Them that They are Lord and God in such wise that each title belongs to
   Both, so too from Whom and through Whom is here referred to Both; and
   this to shew the unity of Both, not to make known God's singleness. The
   language of the Apostle affords no opening for wicked error, nor is his
   faith too exalted for careful statement. For he has guarded himself by
   those specially appropriate words from being understood to mean two
   Gods or a solitary God: for while he rejects oneness of person he yet
   does not divide the unity of Godhead. For this from Whom are all things
   and through Whom are all things, although it did not posit a solitary
   Deity in the sole possession of majesty, must yet set forth One not
   different in efficiency, since from Whom are all things and through
   Whom are all things must signify an Author of the same nature engaged
   in the same work. He affirms, moreover, that Each is properly of the
   same nature. For after announcing the depth of the riches and wisdom
   and knowledge of God, and after asserting the mystery of His
   inscrutable judgments and avowing our ignorance of His ways past
   finding out, he has yet made use of the exercise of human faith, and
   rendered this homage to the depth of the unsearchable and inscrutable
   mysteries of heaven, For of Him and through Him and in Him are all
   things: to Him be glory for ever. Amen [942] . He employs to indicate
   the one nature, that which cannot but be the work of one nature.

   39. For whereas he has specially ascribed to God that all things are
   from Him, and he has assigned as a peculiar property to Christ, that
   all things are through Him, and it is now the glory of God that from
   Him and through Him and in Him are all things; and whereas the Spirit
   of God is the same as the Spirit of Christ, or whereas in the
   ministration of the Lord and in the working of God, one Spirit both
   works and divides, They cannot but be one Whose properties are those of
   one; since in the same Lord the Son, and in the same God the Father,
   one and the same Spirit distributing in the same Holy Spirit
   accomplishes all things. How worthy is this saint of the knowledge of
   exalted and heavenly mysteries, adopted and chosen to share in the
   secret things of God, preserving a due silence over things which may
   not be uttered, true apostle of Christ! How by the announcement of his
   clear teaching has he restrained the imaginations of human wilfulness,
   confessing, as he does, one God the Father and one Lord Jesus Christ,
   so that meanwhile no one can either preach two Gods or one solitary
   God; although He Who is not one person cannot multiply into two Gods,
   nor on the other hand can They Who are not two Gods be understood to be
   one single person; while meantime the revelation of God as Father
   demonstrates the true nativity of Christ.

   40. Thrust out now your quivering and hissing tongues, ye vipers of
   heresy, whether it be thou Sabellius or thou Photinus, or ye who now
   preach that the Only-begotten God is a creature. Whosoever denies the
   Son shall hear of one God the Father, because inasmuch as a father
   becomes a father only by having a son, this name Father necessarily
   connotes the existence of the Son. And again, let him who takes away
   from the Son the unity of an identical nature, acknowledge one Lord
   Jesus Christ. For unless through unity of the Spirit He is one Lord
   room will not be left for God the Father to be Lord. Again, let him who
   holds the Son to have become Son in time and by His Incarnation, learn
   that through Him are all things and we through Him, and that His
   timeless Infinity was creating all things before time was. And
   meanwhile let him read again that there is one hope of our calling, and
   one baptism, and one faith; if, after that, he oppose himself to the
   preaching of the Apostle, he, being accursed because he framed strange
   doctrines of his own device, is neither called nor baptized nor
   believing; because in one God the Father and in one Lord Jesus Christ
   there lies the one faith of one hope and baptism. And no alien doctrine
   can boast that it has a place among the truths which belong to one God
   and Lord and hope and baptism and faith.

   41. So then the one faith is, to confess the Father in the Son and the
   Son in the Father through the unity of an indivisible nature, not
   confused but inseparable, not intermingled but identical, not conjoined
   but coexisting, not incomplete but perfect. For there is birth not
   separation, there is a Son not an adoption; and He is God, not a
   creature. Neither is He a God of a different kind, but the Father and
   Son are one: for the nature was not altered by birth so as to be alien
   from the property of its original. So the Apostle holds the faith of
   the Son abiding in the Father and the Father in the Son when he
   proclaims that for him there is one God the Father and one Lord Christ,
   since in Christ the Lord there was also God, and in God the Father
   there was also Lord, and They Two are that unity which is God, and They
   Two are also that unity which is the Lord, for reason indicates that
   there must be something imperfect in God unless He be Lord, and in the
   Lord unless He were God. And so since Both are one, and Both are
   implied under either name, and neither exists apart from the unity, the
   Apostle has not gone beyond the preaching of the Gospel in his
   teaching, nor does Christ when He speaks in Paul differ from the words
   which He spoke while abiding in the world in bodily form.

   42. For the Lord had said in the gospels, Work not for the meat which
   perisheth, but for the meat which abideth unto life eternal, which the
   Son of Man shall give unto you: for Him the Father, even God, hath
   sealed. They said therefore unto Him, What must we do that we may work
   the works of God? And He said unto them, This is the work of God, that
   ye believe on Him Whom He hath sent [943] . In setting forth the
   mystery of His Incarnation and His Godhead our Lord has also uttered
   the teaching of our faith and hope that we should work for food, not
   that which perisheth but that which abideth for ever; that we should
   remember that this food of eternity is given us by the Son of Man; that
   we should know the Son of Man as sealed by God the Father; that we
   should know that this is the work of God, even faith in Him Whom He has
   sent. And Who is it Whom the Father has sent? Even He Whom the Father
   has sealed. And Who is He Whom the Father has sealed? In truth, the Son
   of Man, even He who gives the food of eternal life. And further who are
   they to whom He gives it? They who shall work for the food that does
   not perish. Thus, then, the work for this food is at the same time the
   work of God, namely, to believe on Him Whom He has sent. But these
   words are uttered by the Son of Man. And how shall the Son of Man give
   the food of life eternal? Why, he knows not the mystery of his own
   salvation, who knows not that the Son of Man, bestowing food unto life
   eternal, has been sealed by God the Father. At this point I now ask in
   what sense are we to understand that the Son of Man has been sealed by
   God the Father?

   43. Now we ought to recognise first of all that God has spoken not for
   Himself but for us, and that He has so far tempered the language of His
   utterance as to enable the weakness of our nature to grasp and
   understand it. For after being rebuked by the Jews for having made
   Himself the equal of God by professing to be the Son of God, He had
   answered that He Himself did all things that the Father did, and that
   He had received all judgment from the Father; moreover that He must be
   honoured even as the Father. And in all these things having before
   declared Himself Son, He had made Himself equal to the Father in
   honour, power and nature. Afterwards He had said that as the Father had
   life in Himself, so He had given the Son to have life in Himself,
   wherein He signified that by virtue of the mystery of the birth He
   possessed the unity of the same nature. For when He says that He has
   what the Father has, He means that He has the Father's self. For that
   God is not after human fashion of a composite being, so that in Him
   there is a difference of kind between Possessor and Possessed; but all
   that He is is life, a nature, that is, complete, absolute and infinite,
   not composed of dissimilar elements but with one life permeating the
   whole. And since this life was in such wise given as it was possessed,
   although the fact that it was given manifestly reveals the birth of the
   Recipient, it yet does not involve a difference of kind since the life
   given was such as was possessed.

   44. Therefore after this manifold and precise revelation of the
   presence of the Father's nature in Himself, He goes on to say, For Him
   hath the Father sealed, even God [944] . It is the nature of a seal to
   exhibit the whole form of the figure graven upon it, and that an
   impression taken from it reproduces it in every respect; and since it
   receives the whole of that which is impressed, it displays also in
   itself wholly whoever has been impressed upon it. Yet this comparison
   is not adequate to exemplify the Divine birth, because in seals there
   is a matter, difference of nature, and an act of impression, whereby
   the likeness of stronger natures is impressed upon things of a more
   yielding nature. But the Only-begotten God, Who was also through the
   Mystery of our salvation the Son of Man, desiring to point out to us
   the likeness of His Father's proper nature in Himself, said that He was
   sealed by God; because the Son of Man was about to give the food of
   eternal life, and that we thereby might perceive in Him the power of
   giving food unto eternity, in that He possessed within Himself all the
   fulness of His Father's form, even of the God Who sealed Him: so that
   what God had sealed should display in itself none other than the form
   of the God Who sealed it. These things indeed the Lord spoke to the
   Jews, who could not receive His saying because of unbelief.

   45. But in us the preacher of the Gospel by the Spirit of Christ Who
   spoke through him, instils the knowledge of this His proper nature when
   he says, Who, being in the form of God, thought it not a thing to grasp
   at that He was equal with God, but emptied Himself, taking the form of
   a servant [945] . For He, Whom God had sealed, could be naught else
   than the form of God, and that which has been sealed in the form of God
   must needs present at the same time imaged forth within itself all that
   God possesses. And for this cause the Apostle taught that He Whom God
   sealed is God abiding in the form of God. For when about to speak of
   the Mystery of the body assumed and born in Him, he says, He thought it
   not a thing to grasp at that He was equal with God, but emptied
   Himself, taking the form of a servant [946] . As regards His being in
   the form of God, by virtue of God's seal upon Him, he still remained
   God. But inasmuch as He was to take the form of a servant and become
   obedient unto death, not grasping at His equality with God, He emptied
   Himself through obedience to take the form of a slave. And He emptied
   Himself of the form of God, that is, of that wherein He was equal with
   God--not that He regarded His equality with God as any
   encroachment,--although He was in the form of God and equal with God
   and sealed by God as God.

   46. At this point I ask whether He Who abides as God in the form of God
   is a God of another kind, as we perceive in the case of seals in
   respect of the likenesses which stamp and those which are stamped,
   since a steel die impressed upon lead or a gem upon wax shapes the
   figure cut in it or imprints that which stands in relief upon it. But
   if there be any one so foolish and senseless as to think that that,
   pertaining to Himself, which God fashions to be God, is aught but God,
   and that He Who is in the form of God is in any respect anything else
   save God after the mystery of His Incarnation and of His humility, made
   perfect through obedience even unto the death of the cross, he shall
   hear, by the confession of things in heaven and things on earth and
   things under the earth and of every tongue, that Jesus is in the glory
   of God the Father. If then, when His form had become that of a slave He
   abides in such glory, how, I ask, did He abide when in the form of God?
   Must not Christ the Spirit have been in the nature of Gods--for this is
   what is meant by in the glory of God'--when Christ as Jesus, that is,
   born as man, exists in the glory of God the Father?

   47. In all things the blessed Apostle preserves the unchangeable
   teaching of the Gospel faith. The Lord Jesus Christ is proclaimed as
   God in such wise that neither does the Apostle's faith, by calling Him
   a God of a different order, fall away to the confession of two Gods,
   nor by making God the Son inseparable from the Father does it leave an
   opening for the unholy doctrine of a single and solitary God. For when
   he says, in the form of God and in the glory of the Father the Apostle
   neither teaches that They differ one from another, nor allows us to
   think of Him as not existing. For He Who is in the form of God neither
   ends by becoming another God nor Himself loses His Godhead: for He
   cannot be severed from the form of God since He exists in it, nor is
   He, Who is in the form of God, not God Just as He Who is in the glory
   of God cannot be aught else than God, and, since He is God in the glory
   of God, cannot be proclaimed as another god and one different from the
   true God, seeing that by reason of the fact that He is in the glory of
   God He possesses naturally from Him in Whose glory He is, the property
   of divinity.

   48. But there is no danger that the one faith will cease to be such
   through diversity in its preaching. The Evangelist had taught that our
   Lord said, He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also [947] . But
   has Paul, the teacher of the Gentiles, forgotten or kept back the
   meaning of the Lord's words, when he says, Who is the image of the
   invisible God [948] ? I ask whether He is the visible likeness of the
   invisible God, and whether the infinite God can also be presented to
   view under the likeness of a finite form? For a likeness must needs
   repeat the form of that of which it is the likeness. Let those,
   however, who will have a nature of a different sort in the Son
   determine what sort of likeness of the invisible God they wish the Son
   to be. Is it a bodily likeness exposed to the gaze, and moving from
   place to place with human gait and motion? Nay, but let them remember
   that according to the Gospels and the Prophets both Christ is a Spirit
   and God is a Spirit. If they confine this Christ the Spirit within the
   bounds of shape and body, such a corporeal Christ will not be the
   likeness of the invisible God, nor will a finite limitation represent
   that which is infinite.

   49. But, as it is, neither did the Lord leave us in doubt: He who hath
   seen Me, hath seen the Father also; nor was the Apostle silent as to
   His nature, Who is the image of the invisible God. For the Lord had
   said, If I do not the works of My Father, believe Me not [949] ,
   teaching them to see the Father in Himself in that He did the works of
   the Father; that through perceiving the power of His nature they might
   understand the nature of that power which they perceived. Wherefore the
   Apostle proclaiming that this is the image of God, says, Who is the
   image of the invisible God, the first-born of all creation; for in Him
   were all things made in the heavens and upon the earth, things visible
   and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or
   powers; all things have been created through Him and in Him, and He is
   before all, and for Him all things consist. And He is the head of the
   body, the Church, Who is the beginning, the first-born from the dead,
   that in all things He might have the pre-eminence. For it was the good
   pleasure of the Father that in Him should all the fulness dwell, and
   through Him all things should be reconciled to Him [950] . So through
   the power of these works He is the image of God. For assuredly the
   Creator of things invisible is not compelled by any necessity inherent
   in His nature to be the visible image of the invisible God. And lest He
   should be regarded as the likeness of the form and not of the nature,
   He is styled the likeness of the invisible God in order that we may
   understand by His exercise of the powers (not the invisible attributes)
   of the Divine nature, that that nature is in Him.

   50. He is accordingly the first-born of every creature because in Him
   all things were created. And lest any one should dare to refer to any
   other than Him the creation of all things in Himself, he says, All
   things have been created through Him and in Him, and He is before all,
   and for Him all things consist. All things then consist for Him Who is
   before all things, and in Whom are all things. Now this indeed
   describes the origin of created things. But concerning the dispensation
   by which He assumed our body, he adds, And He is the head of the body,
   the Church: Who is the beginning, the first-born from the dead: that in
   all things He might have the pre-eminence. For it was the good pleasure
   of the Father that in Him should all the fulness dwell, and that
   through Him all things should be reconciled to Him. The Apostle has
   assigned to the spiritual mysteries their material effects. For He Who
   is the image of the invisible God is Himself the head of His body, the
   Church, and He Who is the first-born of every creature is at the same
   time the beginning, the first born from the dead: that in all things He
   might have the pre-eminence, being for us the Body, while He is also
   the image of God, since He, Who is the first-born of created things, is
   at the same time the first-born for eternity; so that as to Him things
   spiritual, being created in the First-born, owe it that they abide,
   even so all things human also owe it to Him that in the First-born from
   the dead they are born again into eternity. For He is Himself the
   beginning, Who as Son is therefore the image, and because the image, is
   of God. Further He is the first-born of every created thing, possessing
   in Himself the origin of the universe: and again He is the head of His
   body, the Church, and the first-born from the dead, so that in all
   things He has the pre-eminence. And because all things consist for Him,
   in Him the fulness of the Godhead is pleased to dwell, for in Him all
   things are reconciled through Him to Him, through Whom all things were
   created in Himself.

   51. Do you now perceive what it is to be the image of God? It means
   that all things are created in Him through Him. Whereas all things are
   created in Him, understand that He, Whose image He is, also creates all
   things in Him. And since all things which are created in Him are also
   created through Him, recognize that in Him Who is the image there is
   present the nature of Him, Whose image He is. For through Himself He
   creates the things which are created in Him, just as through Himself
   all things are reconciled in Him. Inasmuch as they are reconciled in
   Him, recognise in Him the nature of the Father's unity, reconciling all
   things to Himself in Him. Inasmuch as all things are reconciled through
   Him, perceive Him reconciling to the Father in Himself all things which
   He reconciled through Himself. For the same Apostle says, But all
   things are from God, Who reconciled us to Himself through Christ, and
   gave unto us the ministry of reconciliation: to wit, that God was in
   Christ reconciling the world unto Himself [951] . Compare with this the
   whole mystery of the faith of the Gospel. For He Who is seen when Jesus
   is seen, Who works in His works, and speaks in His words, also
   reconciles in His reconciliation. And for this cause, in Him and
   through Him there is reconciliation, because the Father abiding in Him
   through a like nature restored the world to Himself by reconciliation
   through and in Him.

   52. Thus God out of regard for human weakness has not set forth the
   faith in bare and uncertain statements. For although the authority of
   our Lord's mere words of itself compelled their acceptance, He
   nevertheless has informed our reason by a revelation which explains
   their meaning, that we might learn to know His words, I and the Father
   are one [952] , by means of that which was itself the cause of the
   unity in question. For in saying that the Father speaks in His words,
   and works through His working, and judges through His judgment, and is
   seen in His manifestation, and reconciles through His reconciliation,
   and abides in Him, while He in turn abides in the Father,--what more
   fitting words, I ask, could He have employed in His teaching to suit
   the faculties of our reason, that we might believe in Their unity, than
   those by which, through the truth of the birth and the unity of the
   nature, it is declared that whatever the Son did and said, the Father
   said and did in the Son? This says nothing of a nature foreign to
   Himself, or added by creation to God, or born into Godhead by a
   partition of God, but it betokens the divinity of One Who by a perfect
   birth is begotten perfect God, Who has so confident an assurance of His
   nature that He says, I in the Father and the Father in Me [953] , and
   again, All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine [954] . For
   nought of the Godhead is lacking in Him, in Whose working and speaking
   and manifestation God works and speaks and is beheld. They are not two
   Gods, Who in their working and words and manifestation put on a
   semblance of unity. Neither is He a solitary God. Who in the works and
   words and sight of God, Himself worked and spoke and was seen as God.
   The Church understands this. The Synagogue does not believe, philosophy
   does not know, that being One of One, Whole of Whole, God and Son, He
   has neither by His birth deprived the Father of His completeness, nor
   failed to possess the same completeness in Himself by right of His
   birth. And whosoever is caught in this folly of unbelief is a disciple
   either of the Jews or of the heathen.

   53. Now that you may understand the saying of the Lord, when He said,
   All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine [955] , learn the
   teaching and faith of the Apostle who said, Take heed lest any lead you
   astray through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men,
   after the elements of the world and not after Christ; for in Him
   dwelleth the fulness of Godhead bodily [956] . That man is of the world
   and savours of the teaching of men and is the victim of philosophy, who
   does not know Christ to be the true God, who does not recognise in Him
   the fulness of Godhead. The mind of man knows only that which it
   understands, and the world's powers of belief are limited, since it
   judges according to the laws of the material elements that that alone
   is possible which it can see or do. For the elements of the world have
   come into being out of nothing, but Christ's continuity of existence
   did not begin in the non-existent, nor did He ever begin to exist, but
   He took from the beginning a beginning which is eternal. The elements
   of the world are either without life, or have issued out of this stage
   into life, but Christ is life, born to be living God from the living
   God. The elements of the world have been established by God, but they
   are not God: Christ as God of God is Himself wholly all that God is.
   The elements of the world, since they are within it, cannot possibly
   rise out of their condition and cease to be within it, but Christ,
   while having God within Himself through the Mystery, is Himself in God.
   The elements of the universe, generating from themselves creatures with
   a life like their own, do indeed through the exercise of their bodily
   functions bestow upon them from their own bodies the beginnings of
   life, but they are not themselves present as living beings in their
   offspring, whereas in Christ all the fulness of the Godhead is present
   in bodily shape.

   54. Now I ask, whose Godhead is it whereof the fulness dwells in Him?
   If it be not that of the Father, what other God do you, misleading
   preacher of one God, thrust upon me as Him Whose Godhead dwells fully
   in Christ? But if it be that of the Father, inform me how this fulness
   dwells in Him in bodily fashion. If you hold that the Father abides in
   the Son in bodily fashion, the Father, while dwelling in the Son, will
   not exist in Himself. If on the other hand, and this is more true, the
   Godhead abiding in Him in bodily shape displays within Him the verity
   of the nature of God from God, inasmuch as God is in Him, abiding
   neither through condescension nor through will but by birth, true and
   wholly in bodily fulness according as He is; and inasmuch as, in the
   whole compass of His being, He was born by His divine birth to be God,
   and within the Godhead there is no difference or dissimilarity, except
   that in Christ He dwells in bodily form, and yet whatever dwells in Him
   bodily is according to the fulness of Godhead; why follow after the
   doctrines of men? Why cleave to the teaching of empty falsehoods? Why
   talk of agreement' or harmony of will' or a creature?' The fulness of
   Godhead dwells in Christ bodily.

   55. The Apostle has herein held fast to the canon of his faith, by
   teaching that the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily; and
   this, in order that the teaching of the faith might not degenerate into
   an unholy profession of a oneness of Persons or sinful frenzy break
   forth into the belief of two different natures. For the fulness of
   Godhead which dwells in Christ in bodily fashion is neither solitary
   nor separable; for the fulness in bodily form does not admit any
   partition from the other bodily fulness, and the indwelling Godhead
   cannot be regarded as also the dwelling-place of the Godhead. And
   Christ is so constituted that the fulness of Godhead dwells in Him in
   bodily fashion, and that this fulness must be held one in nature with
   Christ. Lay hands on every chance that offers for your quibbles,
   sharpen the points of your blasphemous wit. Name, at least, the
   imaginary being whose fulness of Godhead it is which dwells in Christ
   in bodily fashion. For He is Christ, and there is dwelling in Him in
   bodily fashion the fulness of Godhead.

   56. And if you would know what it is to dwell in bodily fashion,'
   understand what it is to speak in one that speaks, to be seen in one
   who is seen, to work in one who works, to be God in God, whole of
   whole, one of one; and thus learn what is meant by the fulness of God
   in bodily shape. Remember, too, that the Apostle does not keep silence
   on the question, whose Godhead it is, which dwells fully in Christ in
   bodily fashion, for he says, For the invisible things of Him since the
   creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the
   things that are made, even His everlasting power and divinity [957] .
   So it is His Godhead that dwells in Christ in bodily fashion, not
   partially but wholly, not parcelwise but in fulness; and so dwelling
   that the Two are one, and so one, that the One Who is God does not
   differ from the Other Who is God: Both so equally divine, as a perfect
   birth engendered perfect God. And the birth exists thus in its
   perfection, because the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily in God
   born of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [884] Tit. i. 9, 10.

   [885] I.e. bishop.

   [886] Tit. ii. 7, 8.

   [887] 2 Tim. ii. 17.

   [888] Tit. i. 9.

   [889] St. John x. 30; xiv. 7, 9, 10, 11.

   [890] Ib. x. 30.

   [891] Acts iv. 32.

   [892] 1 Cor. iii. 8.

   [893] St. John xvii. 20, 21.

   [894] Reading odit.

   [895] Eph. iv. 4, 5.

   [896] Gal. iii. 27, 28.

   [897] St. John x. 30.

   [898] Ib. xvii. 21.

   [899] St. John xvii. 21.

   [900] Ib. 22.

   [901] St. John xvii. 22.

   [902] Ib. 22, 23.

   [903] If in the Sacrament we hold real communion with the Father and
   the Son, the union of Father and Son on which it is based must be also
   real, and not a mere concord of will.

   [904] St. John vi. 55, 56.

   [905] Ib. xiv. 19, 20.

   [906] St. John vi. 56.

   [907] Ib. 57.

   [908] St. John x. 28, 29.

   [909] Ib. xiv. 7, 9, 10, 12.

   [910] Ib. xv. 26.

   [911] St. John xvi. 12-15.

   [912] Ib. xvii. 10.

   [913] Rom. viii. 9-11.

   [914] St. Luke iv. 18.

   [915] St. Matt. xii. 18.

   [916] Ib. 28.

   [917] Ps. ii. 8, cf. St. Matt. iii. 17, &c.

   [918] Acts ii. 16, 17.

   [919] St. John xiv. 23.

   [920] St. John x. 30.

   [921] 1 Cor. xii. 3.

   [922] Ibid.

   [923] Ib. 4-7.

   [924] Ib. 8-10.

   [925] Acts i. 4, 5.

   [926] Ib. 8.

   [927] I.e. in 1 Cor. xii. 8 f.

   [928] 1 Cor. xii. 11.

   [929] Hilary's interpretation of this passage is not strictly
   Trinitarian. His view is that there are two Divine Persons at work, the
   Father and the Son, and that Both are embraced under the common name of
   Spirit.' Compare ii. 30, and the exegesis of St. John iv. 24, which
   follows.

   [930] 1 Cor. xii. 12.

   [931] 1 Cor. xii. 5, 6.

   [932] Eph. iv. 7, 10-12.

   [933] 1 Cor. xii. 5, 6.

   [934] Ib. viii. 6.

   [935] Eph. iv. 5, 6.

   [936] 1 Cor. xii. 3.

   [937] Ib. viii. 6.

   [938] St. John vi. 40.

   [939] St. John x. 30.

   [940] See § 31, supr., and note.

   [941] Rom. ix. 5.

   [942] Rom. xi. 36.

   [943] St. John vi. 27-29.

   [944] St. John vi. 27.

   [945] Phil. ii. 6, 7. The sense in which Hilary understands non rapinam
   arbitratus est, is to be seen in his explanation, non sibi rapiens esse
   se æqualem Deo (see just below).

   [946] Ibid

   [947] St. John xiv. 9.

   [948] Col. i. 15.

   [949] St. John x. 37.

   [950] Col. i. 15-20.

   [951] 2 Cor. v. 18, 19.

   [952] St. John x. 30.

   [953] Ib. xiv. 11.

   [954] Ib. xvi. 15.

   [955] St. John xvi. 15.

   [956] Col. ii. 8, 9.

   [957] Rom. i. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book IX.

   1. In the last book we treated of the indistinguishable nature of God
   the Father and God the Son, and demonstrated that the words, I and the
   Father are One [958] , go to prove not a solitary God, but a unity of
   the Godhead unbroken by the birth of the Son: for God can be born only
   of God, and He that is born God of God must be all that God is. We
   reviewed, although not exhaustively, yet enough to make our meaning
   clear, the sayings of our Lord and the Apostles, which teach the
   inseparable nature and power of the Father and the Son; and we came to
   the passage in the teaching of the Apostle, where he says, Take heed
   lest there shall be any one that leadeth you astray through philosophy
   and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the
   world, and not after Christ; for in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the
   Godhead bodily [959] . We pointed out that here the words, in Him
   dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, prove Him true and
   perfect God of His Father's nature, neither severing Him from, nor
   identifying Him with, the Father. On the one hand we are taught that,
   since the incorporeal God dwelt in Him bodily, the Son as God begotten
   of God is in natural unity with the Father: and on the other hand, if
   God dwelt in Christ, this proves the birth of the personal Christ in
   Whom He dwelt [960] . We have thus, it seems to me, more than answered
   the irreverence of those who refer to a unity or agreement of will such
   words of the Lord as, He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father [961] ,
   or, The Father is in Me and I in the Father [962] , or, I and the
   Father are One [963] , or, All things whatsoever the Father hath are
   Mine [964] . Not daring to deny the words themselves, these false
   teachers, in the mask of religion, corrupt the sense of the words. For
   instance, it is true that where the unity of nature is proclaimed the
   agreement of will cannot be denied; but in order to set aside that
   unity which follows from the birth, they profess merely a relationship
   of mutual harmony. But the blessed Apostle, after many indubitable
   statements of the real truth, cuts short their rash and profane
   assertions, by saying, in Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the
   Godhead bodily, for by the bodily indwelling of the incorporeal God in
   Christ is taught the strict unity of Their nature. It is, therefore,
   not a matter of words, but a real truth that the Son was not alone, but
   the Father abode in Him: and not only abode, but also worked and spoke:
   not only worked and spoke, but also manifested Himself in Him. Through
   the Mystery of the birth the Son's power is the power of the Father,
   His authority the Father's authority, His nature the Father's nature.
   By His birth the Son possesses the nature of the Father: as the
   Father's image, He reproduces from the Father all that is in the
   Father, because He is the reality as well as the image of the Father,
   for a perfect birth produces a perfect image, and the fulness of the
   Godhead dwelling bodily in Him indicates the truth of His nature.

   2. All this is indeed as it is: He, Who is by nature God of God, must
   possess the nature of His origin, which God possesses, and the
   indistinguishable unity of a living nature cannot be divided by the
   birth of a living nature. Yet nevertheless the heretics, under cover of
   the saving confession of the Gospel faith, are stealing on to the
   subversion of the truth: for by forcing their own interpretations on
   words uttered with other meanings and intentions, they are robbing the
   Son of His natural unity. Thus to deny the Son of God, they quote the
   authority of His own words, Why callest thou Me good? None is good,
   save one, God [965] . These words, they say, proclaim the Oneness of
   God: anything else, therefore, which shares the name of God, cannot
   possess the nature of God, for God is One. And from His words, This is
   life eternal, that they should know Thee the only true God [966] , they
   attempt to establish the theory that Christ is called God by a mere
   title, not as being very God. Further, to exclude Him from the proper
   nature of the true God, they quote, The Son can do nothing of Himself
   except that which He hath seen the Father do [967] . They use also the
   text, The Father is greater than I. [968] Finally, when they repeat the
   words, Of that day and that hour knoweth no one, neither the angels in
   heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only [969] , as though they were
   the absolute renunciation of His claim to divinity, they boast that
   they have overthrown the faith of the Church. The birth, they say,
   cannot raise to equality the nature which the limitation of ignorance
   degrades. The Father's omniscience and the Son's ignorance reveal
   unlikeness in the Divinity, for God must be ignorant of nothing, and
   the ignorant cannot be compared with the omniscient. All these passages
   they neither understand rationally, nor distinguish as to their
   occasions, nor apprehend in the light of the Gospel mysteries, nor
   realize in the strict meaning of the words and so they impugn the
   divine nature of Christ with crude and insensate rashness, quoting
   single detached utterances to catch the ears of the unwary, and keeping
   back either the sequel which explains or the incidents which prompted
   them, though the meaning of words must be sought in the context before
   or after them.

   3. We will offer later an explanation of these texts in the words of
   the Gospels and Epistles themselves. But first we hold it right to
   remind the members of our common faith, that the knowledge of the
   Eternal is presented in the same confession which gives eternal life
   [970] . He does not, he cannot know his own life, who is ignorant that
   Christ Jesus was very God, as He was very man. It is equally perilous,
   whether we deny that Christ Jesus was God the Spirit, or that He was
   flesh of our body: Every one therefore who shall confess Me before men,
   him will I also confess before My Father which is in Heaven. But
   whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My
   Father which is in heaven [971] . So said the Word made flesh; so
   taught the man Jesus Christ, the Lord of majesty, constituted Mediator
   in His own person for the salvation of the Church, and being in that
   very mystery of Mediatorship between men and God, Himself one Person,
   both man and God. For He, being of two natures united for that
   Mediatorship, is the full reality of each nature; while abiding in
   each, He is wanting in neither; He does not cease to be God because He
   becomes man, nor fail to be man because He remains for ever God. This
   is the true faith for human blessedness, to preach at once the Godhead
   and the manhood, to confess the Word and the flesh, neither forgetting
   the God, because He is man, nor ignoring the flesh, because He is the
   Word.

   4. It is contrary to our experience of nature, that He should be born
   man and still remain God; but it accords with the tenor of our
   expectation, that being born man, He still remained God, for when the
   higher nature is born into the lower, it is credible that the lower
   should also be born into the higher. And, indeed, according to the laws
   and habits of nature, the working of our expectation even anticipates
   the divine mystery. For in every thing that is born, nature has the
   capacity for increase, but has no power of decrease. Look at the trees,
   the crops, the cattle. Regard man himself, the possessor of reason. He
   always expands by growth, he does not contract by decrease; nor does he
   ever lose the self into which he has grown. He wastes indeed with age,
   or is cut off by death; he undergoes change by lapse of time, or
   reaches the end allotted to the constitution of life, yet it is not in
   his power to cease to be what he is; I mean that he cannot make a new
   self by decrease from his old self, that is, become a child again from
   an old man. So the necessity of perpetual increase, which is imposed on
   our nature by natural law, leads us on good grounds to expect its
   promotion into a higher nature, since its increase is according to, and
   its decrease contrary to, nature. It was God alone Who could become
   something other than before, and yet not cease to be what He had ever
   been; Who could shrink within the limits of womb, cradle, and infancy,
   yet not depart from the power of God. This is a mystery, not for
   Himself, but for us. The assumption of our nature was no advancement
   for God, but His willingness to lower Himself is our promotion, for He
   did not resign His divinity but conferred divinity on man.

   5. The Only-begotten God, therefore, when He was born man of the
   Virgin, and in the fulness of time was about in His own person to raise
   humanity to divinity, always maintained this form of the Gospel
   teaching. He taught, namely, to believe Him the Son of God, and
   exhorted to preach Him the Son of Man; man saying and doing all that
   belongs to God; God saying and doing all that belongs to man. Yet never
   did He speak without signifying by the twofold aspect of these very
   utterances both His manhood and His divinity. Though He proclaimed one
   God the Father, He declared Himself to be in the nature of the one God,
   by the truth of His generation. Yet in His office as Son and His
   condition as man, He subjected Himself to God the Father, since
   everything that is born must refer itself back to its author, and all
   flesh must confess itself weak before God. Here, accordingly, the
   heretics find opportunity to deceive the simple and ignorant. These
   words, uttered in His human character, they falsely refer to the
   weakness of His divine nature; and because He was one and the same
   Person in all His utterances, they claim that He spoke always of His
   entire self.

   6. We do not deny that all the sayings which are preserved of His,
   refer to His nature. But, if Jesus Christ be man and God, neither God
   for the first time, when He became man, nor then ceasing to be God, nor
   after He became Man in God less than perfect man and perfect God, then
   the mystery of His words must be one and the same with that of His
   nature. When according to the time indicated, we disconnect His
   divinity from humanity, then let us also disconnect His language as God
   from the language of man; when we confess Him God and man at the same
   time, let us distinguish at the same time His words as God and His
   words as man; when after His manhood and Godhead, we recognise again
   the time when His whole manhood is wholly God, let us refer to that
   time all that is revealed concerning it [972] . It is one thing, that
   He was God before He was man, another, that He was man and God, and
   another, that after being man and God, He was perfect man and perfect
   God. Do not then confuse the times and natures in the mystery of the
   dispensation, for according to the attributes of His different natures,
   He must speak of Himself in relation to the mystery of His humanity, in
   one way before His birth, in another while He was yet to die, and in
   another as eternal.

   7. For our sake, therefore, Jesus Christ, retaining all these
   attributes, and being born man in our body, spoke after the fashion of
   our nature without concealing that divinity belonged to His own nature.
   In His birth, His passion, and His death, He passed through all the
   circumstances of our nature, but He bore them all by the power of His
   own. He was Himself the cause of His birth, He willed to suffer what He
   could not suffer, He died though He lives for ever. Yet God did all
   this not merely through man, for He was born of Himself, He suffered of
   His own free will, and died of Himself. He did it also as man, for He
   was really born, suffered and died. These were the mysteries of the
   secret counsels of heaven, determined before the world was made. The
   Only-begotten God was to become man of His own will, and man was to
   abide eternally in God. God was to suffer of His own will, that the
   malice of the devil, working in the weakness of human infirmity, might
   not confirm the law of sin in us, since God had assumed our weakness.
   God was to die of His own will, that no power, after that the immortal
   God had constrained Himself within the law of death, might raise up its
   head against Him, or put forth the natural strength which He had
   created in it. Thus God was born to take us into Himself, suffered to
   justify us, and died to avenge us; for our manhood abides for ever in
   Him, the weakness of our infirmity is united with His strength, and the
   spiritual powers of iniquity and wickedness are subdued in the triumph
   of our flesh, since God died through the flesh.

   8. The Apostle, who knew this mystery, and had received the knowledge
   of the faith through the Lord Himself, was not unmindful, that neither
   the world, nor mankind, nor philosophy could contain Him, for he
   writes, Take heed, lest there shall be any one that leadeth you astray
   through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after
   the rudiments of the world, and not after Jesus Christ, for in Him
   dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and in Him ye are made
   full, Who is the head of all principalities and powers [973] . After
   the announcement that in Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
   bodily, follows immediately the mystery of our assumption, in the
   words, in Him ye are made full. As the fulness of the Godhead is in
   Him, so we are made full in Him. The Apostle says not merely ye are
   made full, but, in Him ye are made full; for all who are, or shall be,
   regenerated through the hope of faith to life eternal, abide even now
   in the body of Christ; and afterwards they shall be made full no longer
   in Him, but in themselves, at the time of which the Apostle says, Who
   shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be
   conformed to the body of His glory [974] . Now, therefore, we are made
   full in Him, that is, by the assumption of His flesh, for in Him
   dwelleth the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Nor has this our hope a
   light authority in Him. Our fulness in Him constitutes His headship and
   principality over all power, as it is written, That in His name every
   knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things
   below, and every tongue confess that Jesus is Lord in the glory of God
   the Father [975] . Jesus shall be confessed in the glory of God the
   Father, born in man, yet now no longer abiding in the infirmity of our
   body, but in the glory of God. Every tongue shall confess this. But
   though all things in heaven and earth shall bow the knee to Him, yet
   herein He is head of all principalities and powers, that to Him the
   whole universe shall bow the knee in submission, in Whom we are made
   full, Who through the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in Him bodily,
   shall be confessed in the glory of God the Father.

   9. But after the announcement of the mystery of Christ's nature, and
   our assumption, that is, the fulness of Godhead abiding in Christ, and
   ourselves made full in Him by His birth as man, the Apostle continues
   the dispensation of human salvation in the words, In whom ye were also
   circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the stripping
   off of the body of the flesh, but with the circumcision of Christ,
   having been buried with Him in baptism, wherein ye were also raised
   with Him through faith in the working of God, who raised Him from the
   dead [976] . We are circumcised not with a fleshly circumcision but
   with the circumcision of Christ, that is, we are born again into a new
   man; for, being buried with Him in His baptism, we must die to the old
   man, because the regeneration of baptism has the force of resurrection.
   The circumcision of Christ does not mean the putting off of foreskins,
   but to die entirely with Him, and by that death to live henceforth
   entirely to Him. For we rise again in Him through faith in God, Who
   raised Him from the dead; wherefore we must believe in God, by Whose
   Working Christ was raised from the dead, for our faith rises again in
   and with Christ.

   10. Then is completed the entire mystery of the assumed manhood, And
   you being dead through your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your
   flesh, you I say, did He quicken together with Him, having forgiven you
   all your trespasses, blotting out the bond written in ordinances, that
   was against us, which was contrary to us; and He hath taken it out of
   the way, nailing it to the cross, and having put off from Himself His
   flesh, He hath made a shew of powers, triumphing over them in Himself
   [977] . The worldly man cannot receive the faith of the Apostle, nor
   can any language but that of the Apostle explain his meaning. God
   raised Christ from the dead; Christ in Whom the fulness of the Godhead
   dwelt bodily. But He quickened us also together with Him, forgiving us
   our sins, blotting out the bond of the law of sin, which through the
   ordinances made aforetime was against us, taking it out of the way, and
   fixing it to His cross, stripping Himself of His flesh by the law of
   death, holding up the powers to shew, and triumphing over them in
   Himself. Concerning the powers and how He triumphed over them in
   Himself, and held them up to shew, and the bond which he blotted out,
   and the life which He gave us, we have already spoken [978] . But who
   can understand or express this mystery? The working of God raises
   Christ from the dead; the same working of God quickens us together with
   Christ, forgives our sins, blots out the bond, and fixes it to the
   cross; He puts off from Himself His flesh, holds up the powers to shew,
   and triumphs over them in Himself. We have the working of God raising
   Christ from the dead, and we have Christ working in Himself the very
   things which God works in Him, for it was Christ who died, stripping
   from Himself His flesh. Hold fast then to Christ the man, raised from
   the dead by God, and hold fast to Christ the God, working out our
   salvation when He was yet to die. God works in Christ, but it is Christ
   Who strips from Himself His flesh and dies. It was Christ who died, and
   Christ Who worked with the power of God before His death, yet it was
   the working of God which raised the dead Christ, and it was none other
   who raised Christ from the dead but Christ Himself, Who worked before
   His death, and put off His flesh to die.

   11. Do you understand already the Mysteries of the Apostle's Faith? Do
   you think to know Christ already? Tell me, then, Who is it Who strips
   from Himself His flesh, and what is that flesh stripped off? I see two
   thoughts expressed by the Apostle, the flesh stripped off, and Him Who
   strips it off: and then I hear of Christ raised from the dead by the
   working of God. If it is Christ Who is raised from the dead, and God
   Who raises Him; Who, pray, strips from Himself the flesh? Who raises
   Christ from the dead, and quickens us with Him? If the dead Christ be
   not the same as the flesh stripped off, tell me the name of the flesh
   stripped off, and expound me the nature of Him Who strips it off. I
   find that Christ the God, Who was raised from the dead, is the same as
   He Who stripped from Himself His flesh, and that flesh, the same as
   Christ Who was raised from the dead; then I see Him holding
   principalities and powers up to shew, and triumphing in Himself. Do you
   understand this triumphing in Himself? Do you perceive that the flesh
   stripped off, and He Who strips it off, are not different from one
   another? He triumphs in Himself, that is in that flesh which He
   stripped from Himself. Do you see that thus are proclaimed His humanity
   and His divinity, that death is attributed to the man, and the
   quickening of the flesh to the God, though He Who dies and He Who
   raises the dead to life are not two, but one Person? The flesh stripped
   off is the dead Christ: He Who raises Christ from the dead is the same
   Christ Who stripped from Himself the flesh. See His divine nature in
   the power to raise again, and recognise in His death the dispensation
   of His manhood. And though either function is performed by its proper
   nature, yet remember that He Who died, and raised to life, was one,
   Christ Jesus.

   12. I remember that the Apostle often refers to God the Father as
   raising Christ from the dead; but he is not inconsistent with himself
   or at variance with the Gospel faith, for the Lord Himself
   says:--Therefore doth the Father love Me, because I lay down My life,
   that I may take it again. No one shall take it from Me, but I lay it
   down of Myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
   it again. This command have I received from the Father [979] : and
   again, when asked to shew a sign concerning Himself, that they might
   believe in Him, He says of the Temple of His body, Destroy this Temple,
   and in three days I will raise it up [980] . By the power to take His
   soul again and to raise the Temple up, He declares Himself God, and the
   Resurrection His own work: yet He refers all to the authority of His
   Father's command. This is not contrary to the meaning of the Apostle,
   when He proclaims Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God [981]
   , thus referring all the magnificence of His work to the glory of the
   Father: for whatever Christ does, the power and the wisdom of God does:
   and whatever the power and the wisdom of God does, without doubt God
   Himself does, Whose power and wisdom Christ is. So Christ was raised
   from the dead by the working of God; for He Himself worked the works of
   God the Father with a nature indistinguishable from God's. And our
   faith in the Resurrection rests on the God Who raised Christ from the
   dead.

   13. It is this preaching of the double aspect of Christ's Person which
   the blessed Apostle emphasises. He points out in Christ His human
   infirmity, and His divine power and nature. Thus to the Corinthians he
   writes, For though He was crucified through weakness, yet He liveth
   through the power of God [982] , attributing His death to human
   infirmity, but His life to divine power: and again to the Romans, For
   the death, that He died unto sin, He died once: but the life, that He
   liveth, He liveth unto God. Even so reckon ye yourselves also to be
   dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus [983] , ascribing His
   death to sin, that is, to our body, but His life to God, Whose nature
   it is to live. We ought, therefore, he says, to die to our body, that
   we may live to God in Christ Jesus, Who after the assumption of our
   body of sin, lives now wholly unto God, uniting the nature He shared
   with us with the participation of divine immortality.

   14. I have been compelled to dwell briefly on this, lest we should
   forget our Lord Jesus Christ is being treated of as a Person of two
   natures, since He, Who was abiding in the form of God, took the form of
   a servant, in which He was obedient even unto death. The obedience of
   death has nothing to do with the form of God, just as the form of God
   is not inherent in the form of a servant. Yet through the Mystery of
   the Gospel Dispensation the same Person is in the form of a servant and
   in the form of God, though it is not the same thing to take the form of
   a servant and to be abiding in the form of God; nor could He Who was
   abiding in the form of God, take the form of a servant without emptying
   Himself, since the combination of the two forms would be incongruous.
   Yet it was not another and a different Person Who emptied Himself and
   Who took the form of a servant. To take anything cannot be predicated
   of some one who is not, for he only can take who exists. The emptying
   of the form does not then imply the abolition of the nature: He emptied
   Himself, but did not lose His self: He took a new form, but remained
   what He was. Again, whether emptying or taking, He was the same Person:
   there is, therefore, a mystery, in that He emptied Himself, and took
   the form of a servant, but He does not come to an end, so as to cease
   to exist in emptying Himself, and to be non-existent when He took. The
   emptying availed to bring about the taking of the servant's form, but
   not to prevent Christ, Who was in the form of God, from continuing to
   be Christ, for it was in very deed Christ Who took the form of a
   servant. When He emptied Himself to become Christ the man, while
   continuing to be Christ the Spirit, the changing of His bodily fashion,
   and the assumption of another nature in His body, did not put an end to
   the nature of His eternal divinity, for He was one and the same Christ
   when He changed His fashion, and when He assumed our nature.

   15. We have now expounded the Dispensation of the Mysteries, through
   which the heretics deceive certain of the unlearned into ascribing to
   infirmity in the divinity, what Christ said and did through His assumed
   human nature, and attributing to the form of God what is appropriate
   only to the form of the servant. Let us pass on, then, to answer their
   statements in detail. We can always safely distinguish the two kinds of
   utterances, since the only true faith lies in the confession of Jesus
   Christ as Word and flesh, that is, God and Man. The heretics consider
   it necessary to deny that our Lord Jesus Christ by virtue of His nature
   was divine, because He said, Why callest thou Me good? None is good
   save one, God [984] . Now a satisfactory answer must stand in direct
   relation to the matter of enquiry, for only in that case will it
   furnish a reply to the question put. At the outset, then, I would ask
   these misinterpreters, "Do you think that the Lord resented being
   called good?" Would He rather have been called bad, as seems to be
   signified by the words, Why callest thou Me good? I do not think any
   one is so unreasonable as to ascribe to Him a confession of wickedness,
   when it was He Who said, Come unto Me, all ye that labour, and are
   heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take My yoke upon you, and learn
   of Me: for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest unto
   your souls. For My yoke is easy and My burden is light [985] . He says
   He is meek and lowly: can we believe that He was angry because He was
   called good? The two propositions are inconsistent. He Who witnesses to
   His own goodness would not repudiate the name of Good. Plainly, then,
   He was not angry because He was called good: and if we cannot believe
   that He resented being called good, we must ask what was said of Him
   which He did resent.

   16. Let us see, then, how the questioner styled Him, beside calling Him
   good. He said, Good Master, what good thing shall I do [986] ? adding
   to the title of "good" that of master. If Christ then did not chide
   because He was called good, it must have been because He was called
   "good Master." Further the manner of His reproof shews that it was the
   disbelief of the questioner, rather than the name of master, or of
   good, which He resented. A youth, who provides himself upon the
   observance of the law, but did not know the end of the law [987] ,
   which is Christ, who thought himself justified by works, without
   perceiving that Christ came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel
   [988] , and to those who believe that the law cannot save through the
   faith of justification [989] , questioned the Lord of the law, the
   Only-begotten God, as though He were a teacher of the common precepts
   and the writings of the law. But the Lord, abhorring this declaration
   of irreverent unbelief, which addresses Him as a teacher of the law,
   answered, Why callest thou Me good? and to shew how we may know, and
   call Him good, He added, None is good, save one, God, not repudiating
   the name of good, if it be given to Him as God.

   17. Then, as a proof that He resents the name "good master," on the
   ground of the unbelief, which addresses Him as a man, He replies to the
   vain-glorious youth, and his boast that he had fulfilled the law, One
   thing thou lackest; go, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the
   poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, follow Me.
   There is no shrinking from the title of "good" in the promise of
   heavenly treasures, no reluctance to be regarded as "master" in the
   offer to lead the way to perfect blessedness. But there is reproof of
   the unbelief which draws an earthly opinion of Him from the teaching,
   that goodness belongs to God alone. To signify that He is both good and
   God, He exercises the functions of goodness, opening the heavenly
   treasures, and offering Himself as guide to them. All the homage
   offered to Him as man He repudiates, but he does not disown that which
   He paid to God; for at the moment when He confesses that the one God is
   good, His words and actions are those of the power and the goodness and
   the nature of the one God.

   18. That He did not shrink from the title of good, or decline the
   office of master, but resented the unbelief which perceived no more in
   Him than body and flesh, may be proved from the difference of His
   language, when the apostles confessed Him their Master, Ye call Me
   Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am [990] ; and on another
   occasion, Be ye not called masters, for Christ is your Master [991] .
   From the faithful, to whom He is master, He accepts the title with
   words of praise, but here He rejects the name "good master," when He is
   not acknowledged to be the Lord and the Christ, and pronounces the one
   God alone good, but without distinguishing Himself from God, for He
   calls Himself Lord, and Christ, and guide to the heavenly treasures.

   19. The Lord always maintained this definition of the faith of the
   Church, which consists in teaching that there is one God the Father,
   but without separating Himself from the mystery of the one God, for He
   declared Himself, by the nature which is His by birth, neither a second
   God, nor the sole God. Since the nature of the One God is in Him, He
   cannot be God of a different kind from Him; His birth requires that,
   being Son, it should be with a perfect Sonship [992] . So He can
   neither be separated from God nor merged in God. Hence He speaks in
   words deliberately chosen, so that whatever He claims for the Father,
   He signifies in modest language to be appropriate to Himself also. Take
   as an instance the command, Believe in God, and believe also in Me
   [993] . He is identified with God in honour; how, pray, can He be
   separated from His nature? He says, Believe in Me also, just as He said
   Believe in God. Do not the words in Me signify His nature? Separate the
   two natures, but you must separate also the two beliefs. If it be life,
   that we should believe in God without Christ, strip Christ of the name
   and qualities of God. But if perfect life is given to those who believe
   in God, only when they believe in Christ also, let the careful reader
   ponder the meaning of the saying, Believe in God, and believe in Me
   also, for these words, uniting faith in Him with faith in God, unite
   His nature to God's. He enjoins first of all the duty of belief in God,
   but adds to it the command that we should believe in Himself also;
   which implies that He is God, since they who believe in God must also
   believe in Him. Yet He excludes the suggestion of a unity contrary to
   religion [994] , for the exhortation Believe in God, believe in Me
   also, forbids us to think of Him as alone in solitude.

   20. In many, nay almost all His discourses, He offers the explanation
   of this mystery, never separating Himself from the divine unity, when
   He confesses God the Father, and never characterising God as single and
   solitary, when He places Himself in unity with Him. But nowhere does He
   more plainly teach the mystery of His unity and His birth than when He
   says, But the witness which I have is greater than that of John, for
   the works which the Father hath given Me to accomplish, the very works
   that I do, bear witness of Me, that the Father hath sent Me, and the
   Father which sent Me, He hath borne witness of Me. Ye have neither
   heard His voice at any time nor seen His form. And ye have not His word
   abiding in you, for Whom He sent, Him ye believe not. [995] How can the
   Father be truly said to have borne witness of the Son, when neither He
   Himself was seen, nor His voice heard? Yet I remember that a voice was
   heard from Heaven, which said, This is My beloved Son, in Whom I have
   been well pleased; hear ye Him [996] . How can it be said that they did
   not hear the voice of God, when the voice which they heard itself
   asserted that it was the Father's voice? But perhaps the dwellers in
   Jerusalem had not heard what John had heard in the solitude of the
   desert. We must ask, then, "How did the Father bear witness in
   Jerusalem?" It is no longer the witness given to John, who heard the
   voice from heaven, but a witness greater than that of John. What that
   witness is He goes on to say, The works which the Father hath given me
   to accomplish, the very works which I do, bear witness of Me, that the
   Father hath sent Me. We must admit the authority of the testimony, for
   no one, except the Son sent of the Father, could do such works. His
   works are therefore His testimony. But what follows? And the Father,
   which sent Me, He hath borne witness of Me. Ye have neither heard His
   voice at any time, nor seen His form, and ye have not His word abiding
   in you. Are they blameless, in that they did not know the testimony of
   the Father, Who was never heard or seen amongst them, and Whose word
   was not abiding in them? No, for they cannot plead that His testimony
   was hidden from them; as Christ says, the testimony of His works is the
   testimony of the Father concerning Him. His works testify of Him that
   He was sent of the Father; but the testimony of these works is the
   Father's testimony; since, therefore, the working of the Son is the
   Father's testimony, it follows of necessity that the same nature was
   operative in Christ, by which the Father testifies of Him. So Christ,
   Who works the works, and the Father Who testifies through them, are
   revealed as possessing one inseparable nature through the birth, for
   the operation of Christ is signified to be itself the testimony of God
   concerning Him.

   21. They are not, therefore, acquitted of blame for not recognising the
   testimony; for the works of Christ are the Father's testimony
   concerning Him. Nor can they plead ignorance of the testimony on the
   ground that they had not heard the voice of the Testifier, nor seen His
   form, nor had His word abiding in them. For immediately after the
   words, Ye have neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen His form,
   and ye have not His word abiding in you, He points out why the voice
   was not heard, nor the form seen, and the word did not abide in them,
   though the Father had testified concerning Him: For Whom He sent, Him
   ye believe not; that is, if they had believed Him, they would have
   heard the voice of God, and seen the form of God, and His word would
   have been in them, since through the unity of Their nature the Father
   is heard and manifested and possessed in the Son. Is He not also the
   expression of the Father, since He was sent from Him? Does He
   distinguish Himself by any difference of nature from the Father, when
   He says that the Father, testifying of Him, was neither heard, nor
   seen, nor understood, because they did not believe in Him, Whom the
   Father sent? The Only-begotten God does not, therefore, separate
   Himself from God when He confesses God the Father; but, proclaiming by
   the word "Father" His relationship to God, He includes Himself in the
   honour due to God.

   22. For, in this very same discourse in which He pronounces that His
   works testify of Him that He was sent of the Father, and asserts that
   the Father testifies of Him, that He was sent from Him, He says, The
   honour of Him, Who alone is God, ye seek not [997] . This is not,
   however, a bare statement, without any previous preparation for the
   belief in His unity with the Father. Hear what precedes it, Ye will not
   come to Me that ye may have life. I receive not glory from men. But I
   know you, that ye have not the love of God in yourselves. I am come in
   My Father's name, and ye receive Me not: if another shall come in His
   name [998] ,him ye will receive. How can ye believe, which receive
   glory from men, and the glory of Him, Who alone is God, ye seek not.
   [999] He disdains the glory of men, for glory should rather be sought
   of God. It is the mark of unbelievers to receive glory of one another:
   for what glory can man give to man? He says He knows that the love of
   God is not in them, and pronounces, as the cause, that they do not
   receive Him coming in His Father's name. "Coming in His Father's name:"
   what does that mean but "coming in the name of God?" Is it not because
   they rejected Him Who came in the name of God, that the love of God is
   not in them? Is it not implied that He has the nature of God, when He
   says, Ye will not come to Me that ye may have life. Hear what He said
   of Himself in the same discourse, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the
   hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
   of God; and they that hear shall live [1000] . He comes in the name of
   the Father: that is, He is not Himself the Father, yet is in the same
   divine nature as the Father: for as Son and God it is natural for Him
   to come in the name of the Father. Then, another coming in the same
   name they will receive: but he is one from whom men will expect glory,
   and to whom they will give glory in return, though he will feign to
   have come in the name of the Father. By this, doubtless, is signified
   the Antichrist, glorying in his false use of the Father's name. Him
   they will glorify, and will be glorified of him: but the glory of Him,
   Who alone is God, they will not seek.

   23. They have not the love of God in them, He says, because they
   rejected Him coming in the name of the Father, but accepted another,
   who came in the same name, and received glory of one another, but
   neglected the glory of Him, Who is the only true God. Is it possible to
   think that He separates Himself from the glory of the only God, when He
   gives as the reason why they seek not the glory of the only God, that
   they receive Antichrist, and Himself they will not receive? To reject
   Him is to neglect the glory of the only God; is not, then, His glory
   the glory of the only God, if to receive Him steadfastly was to seek
   the glory of the only God? This very discourse is our witness: for at
   its beginning we read, That all may honour the Son, even as they honour
   the Father. He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father
   which sent Him [1001] . It is only things of the same nature that are
   equal in honour; equality of honour denotes that there is no separation
   between the honoured. But with the revelation of the birth is combined,
   the demand for equality of honour. Since the Son is to be honoured as
   the Father [1002] , and since they seek not the honour of Him, Who is
   the only God, He is not excluded from the honour of the only God, for
   His honour is one and the same as that of God: just as He that
   honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father also, so he who seeks
   not the honour of the only God, seeks not the honour of Christ also.
   Accordingly the honour of Christ is inseparable from the honour of God.
   By His words, when the news of Lazarus' sickness was brought to Him, He
   illustrates the complete identification of Father and Son in honour:
   This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son
   of Man may be glorified through him. [1003] Lazarus dies for the glory
   of God, that the Son of God may be glorified through him. Is there any
   doubt that the glory of the Son of God is the glory of God, when the
   death of Lazarus, which is glorious to God, glorifies the Son of God?
   Thus Christ is declared to be one in nature with God the Father through
   His birth, since the sickness of Lazarus is for the glory of God, and
   at the same time the Mystery of the faith is not violated, for the Son
   of God is to be glorified through Lazarus. The Son of God is to be
   regarded as God, yet He is none the less to be confessed also Son of
   God: for by glorifying God through Lazarus, the Son of God is
   glorified.

   24. By the mystery of the divine nature we are forbidden to separate
   the birth of the living Son from His living Father. The Son of God
   suffers no such change of kind, that the truth of His Father's nature
   does not abide in Him. For even where, by the confession of one God
   only, He seems to disclaim for Himself the nature of God by the term
   "only," nevertheless, without destroying the belief in one God, He
   places Himself in the unity of the Father's nature. Thus, when the
   Scribe asked Him, which is the chief commandment of the law, He
   answered, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord: thou shalt love
   the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
   all thy spirit, and with all thy strength. This is the first
   commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than
   these [1004] . They think that He severs Himself from the nature and
   worship of the One God when He pronounces as the chief commandment,
   Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, and does not even make
   Himself the object of worship in the second commandment, since the law
   bids us to love our neighbour, as it bids us to believe in one God. Nor
   must we pass over the answer of the Scribe, Of a truth thou hast well
   said, that God is one, and there is none other but He: and to love Him
   with all the heart, and all the strength and all the soul, and to love
   his neighbour as himself, this is greater than all whole burnt
   offerings and sacrifices [1005] . The answer of the Scribe seems to
   accord with the words of the Lord, for He too proclaims the innermost
   and inmost love of one God, and professes the love of one's neighbour
   as real as the love of self, and places love of God and love of one's
   neighbour above all the burnt offerings of sacrifices. But let us see
   what follows.

   25. And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, He said unto him,
   Thou art not far from the kingdom of God [1006] . What is the meaning
   of such moderate praise? Believe in one God, and love Him with all thy
   soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy heart, and love thy
   neighbour as thyself; if this be the faith which makes man perfect for
   the Kingdom of God, why is not the Scribe already within, instead of
   not far from the Kingdom of Heaven? It is in another strain that He
   grants the Kingdom of Heaven to those who clothe the naked, feed the
   hungry, give drink to the thirsty, and visit the sick and the prisoner,
   Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
   from the foundation of the world [1007] ; or rewards the poor in
   spirit, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of
   Heaven [1008] . Their gain is perfect, their possession complete, their
   inheritance of the kingdom prepared for them is secured. But was this
   young man's confession short of theirs? His ideal of duty raises love
   of neighbour to the level of love of self; what more did he want to
   attain to the perfection of good conduct? To be occasionally
   charitable, and ready to help, is not perfect love; but perfect love
   has fulfilled the whole duty of charity, when a man leaves no debt to
   his neighbour unpaid, but gives him as much as he gives himself. But
   the Scribe was debarred from perfection, because he did not know the
   mystery which had been accomplished. He received, indeed, the praise of
   the Lord for his profession of faith, he heard the reply that he was
   not far from the kingdom, but he was not put in actual possession of
   the blessed hope. His course, though ignorant, was favourable; he put
   the love of God before all things, and charity towards his neighbour on
   a level with love of self. And when he ranked the love of God even
   higher than charity towards his neighbour, he broke through the law of
   burnt offerings and sacrifices; and that was not far from the mystery
   of the Gospel.

   26. We may perceive also, from the words of our Lord Himself, why He
   said, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, rather than, Thou
   shalt be in the Kingdom of Heaven. Then follows: And no man after that
   durst ask Him any question. And Jesus answered and said, as He taught
   in the Temple, How say the Scribes that the Christ is the Son of David?
   David himself saith in the Holy Spirit, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
   Thou on My right hand, till I make Thine enemies the footstool of Thy
   feet (Ps. cx. 1). David himself calleth Him Lord, and whence is He his
   Son [1009] ? The Scribe is not far from the Kingdom of God when he
   confesses one God, Who is to be loved above all things. But his own
   statement of the law is a reproach to him that the mystery of the law
   has escaped him, that he does not know Christ the Lord, the Son of God,
   by the nature of His birth to be included in the confession of the one
   God. The confession of one God according to the law seemed to leave no
   room for the Son of God in the mystery of the one Lord; so He asks the
   Scribe, how he can call Christ the Son of David, when David calls Him
   his Lord, since it is against the order of nature that the son of so
   great a Patriarch should be also his Lord. He would bid the Scribe, who
   regards Him only in respect of His flesh, and His birth from Mary, the
   daughter of David, to remember that, in respect of His Spirit, He is
   David's Lord rather than his son; that the words, Hear, O Israel, the
   Lord our God is one Lord, do not sever Christ from the mystery of the
   One Lord, since so great a Patriarch and Prophet calls Him his Lord, as
   the Son begotten of the Lord before the morning star. He does not pass
   over the law, or forget that none other is to be confessed Lord, but
   without violating the faith of the law, He teaches that He is Lord, in
   that He had His being by the mystery of a natural birth from the
   substance of the incorporeal God. He is one, born of one, and the
   nature of the one Lord has made Him by nature Lord.

   27. What room is any longer left for doubt? The Lord Himself
   proclaiming that the chief commandment of the law is to confess and
   love the one Lord, proves Himself to be Lord not by words of His own,
   but by the Prophet's testimony, always signifying, however, that He is
   Lord, because He is the Son of God. By virtue of His birth He abides in
   the mystery of the one God, for the birth transmitting with it, as it
   did, the nature of God is not the issuing forth of another God with a
   different nature; and, because the generation is real, neither is the
   Father degraded from being Lord, nor is the Son born less than Lord.
   The Father retains His authority, the Son obtains His nature. God the
   Father is one Lord, but the Only-begotten God the Lord is not separated
   from the One, since He derives His nature as Lord from the one Lord.
   Thus by the law Christ teaches that there is one Lord; by the witness
   of the prophets He proves Himself Lord also.

   28. May the faith of the Gospel ever profit thus by the rash
   contentions of the ungodly to defend itself with the weapons of their
   attack, and conquering with the arms prepared for its destruction,
   prove that the words of the one Spirit are the doctrine of the one
   faith! For Christ is none other than He is preached, namely the true
   God, and abiding in the glory of the one true God. Just as He proclaims
   Himself Lord out of the law, even when He seems to deny the fact, so in
   the Gospels He proves Himself the true God, even when He appears to
   confess the opposite. To escape the acknowledgment that He is the true
   God, the heretics plead that He said, And this is life eternal, that
   they should know Thee, the only true God. and Him Whom Thou didst send,
   even Jesus Christ [1010] . When He says, Thee, the only true God, they
   think He excludes Himself from the reality of God by the restriction of
   solitariness; for the only true God cannot be understood except as a
   solitary God. It is true the Apostolic faith does not suffer us to
   believe in two true Gods, for nothing which is foreign to the nature of
   the one God can be put on equality with the truth of that nature; and
   there is more than one God in the reality of the one God, if there
   exists outside the nature of the only true God a true God of another
   kind, not possessing by virtue of His birth the same nature with Him.

   29. But by these very words He proclaims Himself plainly to be true God
   in the nature of the only true God. To understand this, let our answer
   proceed from statements which He made previously, though the connection
   is unbroken right down to these words. We can then establish the faith
   step by step, and let the confidence of our freedom rest at last on the
   summit of our argument, the true Godhead of Christ. There comes first
   the mystery of His words, He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father;
   and, Do ye not believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father in Me?
   The words that I say unto you, I speak not from Myself; but the Father
   abiding in Me, Himself doeth His works. Believe Me that I am in the
   Father and the Father in Me: or else believe Me for the very works'
   sake [1011] . At the close of this discourse, teeming with deep
   mysteries, follows the reply of the disciples, Now know we that Thou
   knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by
   this we believe that Thou camest forth from God [1012] . They perceived
   in Him the nature of God by the divine powers which He exercised; for
   to know all things, and to read the thoughts of the heart belongs to
   the Son, not to the mere messenger of God. They confessed, therefore,
   that He was come from God, because the power of the divine nature was
   in Him.

   30. The Lord praised their understanding, and answered not that He was
   sent from, but that He was come out from, God, signifying by the words
   "come out from" the great fact of His birth from the incorporeal God.
   He had already proclaimed the birth in the same language, when He said,
   Ye love Me, and believe that I came out from the Father, and came from
   the Father into this world [1013] . He had come from the Father into
   this world, because He had come out from God. To shew that He signifies
   His birth by the coming out, He adds that He has come from the Father;
   and since He had come out from God, because He had come from the
   Father, that "coming out," followed, as it is, by the confession of the
   Father's name, is simply and solely the birth. To the Apostles, then,
   as understanding this mystery of His coming out, He continues, Ye
   believe now, Behold the hour cometh, yea is come, that ye shall be
   scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave Me alone: yet I am not
   alone, because the Father is with Me [1014] . He would shew that the
   "coming out" is not a separation from God the Father, but a birth,
   which by His being born continues in Him the nature of God the Father,
   and therefore He adds that He is not alone, but the Father is with Him;
   in power, that is, and unity of nature, for the Father was abiding in
   Him, speaking in His words, and working in His works. Lastly to shew
   the reason of this whole discourse, He adds, These things I have spoken
   to you, that in Me ye may have peace. In this world ye shall have
   tribulation: but be of good cheer, for I have overcome the world [1015]
   . He has spoken these things unto them, that in Him they may abide in
   peace, not torn asunder by the passion of dissension over debates about
   the faith. He was left alone, but was not alone, for He had come out
   from God, and there abode still in Him the God, from Whom He had come
   out. Therefore he bade them, when they were harassed in the world, to
   wait for His promises, for since He had come out from God, and God was
   still in Him, He had conquered the world.

   31. Then, finally, to express in words the whole Mystery, He raised His
   eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come: glorify Thy Son,
   that Thy Son may glorify Thee. Even as Thou gavest Him authority over
   all flesh, that, whatsoever Thou hast given Him, to them He should give
   eternal life [1016] . Do you call Him weak because He asks to be
   glorified? So be it, if He does not ask to be glorified in order that
   He may Himself glorify Him by Whom He is glorified. Of the receiving
   and giving of glory we have spoken in another book [1017] , and it
   would be superfluous to go over the question again. But of this at
   least we are certain, that He prays for glory in order that the Father
   may be glorified by granting it. But perhaps He is weak in that He
   receives power over all flesh. And indeed the receiving of power might
   be a sign of weakness if He were not able to give to those whom He
   receives life eternal. Yet the very fact of receiving is used to prove
   inferiority of nature. It might, if Christ were not true God by birth
   as truly as is the Unbegotten. But if the receiving of power signifies
   neither more nor less than the Birth, by which He received all that He
   has, that gift does not degrade the Begotten, because it makes Him
   perfectly and entirely what God is. God Unbegotten brought God
   Only-begotten to a perfect birth of divine blessedness: it is, then,
   the mystery of the Father to be the Author of the Birth, but it is no
   degradation to the Son to be made the perfect image of His Author by a
   real birth. The giving of power over all flesh, and this, in order that
   to all flesh might be given eternal life, postulates the Fatherhood of
   the Giver and the Divinity of the Receiver: for by giving is signified
   that the One is the Father, and in receiving the power to give eternal
   life, the Other remains God the Son. All power is therefore natural and
   congenital to the Son of God; and though it is given, that does not
   separate Him from His Author, for that which is given is the property
   of His Author, power to bestow eternal life, to change the corruptible
   into the incorruptible. The Father gave all, the Son received all; as
   is plain from His words, All things, whatsoever the Father hath, are
   Mine [1018] . He is not speaking here of species of created things, and
   processes of material change [1019] , but He unfolds to us the glory of
   the blessed and perfect Divinity, and teaches us that God is here
   manifested as the sum of His attributes, His power, His eternity, His
   providence, His authority; not that we should think that He possesses
   these as something extraneous to Himself, but that by these His
   qualities He Himself has been expressed in terms partly comprehensible
   by our sense. The Only-begotten, therefore, taught that He had all that
   the Father has, and that the Holy Spirit should receive of Him: as He
   says, All things, whatsoever the Father hath, are Mine; therefore I
   said, He shall take of Mine [1020] . All that the Father hath are His,
   delivered and received: but these gifts do not degrade His divinity,
   since they give Him the same attributes as the Father.

   32. These are the steps by which He advances the knowledge of Himself.
   He teaches that He is come out from the Father, proclaims that the
   Father is with Him, and testifies that He has conquered the world. He
   is to be glorified of the Father, and will glorify Him: He will use the
   power He has received, to give to all flesh eternal life. Then hear the
   crowning point, which concludes the whole series, And this is life
   eternal, that they should know Thee, the only true God, and Him Whom
   Thou didst send, even Jesus Christ [1021] . Learn, heretic, to confess,
   if you cannot believe, the faith which gives eternal life. Separate, if
   you can, Christ from God, the Son from the Father, God over all from
   the true God, the One from the Only: if, as you say, eternal life is to
   believe in one only true God without Jesus Christ. But if there is no
   eternal life in a confession of the only true God, which separates
   Christ from Him, how, pray, can Christ be separated from the true God
   for our faith, when He is not separable for our salvation?

   33. I know that laboured solutions of difficult questions do not find
   favour with the reader, but it will perhaps be to the advantage of the
   faith if I permit myself to postpone for a time the exposition of the
   full truth, and wrestle against the heretics with these words of the
   Gospel. You hear the statement of the Lord, This is life eternal, that
   they should know Thee, the only true God, and Him Whom Thou didst send,
   even Jesus Christ. What is it, pray, which suggests to you that Christ
   is not the true God? No further indication is given to shew you what
   you should think of Christ. There is nothing but Jesus Christ: not Son
   of Man, as He generally called Himself: not Son of God, as He often
   declared Himself: not the living bread which cometh down from Heaven
   [1022] , as He repeated to the scandal of many. He says, Thee, the only
   true God, and Him Whom Thou didst send, even Jesus Christ, omitting all
   His usual names and titles, natural and assumed. Hence, if the
   confession of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ, gives us eternal
   life, without doubt the name Jesus Christ has here the full sense of
   that of God.

   34. But perhaps by saying, Thee the only, Christ severs Himself from
   communion and unity with God. Yes, but after the words, Thee the only
   true God, does He not immediately continue, and Him Whom Thou didst
   send, even Jesus Christ? I appeal to the sense of the reader: what must
   we believe Christ to be, when we are commanded to believe in Him also,
   as well as the Father the only true God? Or, perhaps, if the Father is
   the only true God, there is no room for Christ to be God. It might be
   so, if, because there is one God the Father, Christ were not the one
   Lord [1023] . The fact that God the Father is one, leaves Christ none
   the less the one Lord: and similarly the Father's one true Godhead
   makes Christ none the less true God: for we can only obtain eternal
   life if we believe in Christ, as well as in the only true God

   35. Come, heretic, what will your fatuous doctrine instruct us to
   believe of Christ; Christ, Who dispenses eternal life, Who is glorified
   of, and glorifies, the Father, Who overcame the world, Who, deserted,
   is not alone, but has the Father with Him, Who came out from God, and
   came from the Father? He is born with such divine powers; what of the
   nature and reality of God will you allow Him? It is in vain that we
   believe in the only true God the Father, unless we believe also in Him,
   Whom He sent, even Jesus Christ. Why do you hesitate? Tell us, what is
   Christ to be confessed? You deny what has been written: what is left,
   but to believe what has not been written? O unhappy wilfulness! O
   falsehood striving against the truth! Christ is united in belief and
   confession with the only true God the Father: what faith is it, pray,
   to deny Him to be true God, and to call Him a creature, when it is no
   faith to believe in the only true God without Christ? But you are
   narrow, heretic, and unable to receive the Holy Spirit. The sense of
   the heavenly words escapes you; stung with the asp's poison of error,
   you forget that Christ is to be confessed true God in the faith of the
   only true God, if we would obtain eternal life.

   36. But the faith of the Church, while confessing the only true God the
   Father, confesses Christ also. It does not confess Christ true God
   without the Father the only true God; nor the Father the only true God
   without Christ. It confesses Christ true God, because it confesses the
   Father the only true God. Thus the fact that God the Father is the only
   true God constitutes Christ also true God. The Only-begotten God
   suffered no change of nature by His natural birth: and He Who,
   according to the nature of His divine origin was born God from the
   living God, is, by the truth of that nature, inalienable from the only
   true God. Thus there follows from the true divine nature its necessary
   result, that the outcome of true divinity must be a true birth, and
   that the one God could not produce from Himself a God of a second kind.
   The mystery of God consists neither in simplicity, nor in multiplicity:
   for neither is there another God, Who springs from God with qualities
   of His own nature, nor does God remain as a single Person, for the true
   birth of the Son teaches us to confess Him as Father. The begotten God
   did not, therefore, lose the qualities of His nature: He possesses the
   natural power of Him, Whose nature He retains in Himself by a natural
   birth. The divinity in Him is not changed, or degenerate, for if His
   birth had brought with it any defect, it would more justly cast upon
   the Nature, through which He came into being, the reflection of having
   failed to implant in its offspring the properties of itself. The change
   would not degrade the Son, Who had passed into a new substance by
   birth, but the Father, Who had been unable to maintain the constancy of
   His nature in the birth of the Son, and had brought forth something
   external and foreign to Himself.

   37. But, as we have often said, the inadequacy of human ideas has no
   corresponding inadequacy in the unity of God the Father and God the
   Son: as though there were extension, or series, or flux, like a spring
   pouring forth its stream from the source, or a tree supporting its
   branch on the stem, or fire giving out its heat into space. In these
   cases we have expansion without any separation: the parts are bound
   together and do not exist of themselves, but the heat is in the fire,
   the branch in the tree, the stream in the spring. So the thing itself
   alone has an independent existence; the one does not pass into the
   other, for the tree and the branch are one and the same, as also the
   fire and the heat, the spring and the stream. But the Only-begotten God
   is God, subsisting by virtue of a perfect and ineffable birth, true
   Scion of the Unbegotten God, incorporeal offspring of an incorporeal
   nature, living and true God of living and true God, God of a nature
   inseparable from God. The fact of birth does not make Him God with a
   different nature, nor did the generation, which produced His substance,
   change its nature in kind.

   38. Put in the dispensation of the flesh which He assumed, and through
   the obedience whereby He emptied Himself of the form of God, Christ,
   born man, took to Himself a new nature, not by loss of virtue or nature
   but by change of fashion. He emptied Himself of the form of God and
   took the form of a servant, when He was born. But the Father's nature,
   with which He was in natural unity, was not affected by this assumption
   of flesh; while Christ, though abiding in the virtue of His nature, yet
   in respect of the humanity assumed in this temporal change, lost
   together with the form of God the unity with the divine nature also.
   But the Incarnation is summed up in this, that the whole Son, that is,
   His manhood as well as His divinity, was permitted by the Father's
   gracious favour to continue in the unity of the Father's nature, and
   retained not only the powers of the divine nature, but also that
   nature's self. For the object to be gained was that man might become
   God. But the assumed manhood could not in any wise abide in the unity
   of God, unless, through unity with God, it attained to unity with the
   nature of God. Then, since God the Word was in the nature of God, the
   Word made flesh would in its turn also be in the nature of God. Thus,
   if the flesh were united to the glory of the Word, the man Jesus Christ
   could abide in the glory of God the Father, and the Word made flesh
   could be restored to the unity of the Father's nature, even as regards
   His manhood, since the assumed flesh had obtained the glory of the
   Word. Therefore the Father must reinstate the Word in His unity, that
   the offspring of His nature might again return to be glorified in
   Himself: for the unity had been infringed by the new dispensation, and
   could only be restored perfect as before if the Father glorified with
   Himself the flesh assumed by the Son.

   39. For this reason, having already so well prepared their minds for
   the understanding of this belief, the Lord follows up the words, And
   this is eternal life, that they should know Thee, the only true God,
   and Him Whom Thou didst send, even Jesus Christ, with a reference to
   the obedience displayed in His incarnation, I have glorified Thee on
   the earth, I have accomplished the work which Thou gavest Me to do
   [1024] . And then, that we might know the reward of His obedience, and
   the secret purpose of the whole divine plan, He continued, And now, O
   Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine own self, with the glory which I had
   with Thee before the world was [1025] . Does any one deny that Christ
   remained in the nature of God or believe Him separable and distinct
   from the only true God? Let him tell us what is the meaning of this
   prayer. And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine own self. For
   what purpose should the Father glorify Him with His own self? What is
   the signification of these words? What follows from their
   signification? The Father neither stood in need of glory, nor had He
   emptied Himself of the form of His glory. How should He glorify the Son
   with His own self, and with that glory which He had with Him before the
   world was made? And what is the sense of which He had with Him? Christ
   does not say, "The glory which I had before the world was made, when I
   was with Thee," but, The glory which I had with Thee. When I was with
   Thee would signify, "when I dwelt by Thy side:" but which I had with
   Thee teaches the Mystery of His nature. Further, Glorify Me with
   Thyself is not the same as "Glorify Me." He does not ask merely that He
   may be glorified, that He may have some special glory of His own, but
   prays that He may be glorified of the Father with Himself. The Father
   was to glorify Him with Himself, that He might abide in unity with Him
   as before, since the unity with the Father's glory had left Him through
   the obedience of the Incarnation. And this means that the glorifying
   should reinstate Him in that nature, with which He was united by the
   Mystery of His divine birth; that He might be glorified of the Father
   with Himself; that He should resume all that He had had with the Father
   before; that the assumption of the servant's form should not estrange
   from Him the nature of the form of God, but that God should glorify in
   Himself the form of the servant, that it might become for ever the form
   of God, since He, Who had before abode in the form of God, was now in
   the form of a servant. And since the form of a servant was to be
   glorified in the form of God, it was to be glorified in Him in Whose
   form the fashion of the servant's form was to be honoured.

   40. But these words of the Lord are not new, or attested now for the
   first time in the teaching of the Gospels, for He testified to this
   very mystery of God the Father glorifying the Son with Himself by the
   noble joy at the fulfilment of His hope, with which He rejoiced at the
   very moment when Judas went forth to betray Him. Filled with joy that
   His purpose was now to be fully accomplished, He said, Now is the Son
   of Man glorified and God is glorified in Him. If God is glorified in
   Him, He hath glorified Him in Himself, and straightway hath He
   glorified Him [1026] . How can we whose souls are burdened with bodies
   of clay, whose minds are polluted and stained with foul consciousness
   of sin, be so puffed up as to judge of His divine claim? How can we set
   up ourselves to criticise His heavenly nature, rebelling against God
   with our unhallowed and blasphemous disputations? The Lord enunciated
   the faith of the Gospel in the simplest words that could be found, and
   fitted His discourses to our understanding, so far as the weakness of
   our nature allowed Him, without saying anything unworthy of the majesty
   of His own nature. The signification of His opening words cannot, I
   think, be doubted, Now is the Son of Man glorified; that is, all the
   glory which He obtains is not for the Word but for His flesh: not for
   the birth of His Godhead, but for the dispensation of His manhood born
   into the world. What then, may I ask, is the meaning of what follows,
   And God is glorified in Him? I hear that God is glorified in Him; but
   what that can be according to your interpretation, heretic, I do not
   know. God is glorified in Him, in the Son of Man, that is: tell me,
   then, is the Son of Man the same as the Son of God? And since the Son
   of Man is not one and the Son of God another, but He Who is Son of God
   is Himself also Son of Man, Who, pray, is the God Who is glorified in
   this Son of Man, Who is also Son of God?

   41. So God is glorified in the Son of Man, Who is also Son of God. Let
   us see, then, what is this third clause which is added, If God is
   glorified in Him, God hath also glorified Him in Himself. What, pray,
   is this secret mystery? God, in the glorified Son of Man, glorifies a
   glorified God in Himself! The glory of God is in the Son of Man, and
   the glory of God is in the glory of the Son of Man. God glorifies in
   Himself, but man is not glorified through himself. Again the God Who is
   glorified in the man, though He receives the glory, yet is Himself none
   other than God. But since in the glorifying of the Son of Man, the God,
   Who glorifies, glorifies God in Himself, I recognise that the glory of
   Christ's nature is taken into the glory of that nature which glorifies
   His nature. God does not glorify Himself; but He glorifies in Himself
   God glorified in man. And this "glorifies in Himself," though it is not
   a glorifying of Himself, yet means that He took the nature, which He
   glorified, into the glory of His own nature since the God, Who
   glorifies the God glorified in man, glorifies Him in Himself, He proves
   that the God Whom He glorifies is in Himself, for He glorifies Him in
   Himself. Come, heretic, whoever you be, produce the inextricable
   objections of your tortuous doctrine; though they bind themselves in
   their own tangles, yet, marshal them as you will, we shall not be in
   danger of sticking in their snares. The Son of Man is glorified; God is
   glorified in Him; God glorifies in Himself Him, Who is glorified in the
   man. It is not the same that the Son of Man is glorified, as that God
   is glorified in the Son of Man, or that God glorifies in Himself Him,
   Who is glorified in the man. Express in the terms of your unholy
   belief, what you mean by God being glorified in the Son of Man. It must
   certainly be either Christ Who is glorified in the flesh, or the Father
   Who is glorified in Christ. If it is Christ, Christ is manifestly God,
   Who is glorified in the flesh. If it is the Father, we are face to face
   with the mystery of the unity, since the Father is glorified in the
   Son. Thus, if you allow it to be Christ, despite yourself you confess
   Him God; if you understand it of God the Father, you cannot deny the
   nature of God the Father in Christ. Let this be enough concerning the
   glorified Son of Man and God glorified in Him. But when we consider
   that God glorifies in Himself God, Who is glorified in the Son of Man,
   by what loophole, pray, can your profane doctrine escape from the
   confession that Christ is very God according to the verity of His
   nature? God glorifies in Himself Christ, Who was born a man; is Christ
   then outside Him, when He glorifies Him in Himself? He restores to
   Christ in Himself the glory which He had with Himself, and now that the
   servant's form, which He assumed, is in turn assumed into the form of
   God, God Who is glorified in man is glorified in Himself; He was in
   God's self before the dispensation, by which He emptied Himself, and
   now He is united with God's self, both in the form of the servant, and
   in the nature belonging to His birth. For His birth did not make Him
   God of a new and foreign nature, but by generation He was made natural
   Son of a natural Father. After His human birth, when He is glorified in
   His manhood, He shines again with the glory of His own nature; the
   Father glorifies Him in Himself, when He is assumed into the glory of
   His Father's nature, of which He had emptied Himself in the
   dispensation.

   42. The words of the Apostle's faith are a barrier against your
   reckless and frenzied profanity, which forbids you to turn the freedom
   of speculation into licence, and wander into error. Every tongue, he
   says, shall confess that Jesus is Lord in the glory of God the Father
   [1027] . The Father has glorified Him in Himself, therefore He must be
   confessed in the glory of the Father. And if He is to be confessed in
   the Father's glory, and the Father has glorified Him in Himself, is He
   not plainly all that His Father is, since the Father has glorified Him
   in Himself and He is to be confessed in the Father's glory? He is now
   not merely in the glory of God, but in the glory of God the Father. The
   Father glorifies Him, not with a glory from without, but in Himself. By
   taking Him back into that glory, which belongs to Himself, and which He
   had with Him before, the Father glorifies Him with Himself and in
   Himself. Therefore this confession is inseparable from Christ even in
   the humiliation of His manhood, as He says, And this is eternal life,
   that they should know Thee, the only true God, Him, Whom Thou didst
   send, even Jesus Christ [1028] ; for firstly there is no life eternal
   in the confession of God the Father without Jesus Christ, and secondly
   Christ is glorified in the Father. Eternal life is precisely this, to
   know the only true God and Him, Whom He sent, even Jesus Christ; deny
   that Christ is true God, if you can have life by believing in God
   without Him. As for the truth that God the Father is the only true God;
   let this be untrue of the God Christ, unless Christ's glory is wholly
   in the only true God the Father. For if the Father glorifies Him in
   Himself, and the Father is the only true God, Christ is not outside the
   only true God, since the Father, Who is the only true God, glorifies in
   Himself Christ, Who is raised into the glory of God. And in that He is
   glorified by the only true God in Himself, He is not estranged from the
   only true God, for He is glorified by the true God in Himself, the only
   God.

   43. But perhaps the godless unbeliever meets the pious believer with
   the assertion that we cannot understand of the true God a confession of
   powerlessness, such as, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do
   nothing of Himself, but what He hath seen the Father doing [1029] . If
   the twofold anger [1030] of the Jews had not demanded a twofold answer,
   it would indeed have been a confession of weakness, that the Son could
   do nothing of Himself, except what He had seen the Father doing. But
   Christ was answering in the same sentence the double charge of the
   Jews, who accused Him of violating the Sabbath, and of making Himself
   equal with God by calling God His Father. Do you think, then, that by
   fixing attention upon the form of His reply you can withdraw it for the
   substance? We have already treated of this passage in another book
   [1031] ; yet as the exposition of the faith gains rather than loses by
   repetition, let us ponder once more on the words, since the occasion
   demands it of us.

   44. Hear how the necessity for the reply arose:--And for this cause did
   the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to kill Him, because He did these
   things on the Sabbath [1032] . Their anger was so kindled against Him,
   that they desired to kill Him, because He did His works on the Sabbath.
   But let us see also what the Lord answered, My Father worketh even
   until now, and I work [1033] . Tell us, heretic, what is that work of
   the Father; since through the Son, and in the Son, are all things,
   visible and invisible? You, who are wise beyond the Gospels, have
   doubtless obtained from some other secret source of learning the
   knowledge of the Father's work, to reveal Him to us. But the Father
   works in the Son, as the Son Himself says, The words that I say unto
   you, I speak not from Myself, but the Father who abideth in Me, He
   doeth His works [1034] . Do you grasp the meaning of the words, My
   Father worketh even until now? He speaks that we may recognise in Him
   the power of the Father's nature employing the nature, which has that
   power, to work on the Sabbath. The Father works in Him while He works;
   without doubt, then, He works along with the working of the Father, and
   therefore He says, My Father worketh even until now, that this present
   work of His words and actions may be regarded as the working of the
   Father's nature in Himself. This worketh even until now identifies the
   time with the moment of speaking, and therefore we must regard Him as
   referring to that very work of the Father's which He was then doing,
   for it implies the working of the Father at the very time of His words.
   And lest the Faith, being restricted to a knowledge of the Father only,
   should fail of the hope of eternal life, He adds at once, And I work;
   that is, what the Father worketh even until now, the Son also worketh.
   Thus He expounds the whole of the faith; for the work which is now,
   belongs to the present time; and if the Father works, and the Son
   works, no union exists between them, which merges them into a single
   Person [1035] . But the wrath of the bystanders is now redoubled. Hear
   what follows, For this cause, therefore, the Jews sought the more to
   kill Him, because He not only broke the Sabbath, but because He called
   God His own Father, making Himself equal with God [1036] . Allow me
   here to repeat that, by the judgment of the Evangelist and by common
   consent of mankind, the Son is in equality with the Father's nature;
   and that equality cannot exist except by identity of nature. The
   begotten cannot derive what it is save from its source and the thing
   generated cannot be foreign to that which generates it, since from that
   alone has it come to be what it is. Let us see, then, what the Lord
   replied to this double outburst of wrath, Verily, verily, I say unto
   you, the Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He hath seen the
   Father doing: for what things soever He doeth, these the Son also doeth
   in like manner [1037] .

   45. Unless we regard these words as an integral part of His statement,
   we do them violence by forcing upon them an arbitrary and unbelieving
   interpretation. But if His answer refers to the grounds of their anger,
   our faith expresses rightly what He meant to teach, and the perversity
   of the ungodly is left without support for its profane delusion. Let us
   see then whether this reply is suitable to an accusation of working on
   the Sabbath. The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He hath seen
   the Father doing. He has said just above, My Father worketh even until
   now, and I work. If by virtue of the authority of the Father's nature
   within Him, all that He works, He works with the Father in Him, and the
   Father works even until now on the Sabbath, then the Son, Who pleads
   the authority of the Father's working, is acquitted of blame. For the
   words, can do nothing, refer not to strength but to authority; He can
   do nothing of Himself, except what He has seen. Now, to have seen does
   not confer the power to do, and therefore He is not weak, if He can do
   nothing without having seen, but His authority is shewn to depend on
   seeing. Again the words, unless He hath seen, signify the consciousness
   derived from seeing, as when He says to the Apostles, Behold I say unto
   you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, that they are white
   already unto harvest [1038] . With the consciousness that the Father's
   nature is abiding in Him, and working in Him when He works, to
   forestall the idea that the Lord of the Sabbath has violated the
   Sabbath, He pronounces that, The Son can do nothing of Himself, but
   what He hath seen the Father doing. And thus He demonstrates that His
   every action springs from His consciousness of the nature working
   within Him; when He works on the Sabbath, the Father worketh even until
   now on the Sabbath. In what follows, however, He refers to the second
   cause of their indignation, For what things soever He doeth, the Son
   doeth in like manner. Is it false that, what things soever the Father
   doeth, the Son doeth in like manner? Does the Son of God admit a
   distinction between the Father's power and working and His own? Does He
   shrink from claiming the equality of homage befitting an equal in power
   and nature? If He does, disdain His weakness, and degrade Him from
   equality of nature with the Father. But He Himself says only a little
   later, That all may honour the Son, even as they honour the Father, He
   that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father which sent Him
   [1039] . Discover, if you can, the inferiority, when Both are equal in
   honour; make out the weakness, when Both work with the same power.

   46. Why do you misrepresent the occasion of the reply in order to
   detract from His divinity? To the working on the Sabbath He answers
   that He can do nothing of Himself, but what He hath seen the Father
   doing: to demonstrate His equality, He professes to do what things
   soever the Father doeth. Enforce your charge of weakness, by His answer
   concerning the Sabbath, if you can disprove that what things soever the
   Father doeth, the Son doeth in like manner. But if what things soever
   includes all things without exception; in what is He found weak, when
   there is nothing that the Father doeth, which He cannot also do? Where
   is His claim to equality refuted by any episode of weakness, when one
   and the same honour is demanded for Him and for the Father? If Both
   have the same power in operation, and both claim the same reverence in
   worship, I cannot understand what dishonour of inferiority can exist,
   since Father and Son possess the same power of operation, and equality
   of honour.

   47. Although we have treated this passage as the facts themselves
   explain it, yet to prove that the Lord's words, The Son can do nothing
   of Himself, but what He hath seen the Father doing, so far from
   supporting this unholy degradation of His nature, testify to His
   conscious possession of the nature of the Father, by Whose authority He
   worked on the Sabbath, let us shew them that we can produce another
   saying of the Lord, which bears upon the question, I do nothing of
   Myself, but as the Father taught Me, I speak these things. And He that
   sent Me is with Me: He hath not left Me alone, for I do always the
   things that are pleasing to Him [1040] . Do you feel what is implied in
   the words, The Son can do nothing, but what He hath seen the Father
   doing? Or what a mystery is contained in the saying, I can do nothing
   of myself, and He hath not left me alone, for I do always the things
   that are pleasing to Him? He does nothing of Himself, because the
   Father abides in Him; can you reconcile with this the fact that the
   Father does not leave Him, because He does the things which are
   pleasing to Him? Your interpretation, heretic, sets up a contradiction
   between these two statements, that He does nothing of Himself, unless
   taught of the Father abiding in Him, and that the Father abides in Him,
   because He does always the things which are pleasing to Him. For if the
   Father's abiding in Him means that He does nothing of Himself, how
   could He have deserved that the Father should abide in Him, by doing
   always the things which are pleasing to the Father. It is no merit, not
   to do of oneself what one does. Conversely, how are the Son's deeds
   pleasing to the Father, if the Father Himself, abiding in the Son, be
   their Author? Impiety, thou art in a sore strait; the well-armed piety
   of the faith hath hemmed thee in. The Son is either an Agent, or He is
   not. If He is not an Agent, how does He please by his acts? If He is an
   Agent, in what sense are deeds, done not of Himself, His own? On the
   one hand, He must have done the things which are pleasing; on the
   other, it is no merit to have done, yet not of oneself, what one does.

   48. But, my opponent, the unity of Their nature is such, that the
   several action of Each implies the conjoint action of Both, and Their
   joint activity a several activity of Each. Conceive the Son acting, and
   the Father acting through Him. He acts not of Himself, for we have to
   explain how the Father abides in Him. He acts in His own Person, for in
   accordance with His birth as the Son, He does Himself what is pleasing.
   His acting not of Himself would prove Him weak, were it not the case
   that He so acts that what He does is pleasing to the Father. But He
   would not be in the unity of the divine nature, if the deeds which He
   does, and wherein He pleases, were not His own, and He were merely
   prompted to action by the Father abiding in Him. The Father then in
   abiding in Him, teaches Him, and the Son in acting, acts not of
   Himself; while, on the other hand, the Son, though not acting of
   Himself, acts Himself, for what He does is pleasing. Thus is the unity
   of Their nature retained in Their action, for the One, though He acts
   Himself, does not act of Himself, while the Other, Who has abstained
   from action, is yet active.

   49. Connect with this that saying, which you lay hold of to support the
   imputation of infirmity, All that the Father giveth Me shall come unto
   Me, and him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out; for I am come
   down from heaven not to do Mine own will, but the will of the Father
   that sent Me [1041] . But, perhaps you say, the Son has no freedom of
   will: the weakness of His nature subjects Him to necessity, and He is
   denied free-will, and subjected to necessity that He may not reject
   those who are given to Him and come from the Father. Nor was the Lord
   content to demonstrate the mystery of the Unity by His action in not
   rejecting those who are given to Him, nor seeking to do His own will
   instead of the will of him that sent Him, but when the Jews, after the
   repetition of the words, Him that sent Me, began to murmur, He confirms
   our interpretation by saying, Every one who heareth from the Father and
   learneth, cometh unto Me. Not that any man hath seen the Father, save
   He which is from God, He hath seen the Father. Verily, verily, I say
   unto you, he that believeth in Me hath eternal life [1042] . Now, tell
   me first, where has the Father been heard, and where has He taught His
   hearers? No one hath seen the Father, save Him Who is from God: has any
   one ever heard Him Whom no one has ever seen? He that has heard from
   the Father, comes to the Son: and he that has heard the teaching of the
   Son, has heard the teaching of the Father's nature, for its properties
   are revealed in the Son. When, therefore, we hear the Son teaching, we
   must understand that we are hearing the teaching of the Father. No one
   hath seen the Father, yet he who comes to the Son, hears and learns
   from the Father to come: it is manifest, therefore, that the Father
   teaches through the words of the Son, and, though seen of none, speaks
   to us in the manifestation of the Son, because the Son, by virtue of
   His perfect birth, possesses all the properties of His Father's nature.
   The Only-begotten God desiring, therefore, to testify of the Father's
   authority, yet inculcating His own unity with the Father's nature, does
   not cast out those who are given to Him of the Father, or work His own
   will instead of the will of Him that sent Him: not that He does not
   will what He does, or is not Himself heard when He teaches; but in
   order that He may reveal Him Who sent Him, and Himself the Sent, under
   the aspect of one indistinguishable nature, He shews all that He wills,
   and says, and does, to be the will and works of the Father.

   50. But He proves abundantly that His will is free by the words, As the
   Father raiseth the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son also
   quickeneth whom He will [1043] . When the equality of Father and Son in
   power and honour is indicated, then the freedom of the Son's will is
   made manifest: when Their unity is demonstrated, His conformity to the
   Father's will is signified, for what the Father wills, the Son does.
   But to do is something more than to obey a will: the latter would imply
   external necessity, while to do another's will requires unity with him,
   being an act of volition. In doing the will of the Father the Son
   teaches that through the identity of Their nature His will is the same
   in nature with the Father's, since all that He does is the Father's
   will. The Son plainly wills all that the Father wills, for wills of the
   same nature cannot dissent from one another. It is the will of the
   Father which is revealed in the words, For this is the will of My
   Father, that every one that beholdeth the Son and believeth in Him,
   should have eternal life, and that I should raise Him up at the last
   day [1044] . Hear now, whether the will of the Son is discordant with
   the Father's, when He says, Father, those whom Thou hast given Me, I
   will that where I am they also may be with Me [1045] . Here is no doubt
   that the Son wills: for while the Father wills that those who believe
   in the Son should have eternal life, the Son wills that the believer
   should be where He is. For is it not eternal life to dwell together
   with Christ? And does He not grant to the believer in Him all
   perfection of blessing when He says, No one hath known the Son save the
   Father, neither hath any known the Father save the Son, and he to
   whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal Him [1046] ? Has He not freedom of
   will, when He wills to impart to us the knowledge of the Father's
   mystery? Is not His will so free that He can bestow on whom He will the
   knowledge of Himself and His Father? Thus Father and Son are manifestly
   joint Possessors of a nature common to Both through birth and common
   through unity: for the Son is free of will, but what He does willingly
   is an act of the Father's will.

   51. He who has not grasped the manifest truths of the faith, obviously
   cannot have an understanding of its mysteries; because he has not the
   doctrine of the Gospel he is an alien to the hope of the Gospel. We
   must confess the Father to be in the Son and the Son in the Father, by
   unity of nature, by might of power, as equal in honour as Begetter and
   Begotten. But, perhaps you say, the witness of our Lord Himself is
   contrary to this declaration, for He says, The Father is greater than I
   [1047] . Is this, heretic, the weapon of your profanity? Are these the
   arms of your frenzy? Has it escaped you, that the Church does not admit
   two Unbegotten, or confess two Fathers? Have you forgotten the
   Incarnation of the Mediator, with the birth, the cradle, the childhood,
   the passion, the cross and the death belonging to it? When you were
   born again, did you not confess the Son of God, born of Mary? If the
   Son of God, of Whom these things are true, says, The Father is greater
   than I, can you be ignorant that the Incarnation for your salvation was
   an emptying of the form of God, and that the Father, unaffected by this
   assumption of human conditions, abode in the blessed eternity of His
   own incorrupt nature without taking our flesh? We confess that the
   Only-begotten God, while He abode in the form of God, abode in the
   nature of God, but we do not at once reabsorb into the substance of the
   divine unity His unity bearing the form of a servant. Nor do we teach
   that the Father is in the Son, as if He entered into Him bodily; but
   that the nature which was begotten by the Father of the same kind as
   His own, possessed by nature the nature which begot it [1048] : and
   that this nature, abiding in the form of the nature which begot it,
   took the form of human nature and weakness. Christ possessed all that
   was proper to His nature: but the form of God had departed from Him,
   for by emptying Himself of it, He had taken the form of a servant. The
   divine nature had not ceased to be, but still abiding in Him, it had
   taken upon itself the humility of earthly birth, and was exercising its
   proper power in the fashion of the humility it assumed. So God, born of
   God, being found as man in the form of a servant, but acting as God in
   His miracles, was at once God as His deeds proved, and yet man, for He
   was found in the fashion of man.

   52. Therefore, in the discourse we have expounded above, He had borne
   witness to the unity of His nature with the Father's: He that hath seen
   Me, hath seen the Father also [1049] : The Father is in Me, and I in
   the Father [1050] These two passages perfectly agree, since Both
   Persons are of equal nature; to behold the Son is the same as to behold
   the Father; that the One abides in the One shows that They are
   inseparable. And, lest they should misunderstand Him, as though when
   they beheld His body, they beheld the Father in Him, He had added,
   Believe Me, that I am in the Father and the Father in Me: or else
   believe Me for the very works' sake [1051] . His power belonged to His
   nature, and His working was the exercise of that power; in the exercise
   of that power, then, they might recognise in Him the unity with the
   Father's nature. In proportion as any one recognised Him to be God in
   the power of His nature, he would come to know God the Father, present
   in that mighty nature. The Son, Who is equal with the Father, shewed by
   His works that the Father could be seen in Him: in order that we,
   perceiving in the Son a nature like the Father's in its power, might
   know that in Father and Son there is no distinction of nature.

   53. So the Only-begotten God, just before He finished His work in the
   flesh, and completed the mystery of taking the servant's form, in order
   to establish our faith, thus speaks, Ye heard how I said unto you, I go
   away, and I came unto you. If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice, because I
   go unto the Father; for the Father is greater than I [1052] . He has
   already, in an earlier part of this very discourse unfolded in all its
   aspects the teaching of His divine nature: can we, then, on the
   strength of this confession deprive the Son of that equality, which His
   true birth has perfected in Him? Or is it an indignity to the
   Only-begotten God, that the Unbegotten God is His Father, seeing that
   His Only-begotten birth from the Unbegotten gives Him the Only-begotten
   nature? He is not the source of His own being, nor did He, being
   Himself non-existent, bring to pass His own birth out of nothing; but,
   existing as a living nature and from a living nature, He possesses the
   power of that nature, and declares the authority of that nature, by
   bearing witness to His honour, and in His honour to the grace belonging
   to the birth He received. He pays to the Father the tribute of
   obedience to the will of Him Who sent Him, but the obedience of
   humility does not dissolve the unity of His nature: He becomes obedient
   unto death, but, after death, He is above every name [1053] .

   54. But if His equality is doubted because the Name is given Him after
   He put off the form of God, we dishonour Him by ignoring the mystery of
   the humility which He assumed. The birth of His humanity brought to Him
   a new nature, and His form was changed in His humility, by the
   assumption of a servant's form, but now the giving of the Name restores
   to Him equality of form. Ask yourself what it is, which is given. If
   the gift be something pertaining to God, the grant to the receiving
   nature does not impair the divinity of the giving nature. Again, the
   words, And gave Him the Name, involve a mystery in the giving, but the
   giving of the Name does not make it another name. To Jesus is given,
   that to Him, Every knee shall bow of things in heaven, and things on
   earth, and things under the earth, and every tongue confess that Jesus
   is Lord in the glory of God the Father [1054] . The honour is given Him
   that He should be confessed in the glory of God the Father. Do you hear
   Him say, The Father is greater than I? Know Him also, of Whom it is
   said in reward of His obedience, And gave unto Him the Name which is
   above every name [1055] ; hear Him Who said, I and the Father are one;
   He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also; I am in the Father,
   and the Father in Me. Consider the honour of the confession which is
   granted Him, that Jesus is Lord in the glory of God the Father. When,
   then, is the Father greater than the Son? Surely, when He gives Him the
   Name above every name. And on the other hand, when is it that the Son
   and the Father are one? Surely, when every tongue confesses that Jesus
   is Lord in the glory of God the Father. If, then, the Father is greater
   through His authority to give, is the Son less through the confession
   of receiving? The Giver is greater: but the Receiver is not less, for
   to Him it is given to be one with the Giver. If it is not given to
   Jesus to be confessed in the glory of God the Father, He is less than
   the Father. But if it is given Him to be in that glory, in which the
   Father is, we see in the prerogative of giving, that the Giver is
   greater, and in the confession of the gift, that the Two are One. The
   Father is, therefore, greater than the Son: for manifestly He is
   greater, Who makes another to be all that He Himself is, Who imparts to
   the Son by the mystery of the birth the image of His own unbegotten
   nature, Who begets Him from Himself into His own form, and restores Him
   again from the form of a servant to the form of God, Whose work it is
   that Christ, born God according to the Spirit in the glory of the
   Father, but now Jesus Christ dead in the flesh, should be once more God
   in the glory of the Father. When, therefore, Christ says that He is
   going to the Father, He reveals the reason why they should rejoice if
   they loved Him, because the Father is greater than He.

   55. After the explanation that love is the source of this joy, because
   love rejoices that Jesus is to be confessed in the glory of God the
   Father, He next expresses His claim to receive back that glory, in the
   words, For the prince of this world cometh, and he hath nothing in Me
   [1056] . The prince of this world hath nothing in Him: for being found
   in fashion as a man, He dwelt in the likeness of the flesh of sin, yet
   apart from the sin of the flesh, and in the flesh condemned sin by sin
   [1057] . Then, giving obedience to the Father's command as His only
   motive, He adds, But that the world may know that I love the Father,
   even as the Father gave Me commandment, so I do. Arise, let us go hence
   [1058] . In His zeal to do the Father's commandment, He rises and
   hastens to complete the mystery of His bodily passion. But the next
   moment He unfolds the mystery of His assumption of flesh. Through this
   assumption we are in Him, as the branches in the vinestock [1059] ; and
   unless He had become the Vine, we could have borne no good fruit. He
   exhorts us to abide in Himself, through faith in His assumed body,
   that, since the Word has been made flesh, we may be in the nature of
   His flesh, as the branches are in the Vine. He separates the form of
   the Father's majesty from the humiliation of the assumed flesh by
   calling Himself the Vine, the source of unity for all the branches, and
   the Father the careful Husbandman, Who prunes away its useless and
   barren branches to be burnt in the fire. In the words, He that hath
   seen Me, hath seen the Father also, and The words that I say unto you,
   I speak not of Myself, but the Father abiding in Me, He doeth His
   works, and Believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me,
   He reveals the truth of His birth and the mystery of His Incarnation.
   He then continues the thread of His discourse, until He comes to the
   saying, The Father is greater than I; and after this, to complete the
   meaning of these words, He hastens to add the illustration of the
   husbandman, the vine, and the branches, which directs our notice to His
   submission to bodily humiliation. He says that, because the Father is
   greater than Himself, He is going to the Father, and that love should
   rejoice, that He is going to the Father, that is, to receive back His
   glory from the Father: with Him, and in Him, to be glorified not with a
   brand-new honour, but with the old, not with some strange honour but
   with that which He had with Him before. If then Christ shall not enter
   into Him with glory, to abide in the glory of God, you may disparage
   His nature: but if the glory which He receives is the proof of His
   Godhead, recognise that it as Giver of this proof that the Father is
   the greater.

   56. Why do you distort the Incarnation into a blasphemy? Why pervert
   the mystery of salvation into a weapon of destruction? The Father, Who
   glorifies the Son, is greater: The Son, Who is glorified in the Father,
   is not less. How can He be less, when He is in the glory of God the
   Father? And how can the Father not be greater? The Father therefore is
   greater, because He is Father: but the Son, because He is Son, is not
   less. By the birth of the Son the Father is constituted greater: the
   nature that is His by birth, does not suffer the Son to be less. The
   Father is greater, for the Son prays Him to render glory to manhood He
   has assumed. The Son is not less, for He receives back His glory with
   the Father. Thus are consummated at once the mystery of the Birth, and
   the dispensation of the Incarnation. The Father, as Father, and as
   glorifying Him Who now is Son of Man, is greater: Father and Son are
   one, in that the Son, born of the Father, after assuming an earthly
   body is taken back to the glory of the Father.

   57. The birth, therefore, does not constitute His nature inferior, for
   He is in the form of God, as being born of God. And though by their
   very signification, Unbegotten' and Begotten' seem to be opposed, yet
   the Begotten cannot be excluded from the nature of the Unbegotten, for
   there is none other from whom He could derive His substance. He does
   not indeed share in the supreme majesty of being unbegotten: but He has
   received from the Unbegotten God the nature of divinity. Thus faith
   confesses the eternity of the Only-begotten God, though it can give no
   meaning to begetting or beginning in His case. His nature forbids us to
   say that He ever began to be, for His birth lies beyond the beginnings
   of time. But while we confess Him existent before all ages, we do not
   hesitate to pronounce Him born in timeless eternity, for we believe His
   birth, though we know it never had a beginning.

   58. Seeking to disparage His nature, the heretics lay hold of such
   sayings as, The Father is greater than I, or, But of that day and hour
   knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, but the
   Father only [1060] . It is turned to a reproach against the
   Only-begotten God that He did not know the day and the hour: that,
   though God, born of God, He is not in the perfection of divine nature,
   since He is subjected to the limitation of ignorance; that is, an
   external force stronger than Himself, triumphing, as it were, over His
   weakness, makes Him captive to this infirmity. And, indeed, it is with
   an apparent right to claim that this confession is inevitable, that the
   heretics, in their frenzy, would drive us to such a blasphemous
   interpretation. The words are those of the Lord Himself, and what, it
   may be asked, could be more unholy than to corrupt His express
   assertion by our attempt to explain it away.

   59. But, before we investigate the meaning and occasion of these words,
   let us first appeal to the judgment of common sense. Is it credible,
   that He, Who stands to all things as the Author of their present and
   future, should not know all things? If all things are through and in
   Christ, and in such a way through Christ that they are also in Him,
   must not that, which is both in Him and through Him, be also in His
   knowledge, when that knowledge, by virtue of a nature which cannot be
   nescient, habitually apprehends what is neither in, nor through Him
   [1061] ? But that which derives from Him alone its origin, and has in
   Him alone the efficient cause of its present state and future
   development, can that be beyond the ken of His nature, through which is
   effected, and in which is contained, all that it is and shall be? Jesus
   Christ knows the thoughts of the mind, as it is now, stirred by present
   motives, and as it will be to-morrow, aroused by the impulse of future
   desires. Hear the witness of the Evangelist, For Jesus knew from the
   beginning who they were that believed not, and who it was that should
   betray Him [1062] . By its virtue His nature could perceive the unborn
   future, and foresee the awakening of passions yet dormant in the mind:
   do you believe that it did not know what is through itself, and within
   itself? He is Lord of all that belongs to others, is He not Lord of His
   own? Remember what is written of Him, All things have been created
   through Him, and in Him: and He is before all things [1063] : or again,
   For it was the good pleasure of the Father, that in Him should all the
   fulness dwell, and through Him to reconcile all things unto Himself
   [1064] , all fulness is in Him, all things were made through Him, and
   are reconciled in Him, and for that day of reconciliation we wait
   expectant; did He not, then, know it, when its time was in His hands,
   and fixed by His mystery, for it is the day of His coming, of which the
   Apostle wrote, When Christ, Who is your life, shall be manifested, then
   shall ye also with Him be manifested in glory [1065] . No one is
   ignorant of that which is through himself and within himself: shall
   Christ come, and does He not know the day of His coming? It is His day,
   for the same Apostle says, The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in
   the night [1066] : can we believe, then, that He did not know it? Human
   natures, so far as in them lies, foresee what they determine to do:
   knowledge of the end desired accompanies the desire to act: does not He
   Who is born God, know what is in, and through, Himself? The times are
   through Him, the day is in His hand, for the future is constituted
   through Him, and the Dispensation of His coming is in His power: is His
   understanding so dull, that the sense of His torpid nature does not
   tell Him what He has Himself determined? Is He like the brute and the
   beast, which, animated by no reason or foresight, not even conscious of
   acting but driven to and fro by the impulse of irrational desire,
   proceed to their end with fortuitous and uncertain course?

   60. But, again, how can we believe that the Lord of glory, because He
   was able not to know the day of His own coming, was of a discordant and
   imperfect nature, subject to the necessity of coming, but ignorant of
   the day of His coming? This would make God weaker than the power of
   ignorance, which took from Him the prerogative of knowledge. Then, too,
   how we redouble occasions of blasphemy, if we impute not only infirmity
   to Christ, but also defect to God the Father, saying that He defrauded
   of foreknowledge of this day the Only-begotten God, the Son of His
   love, and in malice denied Him certainty concerning the future
   consummation: suffered Him to know the day and hour of His passion, but
   withheld from Him the day of His power, and the hour of His glory among
   His Saints: took from Him the knowledge of His blessedness, while He
   granted Him prescience of His death? The trembling conscience of man
   dare not presume to think thus of God, or ascribe to Him such taint of
   human fickleness, that the Father should deny anything to the Son, or
   the Son, Who was born as God, should possess an imperfect knowledge.

   61. But God can never be anything but love, or anything but the Father:
   and He, Who loves, does not envy; He Who is Father, is wholly and
   entirely Father. This name admits of no compromise: no one can be
   partly father, and partly not. A father is father in respect of his
   whole personality; all that he is is present in the child, for
   paternity by piecemeal is impossible: not that paternity extends to
   self-generation, but that a father is altogether father in all his
   qualities, to the offsprings born of him. According to the constitution
   of human bodies, which are made of dissimilar elements, and composed of
   various parts, the father must be father of the whole, since a perfect
   birth hands on to the child all the different elements and parts, which
   are in the father. The father is, therefore, father of all that is his;
   the birth proceeds from the whole of himself, and constitutes the whole
   of the child. God, however, has no body, but simple essence: no parts,
   but an all-embracing whole: nothing quickened, but everything living.
   God is therefore all life, and all one, not compounded of parts, but
   perfect in His simplicity, and, as the Father, must be Father to His
   begotten in all that He Himself is, for the perfect birth of the Son
   makes Him perfect Father in all that He has. So, if He is proper Father
   to the Son, the Son must possess all the properties of the Father. Yet
   how can this be, if the Son has not the quality of prescience, if there
   is anything from His Author, which is wanting in His birth? To say that
   there is one of God's properties which He has not, is almost equivalent
   to saying that He has none of them. And what is proper to God, if not
   the knowledge of the future, a vision, which embraces the invisible and
   unborn world, and has within its scope that which is not yet, but is to
   be?

   62. Moreover Paul, the teacher of the Gentiles, forestalls the impious
   falsehood, that the Only-begotten God was partially nescient. Listen to
   his words, Being instructed in love, unto all riches of the fulness of
   understanding, unto knowledge of the mystery of God, even Christ, in
   Whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden [1067] . God,
   even Christ, is the mystery, and all the treasures of wisdom and
   knowledge are hidden in Him. But a portion is one thing, the whole
   another: a part is not the same as all, nor can all be called a part.
   If the Son does not know the day, all the treasures of knowledge are
   not in Him; but He has all the treasures of knowledge in Him, therefore
   He is not ignorant of the day. But we must remember that those
   treasures of knowledge were hidden in Him, though not, because hidden,
   therefore wanting. As in God, they are in Him: as in the mystery, they
   are hidden. But Christ, the mystery of God, in Whom are all the
   treasures of knowledge hidden, is not Himself hidden from our eyes and
   minds. Since then He is Himself the mystery, let us see whether He is
   ignorant when He does not know. If elsewhere His profession of
   ignorance does not imply that He does not know, here also it will be
   wrong to call Him ignorant, if He does not know. In Him are hidden all
   the treasures of knowledge, and so His ignorance is an economy rather
   than ignorance. Thus we can assign a reason for His ignorance, without
   the assumption that He did not know.

   63. Whenever God says that He does not know, He professes ignorance
   indeed, but is not under the defect of ignorance. It is not because of
   the infirmity of ignorance that He does not know, but because it is not
   yet the time to speak, or the divine Plan to act. Thus He says to
   Abraham, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is full, and their sin is very
   grievous. Therefore I will go down now, and see if they have done
   altogether according to the cry of it: and if not, I will know [1068] .
   Here we perceive God not knowing that which notwithstanding He knows.
   He knows that their sins are very grievous, but He comes down again to
   see whether they have done altogether, and to know if they have not. We
   observe, then, that He is not ignorant, although He does not know, but
   that, when the time comes for action, He knows. This knowledge is not,
   therefore, a change from ignorance, but the coming of the fulness of
   time. He waits still to know, but we cannot suppose that He does not
   know: therefore His not knowing what He knows, and His knowing what He
   does not know, is nothing else than a divine economy in word and deed.

   64. We cannot, then, doubt that the knowledge of God depends on the
   occasion and not on any change on His part: by the occasion being meant
   the occasion, not of obtaining but of declaring knowledge, as we learn
   from His words to Abraham, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do
   thou anything unto him, for now I know that thou fearest thy God, and
   hast not withheld thy beloved son, for My sake [1069] . God knows now,
   but that now I know is a profession of previous ignorance: yet it is
   not true, that until now God did not know the faith of Abraham, for it
   is written, Abraham believed in God, and it was counted to him for
   righteousness [1070] , and therefore this now I know marks the time
   when Abraham received this testimony, not when God began to know.
   Abraham had proved, by the sacrifice of his son, the love he bore to
   God, and God knew it at the time He spoke: but as we cannot suppose
   that He did not know before, we must for this reason suppose that He
   took knowledge of it then because He spoke.

   By way of example, we have chosen for our consideration this passage
   out of many in the Old Testament, which treat of the knowledge of God,
   in order to shew that when God does not know, the cause lies, not in
   His ignorance, but in the occasion.

   65. We find our Lord in the Gospels knowing, yet not knowing, many
   things. Thus He does not know the workers of iniquity, who glory in
   their mighty works and in His name, for He says to them, Then will
   swear, I never knew you; depart from Me, all ye that work iniquity
   [1071] . He declares with an oath even, that He does not know them, but
   nevertheless He knows them to be workers of iniquity. He does not know
   them, not because He does not know, but because by the iniquity of
   their deeds they are unworthy of His knowledge, and He even confirms
   His denial with the sanctity of an oath. By the virtue of His nature He
   could not be ignorant, by the mystery of His will He refused to know.
   Again the Unbegotten God does not know the foolish virgins; He is
   ignorant of those who were too careless to have their oil ready, when
   He entered the chamber of His glorious coming. They come and implore,
   and so far from not knowing them, He cries, Verily, I say unto you, I
   know you not [1072] . Their coming and their prayer compel Him to
   recognize them, but His profession of ignorance refers to His will, not
   to His nature: they are unworthy to be known of Him to Whom nothing is
   unknown. Hence, in order that we should not impute His ignorance to
   infirmity, He says immediately to the Apostles, Watch therefore, for ye
   know not the day nor the hour [1073] . When He bids them watch, for
   they know not the day or the hour, He points out that He knew not the
   virgins, because through sleep and neglect they had no oil, and
   therefore were unworthy to enter into His chamber.

   66. The Lord Jesus Christ, then, Who searcheth the heart and the reins
   [1074] , has no weakness in His nature, that He should not know, for,
   as we perceive, even the fact of His ignorance proceeds from the
   omniscience of His nature. Yet if any there be, who impute to Him
   ignorance, let them tremble, lest He Who knows their thoughts should
   say to them, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts [1075] ? The
   All-knowing, though not ignorant of thoughts and deeds, sometimes
   enquires as if He were, as for instance when He asks the woman who it
   was that touched the hem of His garment, or the Apostles, why they
   quarrelled among themselves, or the mourners, where the sepulchre of
   Lazarus was: but His ignorance was not ignorance, except in words. It
   is against reason that He should know from afar the death and burial of
   Lazarus, but not the place of his sepulchre: that He should read the
   thoughts of the mind, and not recognise the faith of the woman: that He
   should not need to ask concerning anything [1076] , yet be ignorant of
   the dissension of the Apostles. But He, Who knows all things, sometimes
   by a practice of economy professes ignorance, even though He is not
   ignorant. Thus, in the case of Abraham, God concealed His knowledge for
   a time: in that of the foolish virgins and the workers of iniquity, He
   refused to recognise the unworthy: in the mystery of the Son of Man,
   His asking, as if ignorant, expressed His humanity. He accommodated
   Himself to the reality of His birth in the flesh in everything to which
   the weakness of our nature is subject, not in such wise that He became
   weak in His divine nature, but that God, born man, assumed the
   weaknesses of humanity, yet without thereby reducing His unchangeable
   nature to a weak nature, for the unchangeable nature was that wherein
   He mysteriously assumed flesh. He, Who was God is man, but, being man,
   has not ceased to remain God. Conducting Himself then as one born man,
   and proving Himself such, though remaining God the Word, He often uses
   the language of man (though God, speaking as God, makes frequent use of
   human terms), and does not know that which it is not yet time to
   declare, or which is not deserving of His recognition.

   67. We can now understand why He said that He knew not the day. If we
   believe Him to have been really ignorant, we contradict the Apostle,
   who says, In Whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden
   [1077] . There is knowledge which is hidden in Him, and because it has
   to be hidden, it must sometimes for this purpose be professed as
   ignorance, for once declared, it will no longer be secret. In order,
   therefore, that the knowledge may remain hidden, He declares that He
   does not know. But if He does not know, in order that the knowledge may
   remain hidden, this ignorance is not due to His nature, which is
   omniscient, for He is ignorant solely in order that it may be hidden.
   Nor is it hard to see why the knowledge of the day is hidden. He
   exhorts us to watch continually with unrelaxing faith, and withholds
   from us the security of certain knowledge, that our minds may be kept
   on the stretch by the uncertainty of suspense, and while they hasten
   towards and continually look for the day of His coming, may always
   watch in hope; and that, though we know the time must come, its very
   uncertainty may make us careful and vigilant. Thus the Lord says,
   Therefore be ye also ready, for ye know not what hour the Son of Man
   shall come [1078] ; and again, Blessed is that servant whom His lord,
   when He cometh, shall find so doing [1079] . The ignorance is,
   therefore, a means not to delude, but to encourage in perseverance. It
   is no loss to be denied a knowledge which it is an advantage not to
   have, for the security of knowledge might breed negligence of the
   faith, which now is concealed, while the uncertainty of expectation
   keeps us continually prepared, even as the master of the house, with
   the fear of loss before his eyes, watches and guards against the
   dreaded coming of the thief, who chooses the time of sleep for his
   work.

   68. Manifestly, therefore, the ignorance of God is not ignorance but a
   mystery: in the economy of His actions and words and manifestations, He
   does not know and at the same time He knows, or knows and at the same
   time does not know. But we must ask, whether it may not be through the
   Son's infirmity that He knows not what the Father knows. He could
   perhaps read the thoughts of the human heart, because His stronger
   nature can unite itself with a weaker in all its movements, and by the
   force of its power, as it were, pass through and through the feeble
   nature. But a weaker nature is powerless to penetrate a stronger: light
   things may be penetrated by heavy, rare by dense, liquid by solid, but
   the heavy are impenetrable to the light, the dense to the rare, and the
   solid to the liquid: the strong are not exposed to the weak, but the
   weak are penetrated by the strong. Therefore, the heretics say, the Son
   knew not the thoughts of the Father, because, being Himself weak, He
   could not approach the more powerful and enter into Him, or pass
   through Him.

   69. Should any one presume, not merely to speak thus of the
   Only-begotten God in the rashness of his tongue, but even to think so
   in the wickedness of his heart, let him hear what the Apostle thought
   of the Holy Ghost, from the words he wrote to the Corinthians, But unto
   us God revealed them through the Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all
   things, yea the deep things of God. For who among men knoweth the
   things of a man, which are in him, save the spirit of the man which is
   in him? Even so the things which are in God, none knoweth, save the
   Spirit of God [1080] . But let us cast aside these empty illustrations
   of material things, and measure God born of God, Spirit of Spirit, by
   His own powers and not by earthly conditions. Let us measure Him not by
   our own senses, but by His divine claims. Let us believe Him Who said,
   He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also [1081] . Let us not
   forget that He said, Believe, if only by My works, that the Father is
   in Me, and I in the Father [1082] , and again, I and the Father are one
   [1083] . If the names which correspond to realities, when intelligibly
   used, impart to us any true information, then He Who is seen in Another
   by the eye of understanding is not different in nature from that Other;
   not different in kind, since He abides in the Father, and the Father in
   Him; not separate, since Both are One. Perceive their unity in the
   indivisibility of their nature, and apprehend the mystery of that
   indivisible nature by regarding the One as the mirror of the Other. But
   remember that He is the mirror, not as the image reflected by the
   splendour of a nature outside Himself, but as being a living nature,
   indistinguishable from the Father's living nature, derived wholly from
   the whole of His Father's, having the Father's in Him because He is the
   Only begotten, and abiding in the Father, because He is God.

   70. The heretics cannot deny that the Lord used these words to signify
   the mystery His birth, but they attempt to escape from them by
   referring them to a harmony of will. They make the unity of God the
   Father and God the Son not one of divinity, but merely of will: as if
   the divine teaching were poor in expression and the Lord could not have
   said, I and the Father are one in will; or as if those words could have
   the same meaning as I and the Father are one; or as if He meant, He
   that hath seen My will, hath seen the will of My Father also, but,
   being unskilled statement, tried to express that idea in the words, He
   that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also: or as if the divine
   vocabulary did not contain the terms, The will of My Father is in Me,
   and My will is in the Father, but this thought could be expressed by I
   in the Father and the Father in Me. All this is nauseous and irreverent
   nonsense; common sense condemns the judgment of such silly fancies, as
   that the Lord could not say what He wanted, or did not say what He
   said. True, we find Him speaking in parables and allegories, but it is
   a different thing to strengthen one's words with illustrations, or
   satisfy the dignity of the subject with the help of suggestive
   proverbs, or adapt one's language to the needs of the moment. But this
   passage concerning the unity, of which we are speaking, does not allow
   us to look for the meaning outside the plain sound of the words. If
   Father and Son are one, in the sense that They are one in will, and if
   separable natures cannot be one in will, because their diversity of
   kind and nature must draw them into diversities of will and judgment,
   how can They be one in will, not being one in knowledge? There can be
   no unity of will between ignorance and knowledge. Omniscience and
   nescience are opposites, and opposites cannot be of the same will.

   71. But perhaps it may be held to confirm the Son in His confession of
   ignorance that He says the Father alone knows. But unless He had
   plainly said that the Father alone knows, it would have been a matter
   of the greatest danger for our understanding, since we might have
   thought that He Himself did not know. For, since His ignorance is due
   to the economy of hidden knowledge, and not to a nature capable of
   ignorance, now that He says the Father alone knows, we cannot believe
   that He does not know; for, as we said above, God's knowledge is not
   the discovery of what He did not know, but its declaration. The fact
   that the Father alone knows, is no proof that the Son is ignorant: He
   says that He does not know, that others may not know: that the Father
   alone knows, to shew that He Himself also knows. If we say that God
   came to know the love of Abraham [1084] , when He ceased to conceal His
   knowledge, it follows that only because He did not conceal it from the
   Son, can the Father be said to know the day, for God does not learn by
   sudden perception, but declares His knowledge with the occasion. If,
   then, the Son according to the mystery does not know the day, that He
   may not reveal it: on the other hand, only by the fact that He has
   revealed it can the Father be proved to know the day.

   72. Far be it from us to imagine vicissitudes of bodily change in the
   Father and Son, as though the Father sometimes spoke to the Son, and
   sometimes was silent. We remember, indeed, that a voice was sometimes
   uttered from heaven for us, that the power of the Father's words might
   confirm for us the mystery of the Son, as the Lord says, This voice
   hath not come from Heaven for My sake but for your sakes [1085] . But
   the divine nature can dispense with the various combinations necessary
   for human functions, the motion of the tongue, the adjustment of the
   mouth, the forcing of the breath, and the vibration of the air. God is
   a simple Being: we must understand Him by devotion, and confess Him by
   reverence. He is to be worshipped, not pursued by our senses, for a
   conditioned and weak nature cannot grasp with the guesses of its
   imagination the mystery of an infinite and omnipotent nature. In God is
   no variability, no parts, as of a composite divinity, that in Him will
   should follow inaction, speech silence, or work rest, or that He should
   not will, without passing from some other mental state to volition, or
   speak, without breaking the silence with His voice, or act, without
   going forth to labour. He is not subject to the laws of nature, for
   nature has received its law from Him: He never suffers weakness or
   change when He acts, for His power is boundless, as the Lord said,
   Father, all things are possible unto Thee [1086] . He can do more than
   human sense can conceive. The Lord does not deprive even Himself of the
   quality of omnipotence, for He says, What things soever the Father
   doeth, these the Son also doeth in like manner [1087] . Nothing is
   difficult, when there is no weakness; for only a power which is weak to
   effect, knows the need of effort. The cause of difficulty is the
   weakness of the motive force; a force of limitless power rises above
   the conditions of impotence.

   73. We have established this point to exclude the idea that after
   silence God spoke to the Son, or after ignorance the Son began to know.
   To reach our intelligence terms must be used applicable to our own
   nature: thus we do not understand communication except by word of
   mouth, or comprehend the opposite of nescience except as knowledge.
   Thus the Son does not know the day for the reason that He does not
   reveal it: the Father, He says, alone knows it for the reason that He
   reveals it to the Son alone. But, as we have said, Christ is conscious
   of no such natural impediments as an ignorance which must be removed
   before He can come to know, or a knowledge which is not His before the
   Father begins to speak. He declares the unity of His nature, as the
   only-begotten, with the Father, by the unmistakable words, All things
   whatsoever the Father hath, are Mine [1088] . There is no mention here
   of coming into possession: it is one thing, to be the Possessor of
   things external to Him; another, to be self-contained and
   self-existent. The former is to possess heaven and earth and the
   universe, the latter to be able to describe Himself by His own
   properties, which are His, not as something external and subject, but
   as something of which He Himself subsists. When He says, therefore,
   that all things which the Father has, are His, He alludes to the divine
   nature, and not to a joint ownership of gifts bestowed. For referring
   to His words that the Holy Spirit should take of His [1089] , He says,
   All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine, therefore said I, He
   shall take of Mine: that is, the Holy Spirit takes of His, but takes
   also of the Father's: and if He receives of the Father's, He receives
   also of His. The Holy Spirit is the Spirit of God, and does not receive
   of a creature, but teaches us that He receives all these gifts, because
   they are all God's. All things that belong to the Father are the
   Spirit's; but we must not think that whatever He received of the Son,
   He did not receive of the Father also; for all that the Father hath
   belongs equally to the Son.

   74. So the nature of Christ needed no change, or question, or answer,
   that it should advance from ignorance to knowledge, or ask of One Who
   had continued in silence, and wait to receive His answer: but, abiding
   perfectly in mysterious unity with Him, it received of God its whole
   being as it derived from Him its origin. And, further, it received all
   that belonged to the whole being of God, namely, His knowledge and His
   will. What the Father knows, the Son does not learn by question and
   answer; what the Father wills, the Son does not will by command. Since
   all that the Father has, is His, it is the property of His nature to
   will and know, exactly as the Father wills and knows. But to prove His
   birth He often expounds the doctrine of His Person, as when He says, I
   came not to do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent Me. [1090]
   He does the Father's will, not His own, and by the will of Him that
   sent Me, He means His Father. But that He Himself wills the same, is
   unmistakeably declared in the words, Father, those whom Thou hast given
   Me, I will, that, where I am, they also may be with Me [1091] . The
   Father wills that we should be with Christ, in Whom, according to the
   Apostle, He chose us before the foundation of the world [1092] , and
   the Son wills the same, namely that we should be with Him. His will is,
   therefore, the same in nature as the Father's will, though to make
   plain the fact of the birth it is distinguished from the Father's.

   75. The Son is ignorant, then, of nothing which the Father knows, nor
   does it follow because the Father alone knows, that the Son does not
   know. Father and Son abide in unity of nature, and the ignorance of the
   Son belongs to the divine Plan of silence, seeing that in Him are
   hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. This the Lord Himself
   testified, when He answered the question of the Apostles concerning the
   times, It is not yours to know times or moments, which the Father hath
   set within His own authority [1093] . The knowledge is denied them, and
   not only that, but the anxiety to learn is forbidden, because it is not
   theirs to know these times. Yet now that He is risen, they ask again,
   though their question on the former occasion had been met with the
   reply, that not even the Son knew. They cannot possibly have understood
   literally that the Son did not know, for they ask Him again as though
   He did know. They perceived in the mystery of His ignorance a divine
   Plan of silence, and now, after His resurrection, they renew the
   question, thinking that the time has come to speak. And the Son no
   longer denies that He knows, but tells them that it is not theirs to
   know, because the Father has set it within His own authority. If then,
   the Apostles attributed it to the divine Plan, and not to weakness,
   that the Son did not know the day, shall we say that the Son knew not
   the day for the simple reason that He was not God? Remember, God the
   Father set the day within His authority, that it might not come to the
   knowledge of man, and the Son, when asked before, replied that He did
   not know, but now, no longer denying His knowledge, replies that it is
   theirs not to know, for the Father has set the times not in His own
   knowledge, but in His own authority. The day and the moment are
   included in the word times': can it be, then, that He, Who was to
   restore Israel to its kingdom, did not Himself know the day and the
   moment of that restoration? He instructs us to see an evidence of His
   birth in this exclusive prerogative of the Father, yet He does not deny
   that He knows: and while He proclaims that the possession of this
   knowledge is withheld from ourselves, He asserts that it belongs to the
   mystery of the Father's authority.

   [1094] We must not therefore think, because He said He did not know the
   day and the moment, that the Son did not know. As man He wept, and
   slept, and sorrowed, but God is incapable of tears, or fear, or sleep.
   According to the weakness of His flesh He shed tears, slept, hungered,
   thirsted, was weary, and feared, yet without impairing the reality of
   His Only-begotten nature; equally so must we refer to His human nature,
   the words that He knew not the day or the hour.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [958] St. John x. 30.

   [959] Col. ii. 8, 9.

   [960] Subsistentis Christi = subsistentia distincti Christi (see
   footnote in the Benedictine Edition). God the Father dwelt in Christ.
   But the Dweller must be personally distinct from Christ, in Whom He
   dwelt: and as the only distinction between the Father and Christ is
   that of Begetter and Begotten, therefore the words God dwelt in Christ'
   prove the generation of Christ.

   [961] St. John xiv. 9.

   [962] Ib. x. 38.

   [963] Ib. 30.

   [964] Ib. xvi. 15.

   [965] St. Mark x. 18 (cf. St. Matt. xix. 17, St. Luke xviii. 19). The
   Greek is oudeis agathos, ei me heis ho theos, save one, even God'
   (R.V.). The application of this text by the Arians depends upon the
   omission of the article ho.

   [966] St. John xvii. 3.

   [967] St. John v. 19.

   [968] Ib. xiv. 28.

   [969] St. Mark xiii. 32; cf. St. Matt. xxiv. 36.

   [970] Alluding to St. John xvii. 3, quoted in c. 2.

   [971] St. Matt. x. 32, 33.

   [972] The three periods referred to in these three sentences are 1)
   before the Incarnation: we can assign only to His Godhead the words
   Christ uses in reference to this period, because He was not yet man. 2)
   The Incarnation: we must distinguish whether He is speaking of Himself
   as man or as God. 3) After the Resurrection, when His manhood remains,
   but is perfected in the Godhead.

   [973] Col. ii. 8-10.

   [974] Phil. iii. 21.

   [975] Phil. ii. 10, 11. The Greek is eis doxan, k.t.l. to the glory of
   God the Father' (R.V.). There is also another reading in Hilary's text
   in this place, in gloriam' instead of in gloria;' but the latter is
   demanded by the context. See c. 42.

   [976] Col. ii. 11, 12.

   [977] Ib. 13-15.

   [978] See I. 13.

   [979] St. John x. 17, 18.

   [980] Ib. ii. 19.

   [981] 1 Cor. i. 24.

   [982] 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [983] Rom. vi. 10, 11.

   [984] St. Mark x. 18; cf. St. Matt. xix. 17; St. Luke xviii. 19, and
   note on c. 2 of this book.

   [985] St. Matt. xi. 28, 30.

   [986] Ib. xix. 16.

   [987] Rom. x. 4.

   [988] St. Matt. xv. 24; cf. x. 6.

   [989] Cf. Rom. viii. 3, "What the law could not do;" and Gal. iii. 11
   ff., "No man is justified by the law in the sight of God....The law is
   not of faith."

   [990] St. John xiii. 13.

   [991] St. Matt. xxiii. 10.

   [992] i.e. including personal distinction from the Father, cf. c. 1,
   and note.

   [993] St. John xiv. 1.

   [994] i.e. such as Sabellius had taught by extending the unity of
   nature into a unity of person. There is a unity of nature in the
   Godhead, but a union of Persons.

   [995] St. John v. 36-38.

   [996] St. Matt. xvii. 5, the occasion of the Transfiguration. But the
   context shews that Hilary is referring to the voice heard at the
   baptism, where all the three Evangelists (St. Matt. iii. 17, St. Mark
   i. 11, St. Luke iii. 22), according to the commonly received text agree
   in omitting the words, "Hear ye Him."

   [997] St. John v. 44. The usual text of the Greek is ten doxan ten para
   tou monou theou, "the glory that cometh from the only God" (R.V.).

   [998] At the close of this chapter, Hilary speaks as if these words
   were, "if another shall come in His (i.e. the Father's) name," though
   the Latin "si alius venerit in nomine suo," is ambiguous and the Greek,
   "ean allos elthe en to onomati to idi& 251;," quite excludes this
   translation.

   [999] St. John v. 40-44.

   [1000] St. John v. 25.

   [1001] Ib. v. 23.

   [1002] Following the punctuation of the older Editions, and placing the
   full stop after, instead of before, the sentence "cum Filius ita
   honorandus ut Pater sit."

   [1003] St. John xi. 4, "through him" = through Lazarus. The Greek is
   di' autes, "thereby" (R.V.).

   [1004] St. Mark xii. 29-31; cf. Matt. xxii. 36-40.

   [1005] St. Mark xii. 52, 33.

   [1006] Ib. 34.

   [1007] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [1008] Ib. v. 3; cf. Luke vi. 20.

   [1009] St. Mark xii. 34-37.

   [1010] St. John xvii. 3.

   [1011] St. John xiv. 9-11.

   [1012] Ib. xvi. 30.

   [1013] Ib. 27, 28.

   [1014] Ib. 31, 32.

   [1015] St. John xvi. 33.

   [1016] Ib. xvii. 1, 2.

   [1017] See iii. 12.

   [1018] St. John xvi. 15.

   [1019] i.e. He does not mean whatsoever the Father hath the created
   world; nor is the giving and receiving to be understood in a material
   sense, cf. c. 72.

   [1020] St. John xvi. 15. The "He" is the Holy Ghost; see the context.

   [1021] Ib. xvii. 3.

   [1022] St. John vi. 51.

   [1023] 1 Cor. viii. 6: see above, c. 32.

   [1024] St. John xvii. 3, 4.

   [1025] Ib. 5.

   [1026] St. John xiii. 31, 32.

   [1027] Phil. ii. 11. The Greek is eis doxan theou patros, to the glory
   of God the Father (R.V.): see note on c. 8.

   [1028] St. John xvii. 3.

   [1029] St. John v. 19.

   [1030] Ib. 18. The Jews sought the more to kill Him, because He not
   only broke the Sabbath, but also called God His own Father, making
   Himself equal with God.

   [1031] Book vii. 15 ff.

   [1032] St. John v. 16.

   [1033] Ib. 17.

   [1034] Ib. xiv. 10.

   [1035] That both Father and Son work implies that They are two distinct
   Persons and forbids us to suppose a union of Father and Son, which
   merges them into one Person.

   [1036] St. John v. 18.

   [1037] Ib. 19.

   [1038] St. John iv. 35.

   [1039] Ib. cf. 23.

   [1040] St. John viii. 28, 29.

   [1041] St. John vi. 37, 38.

   [1042] Ib. 45-47.

   [1043] St. John v. 21.

   [1044] Ib. vi. 40.

   [1045] Ib. xvii. 24.

   [1046] St. Matt. xi. 27.

   [1047] St. John xiv. 28.

   [1048] The unity of the Father and the Son does not mean that the Son's
   body was derived from the Father, as in human conception the father is
   in the son; but the Son Who derived His incorporeal nature from the
   Father at the generation, afterwards assumed a human body for the
   Incarnation. Thus Hilary clears himself of any Patripassian or
   Marcellian construction which might be put on his words.

   [1049] St. John xiv. 9.

   [1050] Ib. x. 38: cf. xiv. 10, 11.

   [1051] Ib. xiv. 11.

   [1052] Ib. 28.

   [1053] Phil. ii. 8, 9.

   [1054] Ib. 10, 11.

   [1055] Ib. 9.

   [1056] St. John xiv. 30.

   [1057] Rom. viii. 3. Here Hilary's de pecccato peccatum...condemnans
   must mean by means of sin.' In Latin of this date de is often
   instrumental.

   [1058] St. John xiv. 31. The words but that the world...even so I do,'
   are generally connected with the previous sentence, and the last
   sentence, arise, let us go hence,' is regarded as the breaking off of
   the discourse. But the words, But that the world,' &c., do not stand in
   very clear connection with the previous sentence, and the view here
   suggested has much to be said for it.

   [1059] St. John xv. 1, 2.

   [1060] St. Matt. xxiv. 36; St. Mark xiii. 32.

   [1061] Christ was conscious, e.g., of the sinfulness of man.

   [1062] St. John vi. 64.

   [1063] Col. i. 16.

   [1064] Ib. 19.

   [1065] Ib. iii. 4.

   [1066] 1 Thess. v. 2.

   [1067] Col. ii. 2, 3.

   [1068] Gen. xviii. 20, 21.

   [1069] Gen. xxii. 12.

   [1070] Ib. xv. 6.

   [1071] St. Matt. vii. 23.

   [1072] St. Matt. xxv. 12.

   [1073] Ib. xxv. 13.

   [1074] Rev. ii. 23.

   [1075] St. Matt. ix. 4.

   [1076] St. John xvi. 30. The Greek is hina tis se erota, that any one
   should ask thee' (R.V.).

   [1077] Col. ii. 3.

   [1078] St. Matt. xxiv. 44.

   [1079] Ib. 46.

   [1080] 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11.

   [1081] St. John xiv. 9.

   [1082] St. John x. 38; cf. xiv. 11.

   [1083] Ib. x. 30.

   [1084] Gen. xxii. 12: see c. 64.

   [1085] St. John xii. 30.

   [1086] St. Mark xiv. 36.

   [1087] St. John v. 19.

   [1088] Ib. xvi. 15.

   [1089] Ib. 14. "He shall glorify Me, for He shall take of Mine, and
   shall declare it unto you."

   [1090] St. John vi. 38. Hilary means that by the mention of two wills,
   our Lord teaches the personal distinction of the Father and the Son:
   cf. cc. 49, 50.

   [1091] St. John xvii. 24.

   [1092] Eph. i. 4.

   [1093] Acts i. 7.

   [1094] This last paragraph is omitted from many mss., though contained
   in several of high authority. It offers a different explanation from
   that which Hilary has adopted in the rest of the book (see especially
   c. 59), where he maintains that Christ avoided revealing what He really
   knew, by saying that He did not know. The line adopted here is the same
   as that in the passage found by Erasmus and inserted by him in Book x.
   c. 8. This is one of several interpolations made in later, though still
   early, times to correct or supplement Hilary's teaching; cf. x. 8, with
   the note.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book X.

   1. It is manifest that there is nothing which men have ever said which
   is not liable to opposition. Where the will dissents the mind also
   dissents: under the bias of opposing judgment it joins battle, and
   denies the assertions to which it objects. Though every word we say be
   incontrovertible if gauged by the standard of truth, yet so long as men
   think or feel differently, the truth is always exposed to the cavils of
   opponents, because they attack, under the delusion of error or
   prejudice, the truth they misunderstand or dislike. For decisions once
   formed cling with excessive obstinacy: and the passion of controversy
   cannot be driven from the course it has taken, when the will is not
   subject to the reason. Enquiry after truth gives way to the search for
   proofs of what we wish to believe; desire is paramount over truth. Then
   the theories we concoct build themselves on names rather than things:
   the logic of truth gives place to the logic of prejudice: a logic which
   the will adjusts to defend its fancies, not one which stimulates the
   will through the understanding of truth by the reason. From these
   defects of partisan spirit arise all controversies between opposing
   theories. Then follows an obstinate battle between truth asserting
   itself, and prejudice defending itself: truth maintains its ground and
   prejudice resists. But if desire had not forestalled reason: if the
   understanding of the truth had moved us to desire what was true:
   instead of trying to set up our desires as doctrines, we should let our
   doctrines dictate our desires; there would be no contradiction of the
   truth, for every one would begin by desiring what was true, not by
   defending the truth of that which he desired.

   2. Not unmindful of this sin of wilfulness, the Apostle, writing to
   Timothy, after many injunctions to bear witness to the faith and to
   preach the word, adds, For the time will come when they will not endure
   sound doctrine, but having itching ears will heap up teachers to
   themselves after their own lusts, and will turn away their ears from
   the truth, and turn aside unto fables [1095] . For when their
   unhallowed zeal shall drive them beyond the endurance of sound
   doctrine, they will heap up teachers for their lusts, that is,
   construct schemes of doctrine to suit their own desires, not wishing to
   be taught, but getting together teachers who will tell them what they
   wish: that the crowd of teachers whom they have ferreted out and
   gathered together, may satisfy them with the doctrines of their own
   tumultuous desires. And if these madmen in their godless folly do not
   know with what spirit they reject the sound, and yearn after the
   corrupt doctrine, let them hear the words of the same Apostle to the
   same Timothy, But the Spirit saith expressly that in the last days some
   shall away from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
   doctrines of devils through the hypocrisy of lying talk [1096] . What
   advancement of doctrine is it to discover what one fancies, and not
   what one ought to learn? Or what piety in doctrine is it not to desire
   what one ought to learn, but to heap up doctrine after our desires? But
   this is what the promptings of seducing spirits supply. They confirm
   the falsehoods of pretended godliness, for a canting hypocrisy always
   succeeds to defection from the faith: so that at least in word the
   reverence is retained, which the conscience has lost. Even that
   pretended piety they make impious by all manner of lies, violating by
   schemes of false doctrine the sacredness of the faith: for they pile up
   doctrines to suit their desires, and not according to the faith of the
   Gospel. They delight, with an uncontrollable pleasure, to have their
   itching ears tickled by the novelty of their favourite preaching; they
   estrange themselves utterly from the hearing of the truth, and
   surrender themselves entirely to fables: so that their incapacity for
   either speaking or understanding the truth invests their discourse with
   what is, to them, a semblance of truth.

   3. We have clearly fallen on the evil times prophesied by the Apostle;
   for nowadays teachers are sought after who preach not God but a
   creature [1097] . And men are more zealous for what they themselves
   desire, than for what the sound faith teaches. So far have their
   itching ears stirred them to listen to what they desire, that for the
   moment that preaching alone rules among their crowd of doctors which
   estranges the Only-begotten God from the power and nature of God the
   Father, and makes Him in our faith either a God of the second order, or
   not a God at all; in either case a damning profession of impiety,
   whether one profess two Gods by making different grades of divinity; or
   else deny divinity altogether to Him Who drew His nature by birth from
   God. Such doctrines please those whose ears are estranged from the
   hearing of the truth and turned to fables, while the hearing of this
   our sound faith is not endured, and is driven bodily into exile with
   its preachers.

   4. But though many may heap up teachers according to their desires, and
   banish sound doctrine, yet from the company of the Saints the preaching
   of truth can never be exiled. From our exile we shall speak by these
   our writings, and the Word of God which cannot be bound will run
   unhindered, warning us of this time which the Apostle prophesied. For
   when men shew themselves impatient of the true message, and heap up
   teachers according to their own human desires, we can no longer doubt
   about the times, but know that while the preachers of sound doctrine
   are banished [1098] truth is banished too. We do not complain of the
   times: we rejoice rather, that iniquity has revealed itself in this our
   exile, when, unable to endure the truth, it banishes the preachers of
   sound doctrine, that it may heap up for itself teachers after its own
   desires. We glory in our exile, and rejoice in the Lord that in our
   person the Apostle's prophecy should be fulfilled.

   5. In the earlier books, then, while maintaining the profession of a
   faith, I trust, sincere, and a truth uncorrupted, we arranged the
   method of our answer throughout, so that (though such are our
   limitations, that human language can never be safe from exception) no
   one could contradict us without an open profession of godlessness. For
   so completely have we demonstrated the true meaning of those texts
   which they cunningly filch from the Gospels and appropriate for their
   own teaching, that if any one denies it, he cannot escape on the plea
   of ignorance, but is condemned out of his own mouth of godlessness.
   Further, we have, according to the gift of the Holy Ghost, so
   cautiously proceeded throughout in our proof of the faith, that no
   charge could possibly be trumped up against us. For it is their way to
   fill the ears of the unwary with declarations that we deny the birth of
   Christ [1099] , when we preach the unity of the Godhead; and they say
   that by the text, I and the Father are one [1100] , we confess that God
   is solitary: thus, according to them, we say that the Unbegotten God
   descended into the Virgin, and was born man, and that He refers [1101]
   the opening word I' to the dispensation of His flesh, but adds to it
   the proof of His divinity, And the Father, as being the Father of
   Himself as man; and further, that, consisting of two Persons, human and
   divine, He said of Himself, We are one [1102] .

   6. But we have always maintained the birth existing out of time: we
   have taught that God the Son is God of the same nature with God the
   Father, not co-equal with the Unbegotten, for He was not Himself
   Unbegotten, but, as the Only-begotten, not unequal because begotten;
   that the Two are One, not by the giving of a double name to one Person,
   but by a true begetting and being begotten; that neither are there two
   Gods, different in kind, in our faith, nor is God solitary because He
   is one, in the sense in which we confess the mystery of the
   Only-begotten God: but that the Son is both indicated in the name of,
   and exists in, the Father, Whose name and Whose nature are in Him,
   while the Father by His name implies, and abides in, the Son, since a
   son cannot be spoken of, or exist, except as born of a father. Further,
   we say that He is the living copy of the living nature, the impression
   of the divine seal upon the divine nature, so undistinguished from God
   in power and kind, that neither His works nor His words nor His form
   are other than the Father's: but that, since the image by nature
   possesses the nature of its author, the Author also has worked and
   spoken and appeared through His natural image.

   7. But by the side of this timeless and ineffable generation of the
   Only-begotten, which transcends the perception of human understanding,
   we taught as well the mystery of God born to be man from the womb of
   the Virgin, shewing how according to the plan of the Incarnation, when
   He emptied Himself of the form of God and took the form of a servant,
   the weakness of the assumed humanity did not weaken the divine nature,
   but that Divine power was imparted to humanity without the virtue of
   divinity being lost in the human form. For when God was born to be man
   the purpose was not that the Godhead should be lost, but that, the
   Godhead remaining, man should be born to be God. Thus Emmanuel is His
   name, which is God with us [1103] , that God might not be lowered to
   the level of man, but man raised to that of God. Nor, when He asks that
   He may be glorified [1104] , is it in any way a glorifying of His
   divine nature, but of the lower nature He assumed: for He asks for that
   glory which He had with God before the world was made.

   8. As we are answering all, even their most insensate statements, we
   come now to the discussion of the unknown hour [1105] . Now, even if,
   as they say, the Son had not known it, this could give no ground for an
   attack upon His Godhead as the Only-begotten. It was not in the nature
   of things that His birth should avail to put His beginning back, until
   it was equivalent to the existence which is unbegotten, and had no
   beginning; and the Father reserves as His prerogative, to demonstrate
   His authority as the Unbegotten, the fixing of this still undetermined
   day. Nor may we conclude that in His Person there is any defect in that
   nature which contained by right of birth all the fulness of that nature
   which a perfect birth could impart. Nor again could the ignorance of
   day and hour be imputed in the Only-begotten God to a lower degree of
   Divinity. It is to demonstrate against the Sabellian heretics that the
   Father's authority is without birth or beginning, that this prerogative
   of unbegotten authority is not granted to the Son [1106] . But if, as
   we have maintained, when He said that He knew not the day, He kept
   silence not from ignorance, but in accordance with the Divine Plan, all
   occasion for irreverent declarations must be removed, and the
   blasphemous teachings of heresy thwarted, that the truth of the Gospel
   may be illustrated by the very words which seem to obscure it.

   9. Thus the greater number of them will not allow Him to have the
   impossible nature of God because He feared His Passion and shewed
   Himself weak by submitting to suffering [1107] . They assert that He
   Who feared and felt pain could not enjoy that confidence of power which
   is above fear, or that incorruption of spirit which is not conscious of
   suffering: but, being of a nature lower than God the Father, He
   trembled with fear at human suffering, and groaned before the violence
   of bodily pain. These impious assertions are based on the words, My
   soul is sorrowful even unto death [1108] , and "Father if it be
   possible let this cup pass away from Me" [1109] , and also, My God, My
   God, why hast Thou forsaken Me [1110] ? to which they also add, Father
   into Thy hands I commend My Spirit. [1111] All these words of our holy
   faith they appropriate to the use of their unholy blasphemy: that He
   feared, Who was sorrowful, and even prayed that the cup might be taken
   away from Him; that He felt pain, because He complained that God had
   deserted Him in His suffering; that He was infirm, because He commended
   His Spirit to the Father. His doubts and anxieties preclude us, they
   say, from assigning to Him that likeness to God which would belong to a
   nature equal to God as being born His Only-begotten. He proclaims His
   own weakness and inferiority by the prayer to remove the cup, by the
   complaint of desertion and the commending of His Spirit.

   10. Now first of all, before we shew from these very texts, that He was
   subject to no infirmity of fear or sorrow on His own account, let us
   ask, "What can we find for Him to fear, that the dread of an
   unendurable pain should have seized Him?" The objects of His fear,
   which they allege, are, I suppose, suffering and death. Now I ask those
   who are of this opinion, "Can we reasonably suppose that He feared
   death, Who drove away the terrors of death from His Apostles, exhorting
   them to the glory of martyrdom with the words, He that doth not take
   his cross and follow after Me is not worth of Me; and, He that findeth
   his life shall lose it, and he that hath lost his life for My sake
   shall find it [1112] ? If to die for Him is life, what pain can we
   think He had to suffer in the mystery of death, Who rewards with life
   those who die for Him? Could death make Him fear what could be done to
   the body, when He exhorted the disciples, Fear not those which kill the
   body [1113] ?

   11. Further, what terror had the pain of death for Him, to Whom death
   was an act of His own free will? In the human race death is brought on
   either by an attack upon the body of an external enemy, such as fever
   wound, accident or fall: or our bodily nature is overcome by age, and
   yields to death. But the Only-begotten God, Who had the power of laying
   down His life, and of taking it up again [1114] , after the drought of
   vinegar, having borne witness that His work of human suffering was
   finished, in order to accomplish in Himself the mystery of death, bowed
   His head and gave up His Spirit [1115] . If it has been granted to our
   mortal nature of its own will to breathe its last breath, and seek rest
   in death; if the buffeted soul may depart, without the breaking up of
   the body, and the spirit burst forth and flee away, without being as it
   were violated in its own home by the breaking and piercing and crushing
   of limbs; then fear of death might seize the Lord of life; if, that is,
   when He gave up the ghost and died, His death were not an exercise of
   His own free will. But if He died of His own will, and through His own
   will gave back His Spirit, death had no terror; because it was in His
   own power.

   12. But perchance with the fearfulness of human ignorance, He feared
   the very power of death, which He possessed; so, though He died of His
   own accord, He feared because He was to die. If any think so, let them
   ask "To which was death terrible, to His Spirit or to His body?" If to
   His body, are they ignorant that the Holy One should not see corruption
   [1116] , that within three days He was to revive the temple of His body
   [1117] ? But if death was terrible to His Spirit, should Christ fear
   the abyss of hell, while Lazarus was rejoicing in Abraham's bosom? It
   is foolish and absurd, that He should fear death, Who could lay down
   His soul, and take it up again, Who, to fulfil the mystery of human
   life, was about to die of His own free will. He cannot fear death Whose
   power and purpose in dying is to die but for a moment: fear is
   incompatible with willingness to die, and the power to live again, for
   both of these rob death of his terrors.

   13. But was it perhaps the physical pain of hanging on the cross, or
   the rough cords with which He was bound, or the cruel wounds, where the
   nails were driven in, that dismayed Him? Let us see of what body the
   Man Jesus was, that pain should dwell in His crucified, bound, and
   pierced body.

   14. The nature of our bodies is such, that when endued with life and
   feeling by conjunction with a sentient soul, they become something more
   than inert, insensate matter. They feel when touched, suffer when
   pricked, shiver with cold, feel pleasure in warmth, waste with hunger,
   and grow fat with food. By a certain transfusion of the soul, which
   supports and penetrates them, they feel pleasure or pain according to
   the surrounding circumstances. When the body is pricked or pierced, it
   is the soul which pervades it that is conscious, and suffers pain. For
   instance a flesh-wound is felt even to the bone, while the fingers feel
   nothing when we cut the nails which protrude from the flesh. And if
   through some disease a limb becomes withered, it loses the feeling of
   living flesh: it can be cut or burnt, it feels no pain whatever,
   because the soul is no longer mingled with it. Also when through some
   grave necessity part of the body must be cut away, the soul can be
   lulled to sleep by drugs, which overcome the pain, and produce in the
   mind a death-like forgetfulness of its power of sense. Then limbs can
   be cut off without pain: the flesh is dead to all feeling, and does not
   heed the deep thrust of the knife, because the soul within it is
   asleep. It is, therefore, because the body lives by admixture with a
   weak soul, that it is subject to the weakness of pain.

   15. If the Man Jesus Christ began His bodily life with the same
   beginning as our body and soul, if He were not, as God, the immediate
   Author of His own body and soul alike, when He was fashioned in the
   likeness and form of man, and born as man, then we may suppose that He
   felt the pain of our body; since by His beginning, a conception like
   ours, He had a body animated with a soul like our own. But if through
   His own act He took to Himself flesh from the Virgin, and likewise by
   His own act joined a soul to the body thus conceived, then the nature
   of His suffering must have corresponded with the nature of His body and
   soul. For when He emptied Himself of the form of God and received the
   form of a servant when the Son of God was born also Son of Man, without
   losing His own self and power, God the Word formed the perfect living
   Man. For how was the Son of God born Son of Man, how did He receive the
   form of a servant, still remaining in the form of God, unless (God the
   Word being able of Himself to take flesh from the Virgin and to give
   that flesh a soul, for the redemption of our soul and body), the Man
   Christ Jesus was born perfect, and made in the form of a servant by the
   assumption of the body, which the Virgin conceived? For the Virgin
   conceived, what she conceived, from the Holy Ghost alone [1118] , and
   though for His birth in the flesh she supplied from herself that
   element, which women always contribute to the seed planted in them,
   still Jesus Christ was not formed by an ordinary human conception. In
   His birth, the cause of which was transmitted solely by the Holy Ghost,
   His mother performed the same part as in all human conceptions: but by
   virtue of His origin He never ceased to be God.

   16. This deep and beautiful mystery of His assumption of manhood the
   Lord Himself reveals in the words, No man hath ascended into heaven,
   but He that descended from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in
   heaven [1119] . Descended from heaven' refers to His origin from the
   Spirit: for though Mary contributed to His growth in the womb and birth
   all that is natural to her sex, His body did not owe to her its origin.
   The Son of Man' refers to the birth of the flesh conceived in the
   Virgin; Who is in heaven' implies the power of His eternal nature: an
   infinite nature, which could not restrict itself to the limits of the
   body, of which it was itself the source and base. By the virtue of the
   Spirit and the power of God the Word, though He abode in the form of a
   servant, He was ever present as Lord of all, within and beyond the
   circle of heaven and earth. So He descended from heaven and is the Son
   of Man, yet is in heaven: for the Word made flesh did not cease to be
   the Word. As the Word, He is in heaven, as flesh He is the Son of Man.
   As Word made flesh, He is at once from heaven, and Son of Man, and in
   heaven, for the power of the Word, abiding eternally without body, was
   present still in the heaven He had left: to Him and to none other the
   flesh owed its origin. So the Word made flesh, though He was flesh, yet
   never ceased to be the Word.

   17. The blessed Apostle also perfectly describes this mystery of the
   ineffable birth of Christ's body in the words, The first man was from
   the soil of the ground, the second man from heaven [1120] . Calling Him
   Man' he expresses His birth from the Virgin, who in the exercise of her
   office as mother, performed the duties of her sex in the conception and
   birth of man. And when he says, The second man from heaven he testifies
   His origin from the Holy Ghost, Who came upon the Virgin [1121] . As He
   is then man, and from heaven, this Man was born of the Virgin, and
   conceived of the Holy Ghost. So speaks the Apostle.

   18. Again the Lord Himself revealing this mystery of His birth, speaks
   thus: I am the living bread Who have descended from Heaven: if any one
   shall eat of My bread he shall live for ever [1122] : calling Himself
   the Bread since He is the origin of His own body. Further, that it may
   not be thought the Word left His own virtue and nature for the flesh,
   He says again that it is His bread; since He is the bread which
   descends from heaven, His body cannot be regarded as sprung from human
   conception, because it is shewn to be from heaven. And His language
   concerning His bread is an assertion that the Word took a body, for He
   adds, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood, ye
   have not life in you [1123] . Hence, inasmuch as the Being Who is Son
   of Man descended also as bread from heaven, by the Bread descending
   from heaven' and by the Flesh and Blood of the Son of Man' must be
   understood His assumption of the flesh, conceived by the Holy Ghost,
   and born of the Virgin.

   19. Being, then, Man with this body, Jesus Christ is both the Son of
   God and Son of Man, Who emptied Himself of the form of God, and
   received the form of a servant. There is not one Son of Man and another
   Son of God; nor one in the form of God, and another born perfect man in
   the form of a servant: so that, as by the nature determined for us by
   God, the Author of our being, man is born with body and soul, so
   likewise Jesus Christ, by His own power, is God and Man with flesh and
   soul, possessing in Himself whole and perfect manhood, and whole and
   perfect Godhead.

   20. Yet many, with the art by which they seek to prove their heresy,
   are wont to delude the ears of the unlearned with the error, that as
   the body and soul of Adam both sinned, so the Lord must have taken the
   soul and body of Adam from the Virgin, and that it was not the whole
   Man that she conceived from the Holy Ghost [1124] . If they had
   understood the mystery of the Incarnation, these men would have
   understood at the same time the mystery that the Son of Man is also Son
   of God. As if in receiving so much from the Virgin, He received from
   her His soul also; whereas though flesh is always born of flesh, every
   soul is the direct work of God.

   21. With a view to deprive of substantive divinity the Only-begotten
   God, Who was God the Word with God in the beginning, they make Him
   merely the utterance of the voice of God. The Son is related to God His
   Father, they say, as the words to the speaker. They are trying to creep
   into the position, that it was not God the eternal Word, abiding in the
   form of God, Who was born as Christ the Man, Whose life therefore
   springs from a human origin, not from the mystery of a spiritual
   conception; that He was not God the Word, making Himself man by birth
   from the Virgin, but the Word of God dwelling in Jesus as the spirit of
   prophecy dwelt in the prophets. They accuse us of saying that Christ
   was born man with body and soul different from ours. But we preach the
   Word made flesh, Christ emptying Himself of the form of God and taking
   the form of a servant, perfect according to the fashion of human form,
   born a man after the likeness of ourselves: that being true Son of God,
   He is indeed true Son of Man, neither the less Man because born of God,
   nor the less God because Man born of God.

   22. But as He by His own act assumed a body from the Virgin, so He
   assumed from Himself a soul; though even in ordinary human birth the
   soul is never derived from the parents. If, then, the Virgin received
   from God alone the flesh which she conceived, far more certain is it
   that the soul of that body can have come from God alone. If, too, the
   same Christ be the Son of Man, Who is also the Son of God (for the
   whole Son of Man is the whole Son of God), how ridiculous is it to
   preach besides the Son of God, the Word made flesh, another I know not
   whom, inspired, like a prophet, by God the Word; whereas our Lord Jesus
   Christ is both Son of Man and Son of God. Yet because His soul was
   sorrowful unto death, and because He had the power to lay down His soul
   and the power to take it up again, they want to derive it from some
   alien source, and not from the Holy Ghost, the Author of His body's
   conception: for God the Word became man without departing from the
   mystery of His own nature. He was born also not to be at one time two
   separate beings, but that it might be made plain, that He Who was God
   before He was Man, now that He has taken humanity, is God and Man. How
   could Jesus Christ, the Son of God, have been born of Mary, except by
   the Word becoming flesh: that is by the Son of God, though in the form
   of God, taking the form of a slave? When He Who was in the form of God
   took the form of a slave, two contraries were brought together [1125] .
   Thus it was just as true, that He received the form of a slave, as that
   He remained in the form of God. The use of the one word form' to
   describe both natures compels us to recognise that He truly possessed
   both. He is in the form of a servant, Who is also in the form of God
   [1126] . And though He is the latter by His eternal nature, and the
   former in accordance with the divine Plan of Grace, the word has its
   true significance equally in both cases, because He is both: as truly
   in the form of God as in the form of Man. Just as to take the form of a
   servant is none other than to be born a man, so to be in the form of
   God is none other than to be God: and we confess Him as one and the
   same Person, not by loss of the Godhead, but by assumption of the
   manhood: in the form of God through His divine nature, in the form of
   man from His conception by the Holy Ghost, being found in fashion as a
   man. That is why after His birth as Jesus Christ, His suffering, death,
   and burial, He also rose again. We cannot separate Him from Himself in
   all these diverse mysteries, so that He should be no longer Christ; for
   Christ, Who took the form of a servant, was none other than He Who was
   in the form of God: He Who died was the same as He Who was born: He Who
   rose again as He Who died; He Who is in heaven as He Who rose again;
   lastly, He Who is in heaven as He Who before descended from heaven.

   23. So the Man Jesus Christ, Only-begotten God, as flesh and as Word at
   the same time Son of Man and Son of God, without ceasing to be Himself,
   that is, God, took true humanity after the likeness of our humanity.
   But when, in this humanity, He was struck with blows, or smitten with
   wounds, or bound with ropes, or lifted on high, He felt the force of
   suffering, but without its pain. Thus a dart passing through water, or
   piercing a flame, or wounding the air, inflicts all that it is its
   nature to do: it passes through, it pierces, it wounds; but all this is
   without effect on the thing it strikes; since it is against the order
   of nature to make a hole in water, or pierce flame, or wound the air,
   though it is the nature of a dart to make holes, to pierce and to
   wound. So our Lord Jesus Christ suffered blows, hanging, crucifixion
   and death: but the suffering which attacked the body of the Lord,
   without ceasing to be suffering, had not the natural effect of
   suffering. It exercised its function of punishment with all its
   violence; but the body of Christ by its virtue suffered the violence of
   the punishment, without its consciousness. True, the body of the Lord
   would have been capable of feeling pain like our natures, if our bodies
   possessed the power of treading on the waters, and walking over the
   waves without weighing them down by our tread or forcing them apart by
   the pressure of our steps, if we could pass through solid substances,
   and the barred doors were no obstacle to us. But, as only the body of
   our Lord could be borne up by the power of His soul in the waters,
   could walk upon the waves, and pass through walls, how can we judge of
   the flesh conceived of the Holy Ghost on the analogy of a human body?
   That flesh, that is, that Bread, is from Heaven; that humanity is from
   God. He had a body to suffer, and He suffered: but He had not a nature
   [1127] which could feel pain. For His body possessed a unique nature of
   its own; it was transformed into heavenly glory on the Mount, it put
   fevers to flight by its touch, it gave new eyesight by its spittle.

   24. It may perhaps be said, We find Him giving way to weeping, to
   hunger and thirst: must we not suppose Him liable to all the other
   affections of human nature?' But if we do not understand the mystery of
   His tears, hunger, and thirst, let us remember that He Who wept also
   raised the dead to life: that He did not weep for the death of Lazarus,
   but rejoiced [1128] ; that He Who thirsted, gave from Himself rivers of
   living water [1129] . He could not be parched with thirst, if He was
   able to give the thirsty drink. Again, He Who hungered could condemn
   the tree which offered no fruit for His hunger [1130] : but how could
   His nature be overcome by hunger if He could strike the green tree
   barren by His word? And if, beside the mystery of weeping, hunger and
   thirst, the flesh He assumed, that is His entire manhood, was exposed
   to our weaknesses: even then it was not left to suffer from their
   indignities. His weeping was not for Himself; His thirst needed no
   water to quench it; His hunger no food to stay it. It is never said
   that the Lord ate or drank or wept when He was hungry, or thirsty, or
   sorrowful. He conformed to the habits of the body to prove the reality
   of His own body, to satisfy the custom of human bodies by doing as our
   nature does. When He ate and drank, it was a concession, not to His own
   necessities, but to our habits.

   25. For Christ had indeed a body, but unique, as befitted His origin.
   He did not come into existence through the passions incident to human
   conception: He came into the form of our body by an act of His own
   power. He bore our collective humanity in the form of a servant, but He
   was free from the sins and imperfections of the human body: that we
   might be in Him, because He was born of the Virgin, and yet our faults
   might not be in Him, because He is the source of His own humanity, born
   as man but not born under the defects of human conception. It is this
   mystery of His birth which the Apostle upholds and demonstrates, when
   he says, He humbled Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made
   in the likeness of a man and being formed in fashion as a man [1131] :
   that is, in that He took the form of a servant, He was born in the form
   of a man: in that He was made in the likeness of a man, and formed in
   fashion as a man, the appearance and reality of His body testified His
   humanity, yet, though He was formed in fashion as a man, He knew not
   what sin was. For His conception was in the likeness of our nature, not
   in the possession of our faults. For lest the words, He took the form
   of a servant, might be understood of a natural birth, the Apostle adds,
   made in the likeness of a man, and formed in fashion as a man. The
   truth of His birth is thus prevented from suggesting the defects
   incident to our weak natures, since the form of a servant implies the
   reality of His birth, and found in fashion as a man, the likeness of
   our nature. He was of Himself born man through the Virgin, and found in
   the likeness of our degenerate body of sin: as the Apostle testifies in
   his letter to the Romans, For what the law could not do, in that it was
   weak through the flesh, God sending His Son in the likeness of flesh of
   sin, condemned sin of sin [1132] . He was not found in the fashion of a
   man: but found in fashion as a man: nor was His flesh the flesh of sin,
   but the likeness of the flesh of sin. Thus the fashion of flesh implies
   the truth of His birth, and the likeness of the flesh of sin removes
   Him from the imperfections of human weakness. So the Man Jesus Christ
   as man was truly born, as Christ had no sin in His nature: for, on His
   human side, He was born, and could not but be a man; on His divine
   side, He could never cease to be Christ. Since then Jesus Christ was
   man, He submitted as man to a human birth: yet as Christ He was free
   from the infirmity of our degenerate race.

   26. The Apostles' belief prepares us for the understanding of this
   mystery; when it testifies that Jesus Christ was found in fashion as a
   man and was sent in the likeness of the flesh of sin. For being
   fashioned as a man, He is in the form of a servant, but not in the
   imperfections of a servant's nature; and being in the likeness of the
   flesh of sin, the Word is indeed flesh, but is in the likeness of the
   flesh of sin and not the flesh of sin itself. In like manner Jesus
   Christ being man is indeed human, but even thus cannot be aught else
   but Christ, born as man by the birth of His body, but not human in
   defects, as He was not human in origin. The Word made flesh could not
   but be the flesh that He was made; yet He remained always the Word,
   though He was made flesh. As the Word made flesh could not vacate the
   nature of His Source, so by virtue of the origin of His nature He could
   not but remain the Word: but at the same time we must believe that the
   Word is that flesh which He was made; always, however, with the
   reserve, that when He dwelt among us, the flesh was not the Word, but
   was the flesh of the Word dwelling in the flesh.

   Though we have proved this, still we will see whether in the whole
   range of suffering, which He endured, we can anywhere detect in our
   Lord the weakness of bodily pain. We will put off for a time the
   discussion of the passages on the strength of which heresy has
   attributed fear to our Lord; now let us turn to the facts themselves:
   for His words cannot signify fear if His actions display confidence.

   27. Do you suppose, heretic, that the Lord of glory feared to suffer?
   Why, when Peter made this error through ignorance, did He not call him
   Satan' and a stumbling-block [1133] ?' Thus was Peter, who deprecated
   the mystery of the Passion, established in the faith by so sharp a
   rebuke from the lips of the gentle Christ, Whom not flesh and blood,
   but the Father in Heaven had revealed to him [1134] .

   What phantom hope are you chasing when you deny that Christ is God, and
   attribute to Him fear of suffering? He afraid, Who went forth to meet
   the armed bands of His captors? Weakness in His body, at Whose approach
   the pursuers reeled and broke their ranks and fell prone, unable to
   endure His Majesty as He offered Himself to their chains? What weakness
   could enthral His body, Whose nature had such power?

   28. But perhaps He feared the pain of wounds. Say then, What terror had
   the thrust of the nail for Him Who merely by His touch restored the ear
   that was cut off? You who assert the weakness of the Lord, explain this
   work of power at the moment when His flesh was weak and suffering.
   Peter drew his sword and smote: the High Priest's servant stood there,
   lopped of his ear. How was the flesh of the ear restored from the bare
   wound by the touch of Christ? Amidst the flowing blood, and the wound
   left by the cleaving sword, when the body was so maimed, whence sprang
   forth an ear which was not there? Whence came that which did not exist
   before? Whence was restored that which was wanting? Did the hand, which
   created an ear, feel the pain of the nails? He prevented another from
   feeling the pain of a wound: did He feel it Himself? His touch could
   restore the flesh that was cut off; was He sorrowful because He feared
   the piercing of His own flesh? And if the body of Christ had this
   virtue, dare we allege infirmity in that nature, whose natural force
   could counteract all the natural infirmities of man?

   29. But, perhaps, in their misguided and impious perversity, they infer
   His weakness from the fact that His soul was sorrowful unto death
   [1135] . It is not yet the time to blame you, heretic, for
   misunderstanding the passage. For the present I will only ask you, Why
   do you forget that when Judas went forth to betray Him, He said, Now is
   the Son of Man glorified [1136] ? If suffering was to glorify Him, how
   could the fear of it have made Him sorrowful? How, unless He was so
   void of reason, that He feared to suffer when suffering was to glorify
   Him?

   30. But perhaps He may be thought to have feared to the extent that He
   prayed that the cup might be removed from Him: Abba, Father, all things
   are possible unto Thee: remove this cup from Me [1137] . To take the
   narrowest ground of argument, might you not have refuted for yourself
   this dull impiety by your own reading of the words, Put up thy sword
   into its sheath: the cup which My Father hath given Me, shall I not
   drink it [1138] ? Could fear induce Him to pray for the removal from
   Him of that which, in His zeal for the Divine Plan, He was hastening to
   fulfil? To say He shrank from the suffering He desired is not
   consistent. You allow that He suffered willingly: would it not be more
   reverent to confess that you had misunderstood this passage, than to
   rush with blasphemous and headlong folly to the assertion that He
   prayed to escape suffering, though you allow that He suffered
   willingly?

   31. Yet, I suppose, you will arm yourself also for your godless
   contention with these words of the Lord, My God, My God, why hast Thou
   forsaken Me [1139] ? Perhaps you think that after the disgrace of the
   cross, the favour of His Father's help departed from Him, and hence His
   cry that He was left alone in His weakness. But if you regard the
   contempt, the weakness, the cross of Christ as a disgrace, you should
   remember His words, Verily I say unto you, From henceforth ye shall see
   the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming with the
   clouds of Heaven [1140] .

   32. Where, pray, can you see fear in His Passion? Where weakness? Or
   pain? Or dishonour? Do the godless say He feared? But He proclaimed
   with His own lips His willingness to suffer. Do they maintain that He
   was weak? He revealed His power, when His pursuers were stricken with
   panic and dared not face Him. Do they contend that He felt the pain of
   the wounds in His flesh? But He shewed, when He restored the wounded
   flesh of the ear, that, though He was flesh, He did not feel the pain
   of fleshly wounds. The hand which touched the wounded ear belonged to
   His body: yet that hand created an ear out of a wound: how then can
   that be the hand of a body which was subject to weakness?

   33. But, they say, the cross was a dishonour to Him; yet it is because
   of the cross that we can now see the Son of Man sitting on the right
   hand of power, that He Who was born man of the womb of the Virgin has
   returned in His Majesty with the clouds of heaven. Your irreverence
   blinds you to the natural relations of cause and event: not only does
   the spirit of godlessness and error, with which you are filled, hide
   from your understanding the mystery of faith, but the obtuseness of
   heresy drags you below the level of ordinary human intelligence. For it
   stands to reason that whatever we fear, we avoid: that a weak nature is
   a prey to terror by its very feebleness: that whatever feels pain
   possesses a nature always liable to pain: that whatever dishonours is
   always a degradation. On what reasonable principle, then, do you hold
   that our Lord Jesus Christ feared that towards which He pressed: or
   awed the brave, yet trembled Himself with weakness: or stopped the pain
   of wounds, yet felt the pain of His own: or was dishonoured by the
   degradation of the cross, yet through the cross sat down by God on
   high, and returned to His Kingdom?

   34. But perhaps you think your impiety has still an opportunity left to
   see in the words, Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit [1141] , a
   proof that He feared the descent into the lower world, and even the
   necessity of death. But when you read these words and could not
   understand them, would it not have been better to say nothing, or to
   pray devoutly to be shewn their meaning, than to go astray with such
   barefaced assertions, too mad with your own folly to perceive the
   truth? Could you believe that He feared the depths of the abyss, the
   scorching flames, or the pit of avenging punishment, when you listen to
   His words to the thief on the cross, Verily, I say unto thee, To-day
   shalt thou be with Me in Paradise [1142] ? Such a nature with such
   power could not be shut up within the confines of the nether world, nor
   even subjected to fear of it. When He descended to Hades, He was never
   absent from Paradise (just as He was always in Heaven when He was
   preaching on earth as the Son of Man), but promised His martyr [1143] a
   home there, and held out to him the transports of perfect happiness.
   Bodily fear cannot touch Him Who reaches indeed down as far as Hades,
   but by the power of His nature is present in all things everywhere. As
   little can the abyss [1144] of Hell and the terrors of death lay hold
   upon the nature which rules the world, boundless in the freedom of its
   spiritual power, confident of the raptures of Paradise; for the Lord
   Who was to descend to Hades, was also to dwell in Paradise. Separate,
   if you can, from His indivisible nature a part which could fear
   punishment: send the one part of Christ to Hades to suffer pain, the
   other, you must leave in Paradise to reign: for the thief says,
   Remember me when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. It was the groan he heard,
   I suppose, when the nails pierced the hands of our Lord, which provoked
   in him this blessed confession of faith: he learnt the Kingdom of
   Christ from His weakened and stricken body! He begs that Christ will
   remember him when He comes in His Kingdom: you say that Christ feared
   as He hung dying upon the cross. The Lord promises him, To-day shalt
   thou be with Me in Paradise; you would subject Christ to Hades and fear
   of punishment. Your faith has the opposite expectation. The thief
   confessed Christ in His Kingdom as He hung on the cross, and was
   rewarded with Paradise from the cross: you who impute to Christ the
   pain of punishment and the fear of death, will fail of Paradise and His
   Kingdom.

   35. We have now seen the power that lay in the acts and words of
   Christ. We have incontestably proved that His body did not share the
   infirmity of a natural body, because its power could expel the
   infirmities of the body that when He suffered, suffering laid hold of
   His body, but did not inflict upon it the nature of pain: and this
   because, though the form of our body was in the Lord, yet He by virtue
   of His origin was not in the body of our weakness and imperfection. He
   was conceived of the Holy Ghost and born of the Virgin, who performed
   the office of her sex, but did not receive the seed of His conception
   from man [1145] . She brought forth a body, but one conceived of the
   Holy Ghost; a body possessing inherent reality, but with no infirmity
   in its nature. That body was truly and indeed body, because it was born
   of the Virgin: but it was above the weakness of our body, because it
   had its beginning in a spiritual conception.

   36. But even now that we have proved what was the faith of the Apostle,
   the heretics think to meet it by the text, My soul is sorrowful even
   unto death [1146] . These words, they say, prove the consciousness of
   natural infirmity which made Christ begin to be sorrowful. Now, first,
   I appeal to common intelligence: what do we mean by sorrowful unto
   death? It cannot signify the same as to be sorrowful because of death:'
   for where there is sorrow because of death, it is the death that is the
   cause of the sadness. But a sadness even to death [1147] implies that
   death is the finish, not the cause, of the sadness. If then He was
   sorrowful even to death, not because of death, we must enquire, whence
   came His sadness? He was sorrowful, not for a certain time, or for a
   period which human ignorance could not determine, but even unto death.
   So far from His sadness being caused by His death, it was removed by
   it.

   37. That we may understand what was the cause of His sadness, let us
   see what precedes and follows this confession of sadness: for in the
   Passover supper our Lord completely signified the whole mystery of His
   Passion and our faith. After He had said that they should all be
   offended in Him [1148] , but promised that He would go before them into
   Galilee [1149] , Peter protested that though all the rest should be
   offended, he would remain faithful and not be offended [1150] . But the
   Lord knowing by His Divine Nature what should come to pass, answered
   that Peter would deny Him thrice: that we might know from Peter how the
   others were offended, since even he lapsed into so great peril to his
   faith by the triple denial. After that, He took Peter, James and John,
   chosen, the first two to be His martyrs, John to be strengthened for
   the proclamation of the Gospel, and declared that He was sorrowful unto
   death. Then He went before, and prayed, saying, My Father, if it is
   possible, let this cup pass from Me; yet, not as I will, but as Thou
   wilt [1151] . He prays that the cup may pass from Him, when it was
   certainly already before Him: for even then was being fulfilled that
   pouring forth of His blood of the New Testament for the sins of many.
   He does not pray that it may not be with Him; but that it may pass away
   from Him. Then He prays that His will may not be done, and wills that
   what He wishes to be effected, may not be granted Him. For He says, Yet
   not as I will, but as Thou wilt: signifying by His spontaneous prayer
   for the cup's removal His fellowship with human anxiety, yet
   associating Himself with the decree of the Will which He shares
   inseparably with the Father. To shew, moreover, that He does not pray
   for Himself, and that He seeks only a conditional fulfilment of what He
   desires and prays for, He prefaces the whole of this request with the
   words, My Father, if it is possible. Is there anything for the Father
   the possibility of which is uncertain? But if nothing is impossible to
   the Father, we can see on what depends this condition, if it is
   possible [1152] : for this prayer is immediately followed by the words,
   And He came to His disciples and findeth them sleeping, and saith to
   Peter, Could ye not watch one hour with Me? Watch and pray that ye
   enter not into temptation: for the spirit indeed is willing, but the
   flesh is weak [1153] . Is the cause of this sadness and this prayer any
   longer doubtful? He bids them watch and pray with Him for this purpose,
   that they may not enter into temptation; for the spirit indeed is
   willing, but the flesh is weak. They were under the promise made in the
   constancy of faithful souls not to be offended, yet, through weakness
   of the flesh, they were to be offended. It is not, therefore, for
   Himself that He is sorrowful and prays: it is for those whom He exhorts
   to watchfulness and prayer, lest the cup of suffering should be their
   lot: lest that cup which He prays may pass away from Him, should abide
   with them.

   38. And the reason He prayed that the cup might be removed from Him, if
   that were possible, was that, though with God nothing is impossible, as
   Christ Himself says, Father, all things are possible to Thee [1154] ,
   yet for man it is impossible to withstand the fear of suffering, and
   only by trial can faith be proved. Wherefore, as Man He prays for men
   that the cup may pass away, but as God from God, His will is in unison
   with the Father's effectual will. He teaches what He meant by If it is
   possible, in His words to Peter, Lo, Satan hath sought you that He
   might sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee that thy faith may
   not fail [1155] . The cup of the Lord's Passion was to be a trial for
   them all, and He prays the Father for Peter that his faith may not
   fail: that when he denied through weakness, at least he might not fail
   of penitential sorrow, for repentance would mean that faith survived.

   39. The Lord was sorrowful then unto death because in presence of the
   death, the earthquake, the darkened day, the rent veil, the opened
   graves, and the resurrection of the dead, the faith of the disciples
   would need to be established which had been so shaken by the terror of
   the night arrest, the scourging, the striking, the spitting upon, the
   crown of thorns, the bearing of the cross, and all the insults of the
   Passion, but most of all by the condemnation to the accursed cross.
   Knowing that all this would be at an end after His Passion, He was sad
   unto death. He knew, too, that the cup could not pass away unless He
   drank it, for He said, My Father, this cup cannot pass from Me unless I
   drink it: Thy will be done [1156] : that is, with the completion of His
   Passion, the fear of the cup would pass away which could not pass away
   unless He drank it: the end of that fear would follow only when His
   Passion was completed and terror destroyed [1157] , because after His
   death, the stumbling-block of the disciples' weakness would be removed
   by the glory of His power.

   40. Although by His words, Thy will be done, He surrendered the
   Apostles to the decision of His Father's will, in regard to the offence
   of the cup, that is, of His Passion, still He repeated His prayer a
   second and a third time. After that He said, Sleep on now, and take
   your rest [1158] . It is not without the consciousness of some secret
   reason that He Who had reproached them for their sleep, now bade them
   sleep on, and take their rest. Luke is thought to have given us the
   meaning of this command. After He had told us how Satan had sought to
   sift the Apostles as it were wheat, and how the Lord had been entreated
   that the faith of Peter might not fail [1159] , he adds that the Lord
   prayed earnestly, and then that an angel stood by Him comforting Him,
   and as the angel stood by Him, He prayed the more earnestly, so that
   the sweat poured from His body in drops of blood [1160] . The Angel was
   sent, then, to watch over the Apostles, and when the Lord was comforted
   by him, so that He no longer sorrowed for them, He said, without fear
   of sadness, Sleep on now, and take your rest. Matthew and Mark are
   silent about the angel, and the request of the devil: but after the
   sorrowfulness of His soul, the reproach of the sleepers, and the prayer
   that the cup may be taken away, there must be some good reason for the
   command to the sleepers which follows; unless we assume that He Who was
   about to leave them, and Himself had received comfort from the Angel
   sent to Him, meant to abandon them to their sleep, soon to be arrested
   and kept in durance.

   41. We must not indeed pass over the fact that in many manuscripts,
   both Latin and Greek, nothing is said of the angel's coming or the
   Bloody Sweat. But while we suspend judgment, whether this is an
   omission, where it is wanting, or an interpolation, where it is found
   (for the discordance of the copies leaves the question uncertain), let
   not the heretics encourage themselves that herein lies a confirmation
   of His weakness, that He needed the help and comfort of an angel. Let
   them remember the Creator of the angels needs not the support of His
   creatures. Moreover His comforting must be explained in the same way as
   His sorrow. He was sorrowful for us, that is, on our account; He must
   also have been comforted for us, that is, on our account. If He
   sorrowed concerning us, He was comforted concerning us. The object of
   His comfort is the same as that of His sadness. Nor let any one dare to
   impute the Sweat to a weakness, for it is contrary to nature to sweat
   blood [1161] . It was no infirmity, for His power reversed the law of
   nature. The bloody sweat does not for one moment support the heresy of
   weakness, while it establishes against the heresy which invents an
   apparent body [1162] , the reality all His body. Since, then, His fear
   was concerning us, and His prayer on our behalf, we are forced to the
   conclusion that all this happened on our account, for whom He feared,
   and for whom He prayed.

   42. Again the Gospels fill up what is lacking in one another: we learn
   some things from one, some from another, and so on, because all are the
   proclamation of the same spirit. Thus John, who especially brings out
   the working of spiritual causes in the Gospel, preserves this prayer of
   the Lord for the Apostles, which all the others passed over: how He
   prayed, namely, Holy Father, keep them in Thy Name....while I was them
   I kept them in Thy Name: those whom Thou gavest Me I have kept [1163] .
   That prayer was not for Himself but for His Apostles; nor was He
   sorrowful for Himself, since He bids them pray that they be not
   tempted; nor is the angel sent to Him, for He could summon down from
   Heaven, if He would, twelve thousand angels [1164] ; nor did He fear
   because of death when He was troubled unto death. Again, He does not
   pray that the cup may pass over Himself, but that it may pass away from
   Himself, though before it could pass away He must have drunk it. But,
   further, to pass away' does not mean merely to leave the place,' but
   not to exist any more at all:' which is shewn in the language of the
   Gospels and Epistles: for example, Heaven and earth shall pass away,
   but My word shall not perish [1165] : also the Apostle says, Behold the
   old things are passed away; they are become new [1166] . And again, The
   fashion of this world shall pass away [1167] . The cup, therefore, of
   which He prays to the Father, cannot pass away unless it be drunk; and
   when He prays, He prays for those whom He preserved, so long as He was
   with them, whom He now hands over to the Father to preserve. Now that
   He is about to accomplish the mystery of death He begs the Father to
   guard them. The presence of the angel who was sent to Him (if this
   explanation be true) is not of doubtful significance. Jesus shewed His
   certainty that the prayer was answered when, at its close, He bade the
   disciples sleep on. The effect of this prayer and the security which
   prompted the command, sleep on,' is noticed by the Evangelist in the
   course of the Passion, when he says of the Apostles just before they
   escaped from the hands of the pursuers, That the word might be
   fulfilled which He had spoken, Of those whom Thou hast given Me I lost
   not one of them [1168] . He fulfils Himself the petition of His prayer,
   and they are all safe; but He asks that those whom He has preserved the
   Father will now preserve in His own Name. And they are preserved: the
   faith of Peter does not fail: it cowered, but repentance followed
   immediately.

   43. Combine the Lord's prayer in John, the request of the devil in
   Luke, the sorrowfulness unto death, and the protest against sleep,
   followed by the command, Sleep on, in Matthew and Mark, and all
   difficulty disappears. The prayer in John, in which He commends the
   Apostles to His Father, explains the cause of His sorrowfulness, and
   the prayer that the cup may pass away. It is not from Himself that the
   Lord prays the suffering may be taken away. He beseeches the Father to
   preserve the disciples during His coming passion. In the same way, the
   prayer against Satan [1169] in St. Luke explains the confidence with
   which He permitted the sleep He had just forbidden.

   44. There was, then, no place for human anxiety and trepidation in that
   nature, which was more than human. It was superior to the ills of
   earthly flesh; a body not sprung from earthly elements, although His
   origin as Son of Man was due to the mystery of the conception by the
   Holy Ghost. The power of the Most High imparted its power to the body
   which the Virgin bare from the conception of the Holy Ghost. The
   animated body derives its conscious existence from association with a
   soul, which is diffused throughout it, and quickens it to perceive
   pains inflicted from without. Thus the soul, warned by the happy glow
   of its own heavenly faith and hope, soars above its own origin in the
   beginnings of an earthly body, and raises [1170] that body to union
   with itself in thought and spirit, so that it ceases to feel the
   suffering of that which, all the while, it suffers. Why need we then
   say more about the nature of the Lord's body, that of the Son of Man
   Who came down from heaven? Even earthly bodies can sometimes be made
   indifferent to the natural necessities of pain and fear.

   45. Did the Jewish children fear the flames blazing up with the fuel
   cast upon them in the fiery furnace at Babylon? Did the terror of that
   terrible fire prevail over their nature, conceived though it was like
   ours [1171] ? Did they feel pain, when the flames surrounded them?
   Perhaps, however, you may say they felt no pain, because they were not
   burnt: the flames were deprived of their burning nature. To be sure it
   is natural to the body to fear burning, and to be burnt by fire. But
   through the spirit of faith their earthly bodies (that is, bodies which
   had their origin according to the principles of natural birth) could
   neither be burnt nor made afraid. What, therefore, in the case of men
   was a violation of the order of nature, produced by faith in God,
   cannot be judged in God's case natural, but as an activity of the
   Spirit commencing with His earthly origin. The children were bound in
   the midst of the fire; they had no fear as they mounted the blazing
   pile: they felt not the flame as they prayed: though in the midst of
   the furnace, they could not be burnt. Both the fire and their bodies
   lost their proper natures; the one did not burn, the others were not
   burnt. Yet in all other respects, both fire and bodies retained their
   natures: for the bystanders were consumed, and the ministers of
   punishment were themselves punished. Impious heretic, you will have it
   that Christ suffered pain from the piercing of the nails, that He felt
   the bitterness of the wound, when they were driven through His hands:
   why, pray, did not the children fear the flames? Why did they suffer no
   pain? What was the nature in their bodies, which overcame that of fire?
   In the zeal of their faith and the glory of a blessed martyrdom they
   forgot to fear the terrible; should Christ be sorrowful from fear of
   the cross, Christ, Who even if He had been conceived with our sinful
   origin, would have been still God upon the cross, Who was to judge the
   world and reign for ever and ever? Could He forget such a reward, and
   tremble with the anxiety of dishonourable fear?

   46. Daniel, whose meat was the scanty portion of a prophet [1172] , did
   not fear the lions' den. The Apostles rejoiced in suffering and death
   for the Name of Christ. To Paul his sacrifice was the crown of
   righteousness [1173] . The Martyrs sang hymns as they offered their
   necks to the executioner, and climbed with psalms the blazing logs
   piled for them. The consciousness of faith takes away the weakness of
   nature, transforms the bodily senses that they feel no pain, and so the
   body is strengthened by the fixed purpose of the soul, and feels
   nothing except the impulse of its enthusiasm. The suffering which the
   mind despises in its desire of glory, the body does not feel, so long
   as the soul invigorates it. It is, then, a natural effect in man, that
   the zeal of the soul glowing for glory should make him unconscious of
   suffering, heedless of wounds, and regardless of death. But Jesus
   Christ the Lord of glory, the hem of Whose garment can heal, Whose
   spittle and word can create; for the man with the withered hand at His
   command stretched it forth whole, he who was born blind felt no more
   the defect of his birth, and the smitten ear was made sound as the
   other; dare we think of His pierced body in that pain and weakness,
   from which the spirit of faith in Him rescued the glorious and blessed
   Martyrs?

   47. The Only-begotten God, then, suffered in His person the attacks of
   all the infirmities to which we are subject; but He suffered them in
   the power of His own nature, just as He was born in the power of His
   own nature, for at His birth He did not lose His omnipotent nature by
   being born. Though born under human conditions, He was not so
   conceived: His birth was surrounded by human circumstances, but His
   origin went beyond them. He suffered then in His body after the manner
   of our infirm body, yet bore the sufferings of our body in the power of
   His own body. To this article of our faith the prophet bears witness
   when he says, He beareth our sins and grieveth for us: and we esteemed
   Him stricken, smitten, and afflicted: He was wounded for our
   transgressions and made weak for our sins [1174] . It is then a
   mistaken opinion of human judgment, which thinks He felt pain because
   He suffered. He bore our sins, that is, He assumed our body of sin, but
   was Himself sinless. He was sent in the likeness of the flesh of sin,
   bearing sin indeed in His flesh but our sin. So too He felt pain for
   us, but not with our senses; He was found in fashion as a man, with a
   body which could feel pain, but His nature could not feel pain; for,
   though His fashion was that of a man, His origin was not human, but He
   was born by conception of the Holy Ghost.

   For the reasons mentioned, He was esteemed stricken, smitten and
   afflicted.' He took the form of a servant: and man born of a Virgin'
   conveys to us the idea of One Whose nature felt pain when He suffered.
   But though He was wounded it was for our transgressions.' The wound was
   not the wound of His own transgressions: the suffering not a suffering
   for Himself. He was not born man for His own sake, nor did He
   transgress in His own action. The Apostle explains the principle of the
   Divine Plan when he says, We beseech you through Christ to be
   reconciled to God. Him, Who knew no sin, He made to be sin on our
   behalf [1175] . To condemn sin through sin in the flesh, He Who knew no
   sin was Himself made sin; that is, by means of the flesh to condemn sin
   in the flesh, He became flesh on our behalf but knew not flesh [1176] :
   and therefore was wounded because of our transgressions.

   48. Again, the Apostle knows nothing in Christ about fear of pain. When
   He wishes to speak of the dispensation of the Passion, He includes it
   in the mystery of Christ's Divinity. Forgiving us all our trespasses,
   blotting out the bond written in ordinances, that was against us, which
   was contrary to us: taking it away, and nailing it to the cross;
   stripping off from Himself His flesh, He made a shew of principalities
   and powers openly triumphing over them in Himself [1177] . Was that the
   power, think you, to yield to the wound of the nail, to wince under the
   piercing blow, to convert itself into a nature that can feel pain? Yet
   the Apostle, who speaks as the mouthpiece of Christ [1178] , relating
   the work of our salvation through the Lord, describes the death of
   Christ as stripping off from Himself His flesh, boldly putting to shame
   the powers and triumphing over them in Himself.' If His passion was a
   necessity of nature and not the free gift of your salvation: if the
   cross was merely the suffering of wounds, and not the fixing upon
   Himself of the decree of death made out against you: if His dying was a
   violence done by death, and not the stripping off of the flesh by the
   power of God: lastly, if His death itself was anything but a
   dishonouring of powers, an act of boldness, a triumph: then ascribe to
   Him infirmity, because He was therein subject to necessity and nature,
   to force, to fear and disgrace. But if it is the exact opposite in the
   mystery of the Passion, as it was preached to us, who, pray, can be so
   senseless as to repudiate the faith taught by the Apostles, to reverse
   all feelings of religion, to distort into the dishonourable charge of
   natural weakness, what was an act of free-will, a mystery, a display of
   power and boldness, a triumph? And what a triumph it was, when He
   offered Himself to those who sought to crucify Him, and they could not
   endure His presence: when He stood under sentence of death, Who shortly
   was to sit on the right hand of power: when He prayed for His
   persecutors while the nails were driven through Him: when He completed
   the mystery as He drained the draught of vinegar; when He was numbered
   among the transgressors and meanwhile granted Paradise: that when He
   was lifted on the tree, the earth quaked: when He hung on the cross,
   sun and day were put to flight: that He left His own body, yet called
   life back to the bodies of others [1179] : was buried a corpse and rose
   again God: as man suffered all weaknesses for our sakes, as God
   triumphed in them all.

   49. There is still, the heretics say, another serious and far reaching
   confession of weakness, all the more so because it is in the mouth of
   the Lord Himself, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me [1180] ?
   They construe this into the expression of a bitter complaint, that He
   was deserted and given over to weakness. But what a violent
   interpretation of an irreligious mind! how repugnant to the whole tenor
   of our Lord's words! He hastened to the death, which was to glorify
   Him, and after which He was to sit on the right hand of power; with all
   those blessed expectations could He fear death, and therefore complain
   that His God had betrayed Him to its necessity, when it was the
   entrance to eternal blessedness?

   50. Further their heretical ingenuity presses on in the path prepared
   by their own godlessness, even to the entire absorption of God the Word
   into the human soul, and consequent denial that Jesus Christ, the Son
   of Man, was the same as the Son of God. So either God the Word ceased
   to be Himself while He performed the function of a soul in giving life
   to a body [1181] , or the man who was born was not the Christ at all,
   but the Word dwelt in him, as the Spirit dwelt in the prophets [1182] .
   These absurd and perverse errors have grown in boldness and godlessness
   till they assert that Jesus Christ was not Christ until He was born of
   Mary. He Who was born was not a pre-existent Being, but began at that
   moment to exist [1183] .

   Hence follows also the error that God the Word, as it were some part of
   the Divine power extending itself in unbroken continuation, dwelt
   within that man who received from Mary the beginning of his being, and
   endowed him with the power of Divine working: though that man lived and
   moved by the nature of his own soul [1184] .

   51. Through this subtle and mischievous doctrine they are drawn into
   the error that God the Word became soul to the body, His nature by
   self-humiliation working the change upon itself, and thus the Word
   ceased to be God; or else, that the Man Jesus, in the poverty and
   remoteness from God of His nature, was animated only by the life and
   motion of His own human soul, wherein the Word of God, that is, as it
   were, the might of His uttered voice, resided. Thus the way is opened
   for all manner of irreverent theorising: the sum of which is, either
   that God the Word was merged in the soul and ceased to be God: or that
   Christ had no existence before His birth from Mary, since Jesus Christ,
   a mere man of ordinary body and soul, began to exist only at His human
   birth and was raised to the level of the Power, which worked within
   Him, by the extraneous force of the Divine Word extending itself into
   Him. Then when God the Word, after this extension, was withdrawn, He
   cried, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? or at least when the
   divine nature of the Word once more gave place within Him to a human
   soul, He Who had hitherto relied on His Father's help, now separated
   from it, and abandoned to death, bemoaned His solitude and chid His
   deserter. Thus in every way arises a deadly danger of error in belief,
   whether it be thought that the cry of complaint denotes a weakness of
   nature in God the Word, or that God the Word was not pre-existent
   because the birth of Jesus Christ from Mary was the beginning of His
   being.

   52. Amid these irreverent and ill-grounded theories the faith of the
   Church, inspired by the teaching of the Apostles, has recognised a
   birth of Christ, but no beginning. It knows of the dispensation, but of
   no division [1185] : it refuses to make a separation in Jesus Christ
   [1186] ; whereby Jesus is one and Christ another; nor does it
   distinguish the Son of Man from the Son of God, lest perhaps the Son of
   God be not regarded as Son of Man also. It does not absorb the Son of
   God in the Son of Man; nor does it by a tripartite belief [1187] tear
   asunder Christ, Whose coat woven from the top throughout was not
   parted, dividing Jesus Christ into the Word, a body and a soul; nor, on
   the other hand, does it absorb the Word in body and soul. To it He is
   perfectly God the Word, and perfectly Christ the Man. To this alone we
   hold fast in the mystery of our confession, namely, the faith that
   Christ is none other than Jesus, and the doctrine that Jesus is none
   other than Christ.

   53. I am not ignorant how much the grandeur of the divine mystery
   baffles our weak understanding, so that language can scarcely express
   it, or reason define it, or thought even embrace it. The Apostle,
   knowing that the most difficult task for an earthly nature is to
   apprehend, unaided, God's mode of action (for then our judgment were
   keener to discern than God is mighty to effect), writes to his true son
   according to the faith, who had received the Holy Scripture from his
   childhood, As I exhorted thee to tarry at Ephesus, when I was going
   into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge certain men not to teach a
   different doctrine, neither to give heed to fables and endless
   genealogies, the which minister questionings, rather than the
   edification of God which is in faith [1188] . He bids him forbear to
   handle wordy genealogies and fables, which minister endless
   questionings. The edification of God, he says, is in faith: he limits
   human reverence to the faithful worship of the Almighty, and does not
   suffer our weakness to strain itself in the attempt to see what only
   dazzles the eye. If we look at the brightness of the sun, the sight is
   strained and weakened: and sometimes when we scrutinise with too
   curious gaze the source of the shining light, the eyes lose their
   natural power, and the sense of sight is even destroyed. Thus it
   happens that through trying to see too much we see nothing at all. What
   must we then expect in the case of God, the Sun of Righteousness? Will
   not foolishness be their reward, who would be over wise? Will not dull
   and brainless stupor usurp the place of the burning light of
   intelligence? A lower nature cannot understand the principle of a
   higher: nor can Heaven's mode of thought be revealed to human
   conception, for whatever is within the range of a limited
   consciousness, is itself limited. The divine power exceeds therefore
   the capacity of the human mind. If the limited strains itself to reach
   so far, it becomes even feebler than before. It loses what certainty it
   had: instead of seeing heavenly things it is only blinded by them. No
   mind can fully comprehend the divine: it punishes the obstinacy of the
   curious by depriving them of their power. Would we look at the sun we
   must remove as much of his brilliancy as we need, in order to see him:
   if not, by expecting too much, we fall short of the possible. In the
   same way we can only hope to understand the purposes of Heaven, so far
   as is permitted. We must expect only what He grants to our
   apprehension: if we attempt to go beyond the limit of His indulgence,
   it is withdrawn altogether. There is that in God which we can perceive:
   it is visible to all if we are content with the possible. Just as with
   the sun we can see something, if we are content to see what can be
   seen, but if we strain beyond the possible we lose all: so is it with
   the nature of God. There is that which we can understand if we are
   content with understanding what we can: but aim beyond your powers and
   you will lose even the power of attaining what was within your reach.

   54. The mystery of that other timeless birth I will not yet touch upon:
   its treatment demands an ampler space than this. For the present I will
   speak of the Incarnation only. Tell me, I pray, ye who pry into secrets
   of Heaven, the mystery of Christ born of a Virgin and His nature;
   whence will you explain that He was conceived and born of a Virgin?
   What was the physical cause of His origin according to your
   disputations? How was He formed within His mother's womb? Whence His
   body and His humanity? And lastly, what does it mean that the Son of
   Man descended from heaven Who remained in heaven [1189] ? It is not
   possible by the laws of bodies for the same object to remain and to
   descend: the one is the change of downward motion; the other the
   stillness of being at rest. The Infant wails but is in Heaven: the Boy
   grows but remains ever the immeasurable God. By what perception of
   human understanding can we comprehend that He ascended where He was
   before, and He descended Who remained in heaven? The Lord says, What if
   ye should behold the Son of Man ascending thither where He was before
   [1190] ? The Son of Man ascends where He was before: can sense
   apprehend this? The Son of Man descends from heaven, Who is in heaven:
   can reason cope with this? The Word was made flesh: can words express
   this? The Word becomes flesh, that is, God becomes Man: the Man is in
   heaven: the God is from heaven. He ascends Who descended: but He
   descends and yet does not descend. He is as He ever was, yet He was not
   ever what He is. We pass in review the causes, but we cannot explain
   the manner: we perceive the manner, and we cannot understand the
   causes. Yet if we understand Christ Jesus even thus, we shall know Him:
   if we seek to understand Him further we shall not know Him at all.

   55. Again, how great a mystery of word and act it is that Christ wept,
   that His eyes filled with tears from the anguish of His mind [1191] .
   Whence came this defect in His soul that sorrow should wring tears from
   His body? What bitter fate, what unendurable pain, could move to a
   flood of tears the Son of Man Who descended from heaven? Again, what
   was it in Him which wept? God the Word? or His human soul? For though
   weeping is a bodily function, the body is but a servant; tears are, as
   it were, the sweat of the agonised soul. Again, what was the cause of
   His weeping? Did He owe to Jerusalem the debt of His tears, Jerusalem,
   the godless parricide, whom no suffering could requite for the
   slaughter of Apostles and Prophets, and the murder of her Lord Himself?
   He might weep for the disasters and death which befall mankind: but
   could He grieve for the fall of that doomed and desperate race? What, I
   ask, was this mystery of weeping? His soul wept for sorrow; was not it
   the soul which sent forth the Prophets? Which would so often have
   gathered the chickens together under the shadow of His wings [1192] ?
   But God the Word cannot grieve, nor can the Spirit weep: nor could His
   soul possibly do anything before the body existed. Yet we cannot doubt
   that Jesus Christ truly wept [1193] .

   56. No less real were the tears He shed for Lazarus [1194] . The first
   question here is, What was there to weep for in the case of Lazarus?
   Not his death, for that was not unto death, but for the glory of God:
   for the Lord says, That sickness is not unto death, but for the glory
   of God, that the Son of God may be honoured through him [1195] . The
   death which was the cause of God's being glorified could not bring
   sorrow and tears. Nor was there any occasion for tears in His absence
   from Lazarus at the time of his death. He says plainly, Lazarus is
   dead, and I rejoice for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent
   that ye may believe [1196] . His absence then, which aided the
   Apostles' belief, was not the cause of His sorrow: for with the
   knowledge of Divine omniscience, He declared the death of the sick man
   from afar. We can find, then, no necessity for tears, yet He wept. And
   again I ask, To whom must we ascribe the weeping? To God, or the soul,
   or the body? The body, of itself, has no tears except those it sheds at
   the command of the sorrowing soul. Far less can God have wept, for He
   was to be glorified in Lazarus. Nor is it reason to say His soul
   recalled Lazarus from the tomb: can a soul linked to a body, by the
   power of its command, call another soul back to the dead body from
   which it has departed? Can He grieve Who is about to be glorified? Can
   He weep Who is about to restore the dead to life? Tears are not for Him
   Who is about to give life, or grief for Him Who is about to receive
   glory. Yet He Who wept and grieved was also the Giver of life.

   57. If there are many points which we treat scantily it is not because
   we have nothing to say, or do not know what has already been said; our
   purpose is, by abstaining from too laborious a process of argument, to
   render the results as attractive as possible to the reader. We know the
   deeds and words of our Lord, yet we know them not: we are not ignorant
   of them, yet they cannot be understood. The facts are real, but the
   power behind them is a mystery. We will prove this from His own words,
   For this reason doth the Father love Me, because I lay down My life
   that I may take it up again. No one taketh it from Me, but I lay it
   down of Myself. I have power to lay it down and I have power to take it
   up again. This commandment received I from the Father [1197] . He lays
   down His life of Himself, but I ask who lays it down? We confess
   without hesitation, that Christ is God the Word: but on the other hand,
   we know that the Son of Man was composed of a soul and a body: compare
   the angel's words to Joseph, Arise and take the child and His mother,
   and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead who sought the soul
   of the child [1198] . Whose soul is it? His body's, or God's? If His
   body's, what power has the body to lay down the soul, when it is only
   by the working of the soul that it is quickened into life? Again, how
   could the body, which apart from the soul is inert and dead, receive a
   command from the Father? But if, on the other hand, any man suppose
   that God the Word laid aside His soul, that He might take it up again,
   he must prove that God the Word died, that is, remained without life
   and feeling like a dead body, and took up His soul again to be
   quickened once more into life by it.

   58. But, further, no one who is endued with reason can impute to God a
   soul; though it is written in many places that the soul of God hates
   sabbaths and new moons: and also that it delights in certain things
   [1199] . But this is merely a conventional expression to be understood
   in the same way as when God is spoken of as possessing body, with
   hands, and eyes, and fingers, and arms, and heart. As the Lord said, A
   Spirit hath not flesh and bones [1200] : He then Who is, and changeth
   not [1201] , cannot have the limbs and parts of a tangible body. He is
   a simple and blessed nature, a single, complete, all-embracing Whole.
   God is therefore not quickened into life, like bodies, by the action of
   an indwelling soul, but is Himself His own life.

   59. How does He then lay down His soul, or take it up again? What is
   the meaning of this command He received? God could not lay it down,
   that is, die, or take it up again, that is, come to life. But neither
   did the body receive the command to take it up again; it could not do
   so of itself, for He said of the Temple of His body, Destroy this
   temple and after three days I will raise it up [1202] . Thus it is God
   Who raises up the temple of His body. And Who lays down His soul to
   take it again? The body does not take it up again of itself: it is
   raised up by God. That which is raised up again must have been dead,
   and that which is living does not lay down its soul. God then was
   neither dead nor buried: and yet He said, In that she has poured this
   ointment upon My body she did it for My burial [1203] . In that it was
   poured upon His body it was done for His burial: but the His is not the
   same as Him. It is quite another use of the pronoun when we say, it was
   done for the burial of Him,' and when we say, His body was anointed:'
   nor is the sense the same in His body was buried,' and He was buried.'

   60. To grasp this divine mystery we must see the God in Him without
   ignoring the Man; and the Man without ignoring the God. We must not
   divide Jesus Christ, for the Word was made flesh: yet we must not call
   Him buried, though we know He raised Himself again: must not doubt His
   resurrection, though we dare not deny He was buried [1204] . Jesus
   Christ was buried, for He died: He died, and even cried out at the
   moment of death, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? Yet He, Who
   uttered these words, said also: Verily I say unto thee, This day shalt
   thou be with Me in Paradise [1205] , and He Who promised Paradise to
   the thief cried aloud, Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit; and
   having said this He gave up the Ghost [1206] .

   61. Ye who trisect Christ into the Word, the soul and the body, or
   degrade the whole Christ, even God the Word, into a single member of
   our race, unfold to us this mystery of great godliness which was
   manifested in the flesh [1207] . What Spirit did Christ give up? Who
   commended His Spirit into the hands of His Father? Who was to be in
   Paradise that same day? Who complained that He was deserted of God? The
   cry of the deserted betokens the weakness of the dying: the promise of
   Paradise the sovereign power of the living God. To commend His Spirit
   denoted confidence: to give up His Spirit implied His departure by
   death. Who then, I demand, was it Who died? Surely He Who gave up His
   Spirit? but Who gave up His Spirit? Certainly He Who commended it to
   His Father. And if He Who commended His Spirit is the same as He Who
   gave it up and died, was it the body which commended its soul, or God
   Who commended the body's soul? I say soul,' because there is no doubt
   it is frequently synonymous with spirit,' as might be gathered merely
   from the language here: Jesus gave up His Spirit' when He was on the
   point of death. If, therefore, you hold the conviction that the body
   commended the soul, that the perishable commended the living, the
   corruptible the eternal, that which was to be raised again, that which
   abides unchanged, then, since He Who commended His Spirit to the Father
   was also to be in Paradise with the thief that same day, I would fain
   know if, while the sepulchre received Him, He was abiding in heaven, or
   if He was abiding in heaven, when He cried out that God had deserted
   Him.

   62. It is one and the same Lord Jesus Christ, the Word made flesh, Who
   expresses Himself in all these utterances, Who is man when He says He
   is abandoned to death: yet while man still rules in Paradise as God,
   and though reigning in Paradise, as Son of God commends His Spirit to
   His Father, as Son of Man gives up to death the Spirit He commended to
   the Father. Why do we then view as a disgrace that which is a mystery?
   We see Him complaining that He is left to die, because He is Man: we
   see Him, as He dies, declaring that He reigned in Paradise, because He
   is God. Why should we harp, to support our irreverence, on what He said
   to make us understand His death, and keep back what He proclaimed to
   demonstrate His immortality? The words and the voice are equally His,
   when He complains of desertion, and when He declares His rule: by what
   method of heretical logic do we split up our belief and deny that He
   Who died was at the same time He Who rules? Did He not testify both
   equally of Himself, when He commended His Spirit, and when He gave it
   up? But if He is the same, Who commended His Spirit, and gave it up, if
   He dies when ruling and rules when dead: then the mystery of the Son of
   God and Son of Man means that He is One, Who dying reigns, and reigning
   dies.

   63. Stand aside then, all godless unbelievers, for whom the divine
   mystery is too great, who do not know that Christ wept not for Himself
   but for us, to prove the reality of His assumed manhood by yielding to
   the emotion common to humanity: who do not perceive that Christ died
   not for Himself, but for our life, to renew human life by the death of
   the deathless God: who cannot reconcile the complaint of the deserted
   with the confidence of the Ruler: who would teach us that because He
   reigns as God and complains that He is dying, we have here a dead man
   and the reigning God. For He Who dies is none other than He Who reigns,
   He Who commends His spirit than He Who gives it up: He Who was buried,
   rose again: ascending or descending He is altogether one.

   64. Listen to the teaching of the Apostle and see in it a faith
   instructed not by the understanding of the flesh but by the gift of the
   Spirit. The Greeks seek after wisdom, he says, and the Jews ask for a
   sign; but we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block,
   and unto Gentiles foolishness; but unto them that are called, both Jews
   and Greeks, Christ Jesus, the power of God, God [1208] . Is Christ
   divided here so that Jesus the crucified is one, and Christ, the power
   and wisdom of God, another? This is to the Jews a stumbling-block and
   unto the Gentiles foolishness; but to us Christ Jesus is the power of
   God, and the wisdom of God: wisdom, however, not known of the world,
   nor understood by a secular philosophy. Hear the same blessed Apostle
   when he declares that it has not been understood, We speak the wisdom
   of God, which hath been hidden in a mystery, which God foreordained
   before the world for our glory: which none of the rulers of this world
   has known: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the
   Lord of Glory [1209] . Does not the Apostle know that this wisdom of
   God is hidden in a mystery, and cannot be known of the rulers of this
   world? Does he divide Christ into a Lord of Glory and a crucified
   Jesus? Nay, rather, he contradicts this most foolish and impious idea
   with the words, For I determined to know nothing among you, save Jesus
   Christ, and Him crucified [1210] .

   65. The Apostle knew nothing else, and he determined to know nothing
   else: we men of feebler wit, and feebler faith, split up, divide and
   double Jesus Christ, constituting ourselves judges of the unknown, and
   blaspheming the hidden mystery. For us Christ crucified is one, Christ
   the wisdom of God another: Christ Who was buried different from Christ
   Who descended from Heaven: the Son of Man not at the same time also Son
   of God. We teach that which we do not understand: we seek to refute
   that which we cannot grasp. We men improve upon the revelation of God:
   we are not content to say with the Apostle, Who shall lay anything to
   the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth, who is he that
   condemneth? It is Christ Jesus, that died, yea, rather, that was raised
   from the dead, Who is at the right hand of God, Who also maketh
   intercession for us [1211] . Is He Who intercedes for us other than He
   Who is at the right hand of God? Is not He Who is at the right hand of
   God the very same Who rose again? Is He Who rose again other than He
   Who died? He Who died than He Who condemns us? Lastly, is not He Who
   condemns us also God Who justifies us? Distinguish, if you can, Christ
   our accuser from God our defender, Christ Who died from Christ Who
   condemns, Christ sitting at the right hand of God and praying for us
   from Christ Who died. Whether, therefore, dead or buried, descended
   into Hades or ascended into Heaven, all is one and the same Christ: as
   the Apostle says, Now this He ascended' what is it, but that He also
   descended to the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the
   same also that ascended far above all heavens, that He may fill all
   things [1212] . How far then shall we push our babbling ignorance and
   blasphemy, professing to explain what is hidden in the mystery of God?
   He that descended is the same also that ascended. Can we longer doubt
   that the Man Christ Jesus rose from the dead, ascended above the
   heavens and is at the right hand of God? We cannot say His body
   descended into Hades, which lay in the grave. If then He Who descended
   is one with Him, Who ascended; if His body did not go down into Hades,
   yet really arose from the dead, and ascended into heaven, what remains,
   except to believe in the secret mystery, which is hidden from the world
   and the rulers of this age, and to confess that, ascending or
   descending, He is but One, one Jesus Christ for us, Son of God and Son
   of Man, God the Word and Man in the flesh, Who suffered, died, was
   buried, rose again, was received into heaven, and sitteth at the right
   hand of God: Who possesses in His one single self, according to the
   Divine Plan and nature, in the form of God and in the form of a
   servant, the Human and Divine without separation or division.

   66. So the Apostle moulding our ignorant and haphazard ideas into
   conformity with truth says of this mystery of the faith, For He was
   crucified through weakness but He liveth through the power of God
   [1213] . Preaching the Son of Man and Son of God, Man through the
   Divine Plan, God through His eternal nature, he says, that He Who was
   crucified through weakness is He Who lives through the power of God.
   His weakness arises from the form of a servant, His nature remains
   because of the form of God. He took the form of a servant, though He
   was in form of God: therefore there can be no doubt as to the mystery
   according to which He both suffered and lived. There existed in Him
   both weakness to suffer, and power of God to give life: and hence He
   Who suffered and lived cannot be more than One, or other than Himself.

   67. The Only-begotten God suffered indeed all that men can suffer: but
   let us express ourselves in the words and faith of the Apostle. He
   says, For I delivered unto you first of all how that Christ died for
   our sins, according to the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that
   He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures [1214] . This
   is no unsupported statement of his own, which might lead to error, but
   a warning to us to confess that Christ died and rose after a real
   manner, not a nominal, since the fact is certified by the full weight
   of Scripture authority; and that we must understand His death in that
   exact sense in which Scripture declares it. In his regard for the
   perplexities and scruples of the weak and sensitive believer, he adds
   these solemn concluding words, according to the Scriptures, to his
   proclamation of the death and the resurrection. He would not have us
   grow weaker, driven about by every wind of vain doctrine, or vexed by
   empty subtleties and false doubts: he would summon faith to return,
   before it were shipwrecked, to the haven of piety, believing and
   confessing the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, Son of Man and
   Son of God, according to the Scriptures, this being the safeguard of
   reverence against the attack of the adversary, so to understand the
   death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, as it was written of Him. There
   is no danger in faith: the reverent confession of the hidden mystery of
   God is always safe. Christ was born of the Virgin, but conceived of the
   Holy Ghost according to the Scriptures. Christ wept, but according to
   the Scriptures: that which made Him weep was also a cause of joy.
   Christ hungered; but according to the Scriptures, He used His power as
   God against the tree which bore no fruit, when He had no food. Christ
   suffered: but according to the Scriptures, He was about to sit at the
   right hand of Power. He complained that He was abandoned to die: but
   according to the Scriptures, at the same moment He received in His
   kingdom in Paradise the thief who confessed Him. He died: but according
   to the Scriptures, He rose again and sits at the right hand of God. In
   the belief of this mystery there is life: this confession resists all
   attack.

   68. The Apostle is careful to leave no room for doubt: we cannot say,
   "Christ was born, suffered, was dead and buried, and rose again: but
   how, by what power, by what division of parts of Himself? Who wept? Who
   rejoiced? Who complained? Who descended? and Who ascended?" He rests
   the merits of faith entirely on the confession of unquestioning
   reverence. The righteousness, he says, which is of faith saith thus,
   Say not in thy heart, Who hath ascended into heaven, that is, to bring
   Christ down: or Who hath descended into the abyss: that is, to bring
   Christ up from the dead? But what saith the Scripture? Thy word is
   nigh, in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is, the word of faith which
   we preach: because if thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord,
   and shalt believe in thy heart, that God hath raised Him up from the
   dead, thou shalt be saved [1215] . Faith perfects the righteous man: as
   it is written, Abraham believed God and it was reckoned unto him for
   righteousness [1216] . Did Abraham impugn the word of God, when he was
   promised the inheritance of the Gentiles, and an abiding posterity as
   many as the sand or the stars for multitude? To the reverent faith,
   which trusts implicitly on the omnipotence of God, the limits of human
   weakness are no barrier. Despising all that is feeble and earthly in
   itself, it believes the divine promise, even though it exceeds the
   possibilities of human nature. It knows that the laws which govern man
   are no hindrance to the power of God, Who is as bountiful in the
   performance as He is gracious in the promise. Nothing is more righteous
   than Faith. For as in human conduct it is equity and self-restraint
   that receive our approval, so in the case of God, what is more
   righteous for man than to ascribe omnipotence to Him, Whose Power He
   perceives to be without limits?

   69. The Apostle then looking in us for the righteousness which is of
   Faith, cuts at the root of incredulous doubt and godless unbelief. He
   forbids us to admit into our hearts the cares of anxious thought, and
   points to the authority of the Prophet's words, Say not in thy heart,
   Who hath ascended into heaven [1217] ? Then He completes the thought of
   the Prophet's words with the addition, That is to bring Christ down.
   The perception of the human mind cannot attain to the knowledge of the
   divine: but neither can a reverent faith doubt the works of God. Christ
   needed no human help, that any one should ascend into heaven to bring
   Him down from His blessed Home to His earthly body. It was no external
   force which drove Him down to the earth. We must believe that He came,
   even as He did come: it is true religion to confess Jesus Christ not
   brought down, but descending. The mystery both of the time and the
   method of His coming, belongs to Him alone. We may not think because He
   came but recently, that therefore He must have been brought down, nor
   that His coming in time depended upon another, who brought Him down.

   Nor does the Apostle give room for unbelief in the other direction. He
   quotes at once the words of the Prophet, Or Who hath descended into the
   abyss [1218] , and adds immediately the explanation, That is to bring
   Christ back from the dead. He is free to return into heaven, Who was
   free to descend to the earth. All hesitation and doubt is then removed.
   Faith reveals what omnipotence plans: history relates the effect, God
   Almighty was the cause.

   70. But there is demanded from us an unwavering certainty. The Apostle
   expounding the whole secret of the Scripture passes on, Thy word is
   nigh, in thy mouth and in thy heart [1219] . The words of our
   confession must not be tardy or deliberately vague: there must be no
   interval between heart and lips, lest what ought to be the confession
   of true reverence become a subterfuge of infidelity. The word must be
   near us, and within us; no delay between the heart and the lips; a
   faith of conviction as well as of words. Heart and lips must be in
   harmony, and reveal in thought and utterance a religion which does not
   waver. Here too, as before, the Apostle adds the explanation of the
   Prophet's words, That is the word of Faith, which we preach; because if
   thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in
   thy heart that God hath raised Him up from the dead, thou shalt be
   saved. Piety consists in rejecting doubt, righteousness in believing,
   salvation in confessing. Trifle not with ambiguities, be not stirred up
   to vain babblings, do not debate in any way the powers of God, or
   impose limits upon His might, cease searching again and again for the
   causes of unsearchable mysteries: confess rather that Jesus is the
   Lord, and believe that God raised Him from the dead; herein is
   salvation. What folly is it to depreciate the nature and character of
   Christ, when this alone is salvation, to know that He is the Lord.
   Again, what an error of human vanity to quarrel about His resurrection,
   when it is enough for eternal life to believe that God raised Him up.
   In simplicity then is faith, in faith righteousness, and in confession
   true godliness. For God does not call us to the blessed life through
   arduous investigations. He does not tempt us with the varied arts of
   rhetoric. The way to eternity is plain and easy; believe that Jesus was
   raised from the dead by God and confess that He is the Lord. Let no one
   therefore wrest into an occasion for impiety, what was said because of
   our ignorance. It had to be proved to us, that Jesus Christ died, that
   we might live in Him.

   71. If then He said, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me [1220] ,
   and Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit [1221] , that we might
   be sure that He did die, was not this, in His care for our faith,
   rather a scattering of our doubts, than a confession of His weakness?
   When He was about to restore Lazarus, He prayed to the Father: but what
   need had He of prayer, Who said, Father, I thank Thee, that Thou hast
   heard Me; and I know that Thou hearest Me always, but because of the
   multitude I said it, that they may believe that Thou didst send Me
   [1222] ? He prayed then for us, that we may know Him to be the Son; the
   words of prayer availed Him nothing, but He said them for the
   advancement of our faith. He was not in want of help, but we of
   teaching. Again He prayed to be glorified; and immediately was heard
   from heaven the voice of God the Father glorifying Him: but when they
   wondered at the voice, He said, This voice hath not come for My sake,
   but for your sakes [1223] . The Father is besought for us, He speaks
   for us: may all this lead us to believe and confess! The answer of the
   Glorifier is granted not to the prayer for glory, but to the ignorance
   of the bystanders: must we not then regard the complaint of suffering,
   when He found His greatest joy in suffering, as intended for the
   building up of our faith? Christ prayed for His persecutors, because
   they knew not what they did. He promised Paradise from the cross,
   because He is God the King. He rejoiced upon the cross, that all was
   finished when He drank the vinegar, because He had fulfilled all
   prophecy before He died. He was born for us, suffered for us, died for
   us, rose again for us. This alone is necessary for our salvation, to
   confess the Son of God risen from the dead: why then should we die in
   this state of godless unbelief? If Christ, ever secure of His divinity,
   made clear to us His death, Himself indifferent to death, yet dying to
   assure that it was true humanity that He had assumed: why should we use
   this very confession of the Son of God that for us He became Son of Man
   and died as the chief weapon to deny His divinity?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1095] 2 Tim. iv. 3, 4.

   [1096] 1 Tim. iv. 1, 2.

   [1097] i.e. the Arians, who maintained that Jesus was created
   (creatura) and not God.

   [1098] Reading "exsulantibus" with the Benedictine Edition (Paris,
   1693); Migne (Paris, 1844), "exultantibus."

   [1099] i.e. The generation of the second Person from the first Person
   of the Trinity.

   [1100] St. John x. 30.

   [1101] Supply, referat.'

   [1102] The Arians accused the Catholics of a Sabellian denial of the
   Trinity and a Patripassian view of the Incarnation, i.e. that the
   unborn God became man.

   [1103] St. Matt. i. 23.

   [1104] St. John xvii. 5.

   [1105] "Of that day and that hour knoweth no one, not even the Angels
   of Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only." St. Matt. xxiv. 36;
   cf. St. Mark xiii. 32.

   [1106] Hilary is granting for the moment that the Son really was
   ignorant of the day and hour; this, he says, could be not argument for
   the inequality of the Son: it would serve, however, to disprove the
   Sabellian identification of the Son and the Father by shewing that this
   knowledge was the possession of the Father only. Erasmus inserted here
   a passage which he found in a ms.;--"and this shews us that the saying
   of the Word referred to the mystery of human perfection: that He, Who
   bore our infirmities, should take upon Himself also the infirmity of
   human ignorance, and that He should say He knew not the day, just as He
   knew not where they had laid Lazarus, or who it was when the woman
   touched the hem of His garment: being infirm in knowledge as He was
   infirm in weeping, in the endurance of weariness, hunger, and thirst,
   He did not disdain even the error of ignorance: especially when we
   consider how, when He rose from the dead, and was about to ascend up
   to, and above, the heavens, the Apostles approached Him as no longer
   ignorant, but knowing, and determining this His day, and put exactly
   the same question to Him of which He was silent during the dispensation
   of His humanity: that it might be made plain by their repeated
   question, that they understood His statement, I know not,' of an
   ignorance which He took upon Himself, not essential to His nature." The
   passage is utterly inconsistent with Hilary's teaching both here and in
   ix. 58 f., and is an obvious and clumsy interpolation.

   [1107] Throughout the whole of this discussion of Christ's sufferings,
   Hilary distinguishes the feeling of pain (dolere, dolor) from the
   physical cause of pain, i.e. the cutting and piercing of the body
   (pati, passio). Christ's body suffered (pati) but He could not feel
   pain (dolere): see c. 23.

   [1108] St. Matt. xxvi. 38.

   [1109] Ib. 39.

   [1110] Ib. xxvii. 46.

   [1111] St. Luke xxiii. 46.

   [1112] St. Matt. x. 38, 39.

   [1113] St. Matt. x. 28.

   [1114] St. John x. 18.

   [1115] Ib. xix. 30.

   [1116] Ps. xv. 10.

   [1117] St. John ii. 19; St. Matt. xxvi. 16, xxvii. 40; St. Mark xiv.
   58.

   [1118] Omitting suo:" or retaining it His (i.e. the Word's) Holy
   Spirit.'

   [1119] St. John iii. 13.

   [1120] 1 Cor. xv. 47. One copy reads de terra terrenus, of the earth,
   earth.

   [1121] Luke i. 35. "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
   of the Most High shall overshadow thee."

   [1122] St. John vi. 51.

   [1123] Ib. vi. 54.

   [1124] Apollinaris argued that if Christ were perfect God and perfect
   man, there would be two Christs, the Son of God by nature and the Son
   of God by adoption. Hence He taught that Christ was partly God and
   partly man; that He received from the Virgin His body and the lower,
   irrational soul which is the condition of bodily life; while His
   rational Spirit was Divine. On this theory the whole man,' as Hilary
   says, was not born of the Virgin. Hilary denies the threefold division.
   The soul in every case, Christ's included, is, he says, the immediate
   work of God.

   [1125] i.e. the infinite nature of God, and the finite nature of man.

   [1126] Form since the time of Aristotle meant the qualities which
   constituted the distinctive essence of a thing.

   [1127] Erasmus mentions an insertion in one ms. here, which explains
   what Hilary implies throughout the chapter: weak as ours from sin,'
   i.e. weakness is the proper penalty for sin: pain is only a secondary
   and adventitious effect of the weakness of human nature brought on by
   sin. Christ then atoned completely for sin, by suffering, without
   feeling pain.

   [1128] St. John xi. 15, Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your sakes,
   that I was not there, to the intent that ye may believe.'

   [1129] St. John vii. 38.

   [1130] St. Matt. xxi. 19 and St. Mark xi. 3.

   [1131] Phil. ii. 7.

   [1132] Rom. viii. 3.

   [1133] St. Matt. xvi. 22, 23.

   [1134] Ib. xvi. 16.

   [1135] St. Matt. xxvi. 38.

   [1136] St. John xiii. 31.

   [1137] St. Mark xiv. 36.

   [1138] St. John xviii. 11.

   [1139] St. Mark xv. 34.; St. Matt. xxvii. 46.

   [1140] St. Matt. xxvi. 64; cf. xvi. 27.

   [1141] St. Luke xxiii. 46.

   [1142] Ib. 43.

   [1143] i.e. the thief on the cross.

   [1144] In Biblical and Patristic Latin chaos had acquired the sense of
   chasma; cf. Rönsch, Itala u. Vulgata, p. 250.

   [1145] Reading susceptis elementis.'

   [1146] St. Matt. xxvi. 38; St. Mark xiv. 34.

   [1147] Usque ad mortem: up to, as far as death. The Latin gives more
   colour to this interpretation of Hilary than the English translation
   even unto death.'

   [1148] St. Matt. xxvi. 31; St. Mark xiv. 27; cf. St. John xvi. 32.

   [1149] St. Matt. xxvi. 32; St. Mark xiv. 28; cf. xvi. 7.

   [1150] St. Matt. xxvi. 33.

   [1151] St. Matt. xxvi. 39; St. Mark xiv. 36; St. Luke xxii. 42.

   [1152] i.e. the possibility that the disciples may not endure the
   temptation of the cup: that it might abide with them instead of passing
   away. See the explanation in the next chapter.

   [1153] St. Matt. xxvi. 40, 41; St. Mark xiv. 37, 38; cf. St. Luke xxii.
   45, 46.

   [1154] St. Mark xiv. 36.

   [1155] St. Luke xxii. 31, 32.

   [1156] St. Matt. xxvi. 42. The Greek is:--My Father, if this cup cannot
   pass away except I drink of it, Thy will be done.'

   [1157] Reading non nisi finito.'

   [1158] St. Matt. xxvi. 45.

   [1159] This is a mistranslation of St. Luke xxii. 32, edeethen being
   taken as passive.

   [1160] St. Luke xxii. 43, 44. The Greek is hosei, as it were drops of
   blood.'

   [1161] The Greek is egeneto de ho hidros autou hosei thromboi haimatos.
   His sweat became as it were great drops of blood' (R.V.): see supra.

   [1162] i.e. all sects with Docetic tenets, who would not allow Christ
   to have had a real human body, but only to have appeared in bodily
   shape, like a ghost.

   [1163] St. John xvii. 11, 12. Hilary omits after keeping them in Thy
   Name,' the words which Thou hast given Me, that they may be one even as
   We are One.'

   [1164] St. Matt. xxvi. 53.

   [1165] St. Mark xiii. 31. In the Greek the same word parerchesthai is
   used in both cases, but Hilary uses transire in the first, praeterire
   in the second instance.

   [1166] 2 Cor. v. 17.

   [1167] 1 Cor. vii. 31.

   [1168] St. John xviii. 9.

   [1169] i.e. St. Luke xxvi. 31, 32, as quoted above, c. 38.

   [1170] Reading efficit.

   [1171] Dan. iii. 23.

   [1172] Dan. i. 8-16.

   [1173] 2 Tim. iv. 6, 8.

   [1174] Isai. liii. 4, 5. Hilary translates from the Septuagint. The
   Hebrew and the Vulgate differ, cf. the English Version, "Surely He hath
   borne our griefs" (instead of "our sins").

   [1175] 2 Cor. v. 20, 21. The Greek is huper christou, on behalf of
   Christ.'

   [1176] i.e. flesh in the bad sense, "the flesh of sin."

   [1177] Col. ii. 13-15.

   [1178] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

   [1179] Allusion to St. Matt. xxvii. 52, "many bodies of the saints that
   had fallen asleep were raised."

   [1180] St. Matt. xxvii. 46.

   [1181] Apollinaris' heresy that in Christ the place of the ordinary
   human soul was supplied by the Logos, the second Person in the Trinity.

   [1182] This doctrine was held by Marcellus of Ancyra (Sozomen, H.E. II.
   33), and Photinus: cp. also what Sozomen (VII. 7) says of Hebion.

   [1183] This doctrine was held by Marcellus of Ancyra (Sozomen, H.E. II.
   33), and Photinus: cp. also what Sozomen (VII. 7) says of Hebion.

   [1184] The preaching of Sabellius, cf. I. 16, protensio sit potius quam
   descensio, an extension rather than a descent.'

   [1185] i.e. it realizes the plan by which the second Person of the
   Trinity chose to take a human form, but refuses to separate the Divine
   from the human in Jesus.

   [1186] Reading partitur for Mss. patitur.

   [1187] Apollinarianism.

   [1188] 1 Tim. i. 3, 4.

   [1189] St. John iii. 13.

   [1190] Ib. vi. 62.

   [1191] St. Luke xix. 41.

   [1192] St. Matt. xxiii. 37; St. Luke xiii. 34.

   [1193] The human soul in Jesus alone could feel grief and weep: yet it
   was the divine Spirit which sent forth the prophets: for the human soul
   began to exist only in conjunction with His human body.

   [1194] St. John xi. 35.

   [1195] Ib. 4. The Greek is di' autes, through it.

   [1196] St. John 14, 15.

   [1197] Ib. x. 17, 18.

   [1198] St. Matt. ii. 20.

   [1199] E.g. Isai. i. 14.

   [1200] St. Luke xxiv. 39.

   [1201] Mal. iii. 6.

   [1202] St. John ii. 19.

   [1203] St. Matt. xxvi. 12.

   [1204] Hilary is playing on the mystery of the two natures in one
   Person. We cannot say the God-nature was buried: nor that the human
   nature brought itself back to life: yet Jesus Christ died, was buried,
   and rose again.

   [1205] St. Luke xxiii. 43.

   [1206] Ib. 46.

   [1207] 1 Tim. iii. 16.

   [1208] 1 Cor. i. 23, 24.

   [1209] 1 Cor. ii. 7, 8.

   [1210] Ib. 2.

   [1211] Rom. viii. 33, 34.

   [1212] Eph. iv. 9, 10.

   [1213] 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [1214] 1 Cor. xv. 3, 4.

   [1215] Rom. x. 6-9.

   [1216] Gen. xv. 16; Rom. iv. 3.

   [1217] Deut. xxx. 12. The context is the assurance of Moses, that "the
   law is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off," but "the word is
   very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart."

   [1218] Deut. xxx. 13. E.V. Who shall go over the sea for us?

   [1219] Deut. xxx. 14.

   [1220] St. Mark xv. 34.

   [1221] St. Luke xxiii. 46.

   [1222] St. John xi. 41, 42.

   [1223] Ib. xii. 30.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book XI.

   1. The Apostle in his letter to the Ephesians, reviewing in its
   manifold aspects the full and perfect mystery of the Gospel, mingles
   with other instructions in the knowledge of God the following: As ye
   also were called in one hope of your calling; One Lord, one faith, one
   baptism, one God and Father of all, and through all, and in us all
   [1224] . He does not leave us in the vague and misleading paths of an
   indefinite teaching, or abandon us to the shifting fancies of
   imagination, but limits the unimpeded license of intellect and desire
   by the appointment of restraining barriers. He gives us no opportunity
   to be wise beyond what he preached, but defines in exact and precise
   language the faith fixed for all time, that there may be no excuse for
   instability of belief. He declares one faith, as he preaches one Lord,
   and pronounces one baptism, as he declares one faith of one Lord, that
   as there is one faith of one Lord, so there may be one baptism of one
   faith in one Lord. And since the whole mystery of the baptism and the
   faith is not only in one Lord, but also in one God, he completes the
   consummation of our hope by the confession of one God. The one baptism
   and the one faith are of one God, as they are of one Lord. Lord and God
   are each one, not by union of person but by distinction of properties:
   for, on the one hand, it is the property of Each to be one, whether of
   the Father in His Fatherhood, or of the Son in His Sonship, and on the
   other hand, that property of individuality, which Each possesses,
   constitutes for Each the mystery of His union with the Other. Thus the
   one Lord Christ cannot take away from God the Father His Lordship, or
   the one God the Father deny to the one Lord Christ His Godhead. If,
   because God is one, Christ is not also by nature divine, then we cannot
   allow that the one God is Lord, because there is one Lord Christ: that
   is, on the supposition that by their oneness' is signified not the
   mystery, but an exclusive unity. So there is one baptism and one faith
   of one Lord, as of one God.

   2. But how can it be any longer one faith, if it does not steadfastly
   and sincerely confess one Lord and one God the Father: and how can the
   faith which is not one faith confess one Lord and one God the Father?
   Further, how can the faith be one, when its preachers are so at
   variance? One comes teaching that the Lord Jesus Christ, being in the
   weakness of our nature, groaned with anguish when the nails pierced His
   hands, that He lost the virtue of His own power and nature, and shrank
   shuddering from the death which threatened Him. Another even denies the
   cardinal doctrine of the Generation and pronounces Him a creature.
   Another will call Him, but not think Him, God on the ground that
   religion allows us to speak of more Gods than One, but He, Whom we
   recognise as God, must be conscious of sharing the divine nature [1225]
   . Again, how can Christ the Lord be one, when some say that as God He
   feels no pain, others make Him weak and fearful: to some He is God in
   name, to others God in nature: to some the Son by Generation, to others
   the Son by appellation? And if this is so, how can God the Father be
   one in the faith, when to some He is Father by His authority, to others
   Father by generation, in the sense that God is Father of the universe?

   And yet, who will deny that whatever is not the one faith, is not faith
   at all? For in the one faith there is one Lord Christ, and God the
   Father is one. But the one Lord Jesus Christ is not one in the truth of
   the confession, as well as in name, unless He is Son, unless He is God
   [1226] , unless He is unchangeable, unless His Sonship and His Godhead
   have been eternally present in Him. He who preaches Christ other than
   He is, that is, other than Son and God, preaches another Christ. Nor is
   he in the one faith of the one baptism, for in the teaching of the
   Apostle the one faith is the faith of that one baptism, in which the
   one Lord is Christ, the Son of God Who is also God.

   3. Yet it cannot be denied that Christ was Christ. It cannot be that He
   was incognisable to mankind. The books of the prophets have set their
   seal upon Him: the fulness of the times, which waxes daily, witnesses
   of Him: by the working of wonders the tombs of Apostles and Martyrs
   proclaim Him: the power of His name reveals Him: the unclean spirits
   confess Him, and the devils howling in their torment call aloud His
   name. In all we see the dispensation of His power. But our faith must
   preach Him as He is, namely, one Lord not in name but in confession, in
   one faith of one baptism: for on our faith in one Lord Christ depends
   our confession of one God the Father.

   4. But these teachers of a new Christ, who deny to Him all that is His,
   preach another Lord Christ as well as another God the Father. The One
   is not the Begetter but the Creator, the Other not begotten, but
   created. Christ is therefore not very God, because He is not God by
   birth, and faith cannot recognise a Father in God, because there is no
   generation to constitute Him Father. They glorify God the Father
   indeed, as is His right and due, when they predicate of Him a nature
   unapproachable, invisible, inviolable, ineffable, and infinite, endued
   with omniscience and omnipotence, instinct with love, moving in all and
   permeating all, immanent and transcendent, sentient in all sentient
   existence. But when they proceed to ascribe to Him the unique glory of
   being alone good, alone omnipotent, alone immortal, who does not feel
   that this pious praise aims to exclude the Lord Jesus Christ from the
   blessedness, which by the reservation alone' is restricted to the glory
   of God? Does it not leave Christ in sinfulness and weakness and death,
   while the Father reigns in solitary perfection? Does it not deny in
   Christ a natural origin from God the Father, in the fear lest He should
   be thought to inherit by a birth, which bestows upon the Begotten the
   same virtue of nature as the Begetter, a blessedness natural to God the
   Father alone?

   5. Unlearned in the teaching of the Gospels and Apostles, they extol
   the glory of God the Father, not, however, with the sincerity of a
   devout believer, but with the cunning of impiety, to wrest from it an
   argument for their wicked heresy. Nothing, they say, can be compared
   with His nature: therefore the Only-begotten God is excluded from the
   comparison, because He possesses a lower and weaker nature. And this
   they say of God, the living image of the living God, the perfect form
   of His blessed nature, the only-begotten offspring of His unbegotten
   substance; Who is not truly the image of God unless He possesses the
   perfect glory of the Father's blessedness: and reproduces in its
   exactitude the likeness of His whole nature. But if the Only-begotten
   God is the image of the Unbegotten God, the verity of that perfect and
   supreme nature resides in Him and makes Him the image of the very God.
   Is the Father omnipotent? The weak Son is not the image of omnipotence.
   Is He good? The Son, Whose divinity is of a lower stamp, does not
   reflect in His sinful nature the image of goodness. Is He incorporeal?
   The Son, Whose very spirit is confined to the limits of a body, is not
   in the form of the Incorporeal. Is He ineffable? The Son, Whom language
   can define, Whose nature the tongue can describe, is not the image of
   the Ineffable. Is He the true God? The Son possesses only a fictitious
   divinity, and the false cannot be the image of the True. The Apostle,
   however, does not ascribe to Christ a portion of the image, or a part
   of the form, but pronounces Him unreservedly the image of the invisible
   God and the form of God [1227] . And how could He declare more
   expressly the divine nature of the Son of God, than by saying that
   Christ is the image of the invisible God even in respect of His
   invisibility: for if the substance of Christ were discernible how could
   He be the image of an invisible nature?

   6. But, as we pointed out in the former books, they seize the
   Dispensation of the assumed manhood as a pretext to dishonour His
   divinity, and distort the Mystery of our salvation into an occasion of
   blasphemy. Had they held fast the faith of the Apostle, they would
   neither have forgotten that He, Who was in the form of God, took the
   form of a servant, nor made use of the servant's form to dishonour the
   form of God (for the form of God includes the fulness of divinity), but
   they would have noted, reasonably and reverently, the distinction of
   occasions [1228] and mysteries, without dishonouring the divinity, or
   being misled by the Incarnation of Christ. But now, when we have, I am
   convinced, proved everything to the utmost, and pointed out the power
   of the divine nature underlying the birth of the assumed body, there is
   no longer room for doubt. He Who was at once man and the Only-begotten
   God performed all things by the power of God, and in the power of God
   accomplished all things through a true human nature. As begotten of God
   He possessed the nature of divine omnipotence, as born of the Virgin He
   had a perfect and entire humanity. Though He had a real body, He
   subsisted in the nature of God, and though He subsisted in the nature
   of God, He abode in a real body.

   7. In our reply we have followed Him to the moment of His glorious
   death, and taking one by one the statements of their unhallowed
   doctrine, we have refuted them from the teaching of the Gospels and the
   Apostle. But even after His glorious resurrection there are certain
   things which they have made bold to construe as proofs of the weakness
   of a lower nature, and to these we must now reply. Let us adopt once
   more our usual method of drawing out from the words themselves their
   true signification, that so we may discover the truth precisely where
   they think to overthrow it. For the Lord spoke in simple words for our
   instruction in the faith, and His words cannot need support or comment
   from foreign and irrelevant sayings.

   8. Among their other sins the heretics often employ as an argument the
   words of the Lord, I ascend unto My Father and your Father, and My God
   and your God [1229] . His Father is also their Father, His God their
   God; therefore He is not in the nature of God, for He pronounces God
   the Father of others as of Himself, and His unique Sonship ceases when
   He shares with others the nature and the origin which make Him Son and
   God. But let them add further the words of the Apostle, But when He
   saith All things are put in subjection, He is excepted Who did subject
   all things unto Him. And when all things have been subjected unto Him,
   then shall He Himself be subjected unto Him that did subject all things
   unto Himself, that God may be all in all [1230] , whereby, since they
   regard that subjection as a proof of weakness, they may dispossess Him
   of the virtue of His Father's nature, because His natural infirmity
   subjected Him to the dominion of a stronger nature. And after that, let
   them adopt their very strongest position and their impregnable defence,
   before which the truth of the Divine birth is to be demolished; namely,
   that if He is subjected, He is not God; if His God and Father is ours
   also, He shares all in common with creatures, and therefore is Himself
   also a creature: created of God and not begotten, since the creature
   has its substance out of nothing, but the begotten possesses the nature
   of its author.

   9. Falsehood is always infamous, for the liar throwing off the bridle
   of shame dares to gainsay the truth, or else at times he hides behind
   some veil of pretext, that he may appear to defend with modesty what is
   shameless in intention. But in this case, when they sacrilegiously use
   the Scriptures to degrade the dignity of our Lord, there is no room for
   the blush or the false excuse; for there are occasions when even pardon
   accorded to ignorance is refused, and wilful misconstruction is exposed
   in its naked profanity. Let us postpone for a moment the exposition of
   this passage in the Gospel, and ask them first whether they have
   forgotten the preaching of the Apostle, who said, Without controversy
   great is the mystery of godliness, which was manifested in the flesh,
   justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached among the nations,
   believed on in the world, received up in glory [1231] . Who is so dull
   that he cannot comprehend that the mystery of godliness is simply the
   Dispensation of the flesh assumed by the Lord? At the outset then, he
   who does not agree in this confession is not in the faith of God. For
   the Apostle leaves no doubt that all must confess that the hidden
   secret of our salvation is not the dishonour of God, but the mystery of
   great godliness, and a mystery no longer kept from our eyes, but
   manifested in the flesh; no longer weak through the nature of flesh,
   but justified in the Spirit. And so by the justification of the Spirit
   is removed from our faith the idea of fleshly weakness; through the
   manifestation of the flesh is revealed that which was secret, and in
   the unknown cause of that which was secret is contained the only
   confession, the confession of the mystery of great godliness. This is
   the whole system of the faith set forth by the Apostle in its proper
   order. From godliness proceeds the mystery, from the mystery the
   manifestation in the flesh, from the manifestation in the flesh the
   justification in the Spirit: for the mystery of godliness which was
   manifested in the flesh, to be truly a mystery, was manifested in the
   flesh through the justification of the Spirit. Again, we must not
   forget what manner of justification in the Spirit is this manifestation
   in the flesh: for the mystery which was manifested in the flesh,
   justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached among the nations,
   and believed on in this world, this same mystery was received up in
   glory. Thus is it in every way a mystery of great godliness, when it is
   manifested in the flesh, when it is justified in the Spirit, when it is
   seen of angels, when it is preached among the nations, when it is
   believed on in the world, and when it is received up in glory. The
   preaching follows the seeing, and the believing the preaching, and the
   consummation of all is the receiving up in glory: for the assumption
   into glory is the mystery of great godliness, and by faith in the
   Dispensation we are prepared to be received up, and to be conformed to
   the glory of the Lord. The assumption of flesh is therefore also the
   mystery of great godliness, for through the assumption of flesh the
   mystery was manifested in the flesh. But we must believe that the
   manifestation in the flesh also is this same mystery of great
   godliness, for His manifestation in the flesh is His justification in
   the Spirit, and His assumption into glory. And now what room does our
   faith leave for any to think that the secret of the Dispensation of
   godliness is the enfeebling of the divinity, when through the
   assumption of glory is to be confessed the mystery of great godliness?
   What was infirmity' is now the mystery:' what was necessity' becomes
   godliness [1232] .' And now let us turn to the meaning of the
   Evangelist's words, that the secret of our salvation and our glory may
   not be converted into an occasion of blasphemy.

   10. You credit with the weight of irresistible authority, heretic, that
   saying of the Lord, I ascend to My Father and your Father, and My God
   and your God [1233] . The same Father, you say, is His Father and ours,
   the same God His God and ours. He partakes, therefore, of our weakness,
   for in the possession of the same Father we are not inferior as sons,
   and in the service of the same God we are equal as servants. Since,
   then, we are of created origin and a servant's nature, but have a
   common Father and God with Him, He is in common with our nature a
   creature and a servant. So runs this infatuated and unhallowed
   teaching. It produces also the words of the Prophet, Thy God hath
   anointed Thee, O God, to prove that Christ does not partake of that
   glorious nature which belongs to God, since the God Who anoints Him is
   preferred before Him as His God [1234] .

   11. We do not know Christ the God unless we know God the Begotten. But
   to be born God is to belong to the nature of God, for the name Begotten
   signifies indeed the manner of His origin, but does not make Him
   different in kind from the Begetter. And if so, the Begotten owes
   indeed to His Author the source of His being, but is not dispossessed
   of the nature of that Author, for the birth of God can arise but from
   one origin, and have but one nature. If its origin is not from God, it
   is not a birth; if it is anything but a birth, Christ is not God. But
   He is God of God, and therefore God the Father stands to God the Son as
   God of His birth and Father of His nature, for the birth of God is from
   God, and in the specific nature of God.

   12. See in all that He said, how carefully the Lord tempers the pious
   acknowledgment of His debt, so that neither the confession of the birth
   could be held to reflect upon His divinity, nor His reverent obedience
   to infringe upon His sovereign nature. He does not withhold the homage
   due from Him as the Begotten, Who owed to His Author His very
   existence, but He manifests by His confident bearing the consciousness
   of participation in that nature, which belongs to Him by virtue of the
   origin whereby He was born as God. Take, for instance, the words, He
   that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also [1235] , and, The words
   that I say, I speak not from Myself [1236] . He does not speak from
   Himself: therefore He receives from His Author that which He says. But
   if any have seen Him, they have seen the Father also: they are
   conscious, by this evidence, given to shew that God is in Him, that a
   nature, one in kind with that of God, was born from God to subsist as
   God. Take again the words, That which the Father hath given unto Me, is
   greater than all [1237] , and, I and the Father are one [1238] . To say
   that the Father gave, is a confession that He received His origin: but
   the unity of Himself with the Father is a property of His nature
   derived from that origin. Take another instance, He hath given all
   judgment unto the Son, that all may honour the Son even as they honour
   the Father [1239] . He acknowledges that the judgment is given to Him,
   and therefore He does not put His birth in the background: but He
   claims equal honour with the Father, and therefore He does not resign
   His nature. Yet another example, I am in the Father, and the Father is
   in Me [1240] , and, The Father is greater than I [1241] . The One is in
   the Other: recognise, then, the divinity of God, the Begotten of God:
   the Father is greater than He: perceive, then, His acknowledgment of
   the Father's authority. In the same way He says, The Son can do nothing
   of Himself but what He hath seen the Father doing: for what things
   soever He doeth, these the Son also doeth in like manner [1242] . He
   doeth nothing of Himself: that is, in accordance with His birth the
   Father prompts His actions: yet what things soever the Father doeth,
   these the Son also doeth in like manner; that is, He subsists as
   nothing less than God, and by the Father's omnipotent nature residing
   in Him, can do all that God the Father does. All is uttered in
   agreement with His unity of Spirit with the Father, and the properties
   of that nature, which He possesses by virtue of His birth. That birth,
   which brought Him into being, constituted Him divine, and His being
   reveals the consciousness of that divine nature. God the Son confesses
   God His Father, because He was born of Him; but also, because He was
   born, He inherits the whole nature of God.

   13. So the Dispensation of the great and godly mystery makes Him, Who
   was already Father of the divine Son, also His Lord in the created form
   which He assumed, for He, Who was in the form of God, was found also in
   the form of a servant. Yet He was not a servant, for according to the
   Spirit He was God the Son of God. Every one will agree also that there
   is no servant where there is no lord. God is indeed Father in the
   Generation of the Only-begotten God, but only in the case that the
   Other is a servant can we call Him Lord as well as Father. The Son was
   not at the first a servant by nature, but afterwards began to be by
   nature something which He was not before. Thus the Father is Lord on
   the same grounds as the Son is servant. By the Dispensation of His
   nature the Son had a Lord, when He made Himself a servant by the
   assumption of manhood.

   14. Being, then, in the form of a servant, Jesus Christ, Who before was
   in the form of God, said as a man, I ascend to My Father and your
   Father, and My God and your God. He was speaking as a servant to
   servants: how can we then dissociate the words from Christ the servant,
   and transfer them to that nature, which had nothing of the servant in
   it? For He Who abode in the form of God took upon Him the form of a
   servant, this form being the indispensable condition of His fellowship
   as a servant with servants. It is in this sense that God is His Father
   and the Father of men, His God and the God of servants. Jesus Christ
   was speaking as a man in the form of a servant to men and servants;
   what difficulty is there then in the idea, that in His human aspect the
   Father is His Father as ours, in His servant's nature God is His God as
   all men's?

   15. These, then, are the words with which He prefaces the message, Go
   unto My brethren, and say to them, I ascend unto My Father and your
   Father, and My God and your God. I ask, Are they to be understood as
   His brethren with reference to the form of God or to the form of a
   servant? And has our flesh kinship with Him in regard to the fulness of
   the Godhead dwelling in Him, that we should be reckoned His brothers in
   respect of His divinity? No, for the Spirit of prophecy recognises
   clearly in what respect we are the brethren of the Only-begotten God.
   It is as a worm and no man [1243] that He says, I will declare Thy name
   unto My brethren [1244] . As a worm, which is born without the ordinary
   process of conception, or else comes up into the world, already living,
   from the depths of the earth, He speaks here in manifestation of the
   fact that He had assumed flesh and also brought it up, living, from
   Hades. Throughout the Psalm He is foretelling by the Spirit of prophecy
   the mysteries of His Passion: it is therefore in respect of the
   Dispensation, in which He suffered, that He has brethren. The Apostle
   also recognises the mystery of this brotherhood, for he calls Him not
   only the firstborn from the dead [1245] , but also the firstborn among
   many brethren [1246] . Christ is the Firstborn among many brethren in
   the same sense in which He is Firstborn from the dead: and as the
   mystery of death concerns His body, so the mystery of brotherhood also
   refers to His flesh. Thus God has brethren according to His flesh, for
   the Word became flesh and dwelt amongst us [1247] : but the
   Only-begotten Son, unique as the Only-begotten, has no brethren.

   16. By assuming flesh, however, He acquired our nature in our totality,
   and became all that we are, but did not lose that which He was before.
   Both before by His heavenly origin, and now by His earthly
   constitution, God is His Father. By His earthly constitution God is His
   Father, since all things are from God the Father, and God is Father to
   all things, since from Him and in Him are all things. But to the
   Only-begotten God, God is Father, not only because the Word became
   flesh; His Fatherhood extends also to Him Who was, as God the Word,
   with God in the beginning. Thus, when the Word became flesh, God was
   His Father both by the birth of God the Word, and by the constitution
   of His flesh: for God is the Father of all flesh, though not in the
   same way that He is Father to God the Word. But God the Word, though He
   did not cease to be God, really did become flesh: and while He thus
   dwelt He was still truly the Word, just as when the Word became flesh
   He was still truly God as well as man. For to dwell' can only be said
   of one who abides in something: and to become flesh of one who is born.
   He dwelt among us; that is, He assumed our flesh. The Word became flesh
   and dwelt among us; that is, He was God in the reality of our body. If
   Christ Jesus, the man according to the flesh, robbed God the Word of
   the divine nature, or was not according to the mystery of godliness
   also God the Word, then it reduces His nature to our level that God is
   His Father, and our Father, His God and our God. But if God the Word,
   when He became the man Christ Jesus, did not cease to be God the Word,
   then God is at the same time His Father and ours, His God and ours,
   only in respect of that nature, by which the Word is our brother, and
   the message to His brethren, I ascend unto My Father and your Father,
   and My God and your God, is not that of the Only-begotten God the Word,
   but of the Word made flesh.

   17. The Apostle here speaks in carefully guarded words, which by their
   definiteness can give no occasion to the ungodly. We have seen that the
   Evangelist makes the Lord use the word Brethren' in the preface to the
   message, thus signifying that the whole message, being addressed to His
   brethren, refers to His fellowship in that nature which makes Him their
   brother. Thus he makes manifest that the mystery of godliness, which is
   here proclaimed, is no degradation of His divinity. The community with
   Him, by which God is our Father and His, our God and His, exists in
   regard to the Dispensation of the flesh: we are counted His brethren,
   because He was born into the body. No one disputes that God the Father
   is also the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, but this reverent confession
   offers no occasion for irreverence. God is His God but not as
   possessing a different order of divinity from His. He was begotten God
   of the Father, and born a servant by the Dispensation: and so God is
   His Father because He is God of God, and God is His God, because He is
   flesh of the Virgin. All this the Apostle confirms in one short and
   decisive sentence, Making mention of you in my prayers that the God of
   our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you a spirit
   of wisdom and revelation [1248] . When he speaks of Him as Jesus
   Christ, he mentions His God: when his theme is the glory of Christ, he
   calls God His Father. To Christ, as having glory, God is Father: to
   Christ, as being Jesus, God is God. For the angel, when speaking of
   Christ the Lord, Who should be born of Mary, calls Him by the name
   Jesus [1249] :' but to the prophets Christ the Lord is Spirit [1250] .'
   The Apostle's words in this passage seem to many, on account of the
   Latin, somewhat obscure, for Latin has no articles, which the beautiful
   and logical usage of Greek employs. The Greek runs, ho Theos tou Kuriou
   hemon 'Iesou Christou, ho pater tes doxes, which we might translate
   into Latin, if the usage of the article were permitted, Ille Deus
   illius Domini nostri Jesu Christi, ille pater illius claritatis' (The
   God of the Lord [of us] Jesus Christ, the Father of the glory). In this
   form The God of the Jesus Christ,' and the Father of the glory,' the
   sentence expresses, so far as we can comprehend them, certain truths of
   His nature. Where the glory of Christ is concerned, God is His Father;
   where Christ is Jesus, there the Father is His God. In the Dispensation
   by which He is a servant, He has as God Him Whom, in the glory by which
   He is God, He has as Father.

   18. Time and the lapse of ages make no difference to a Spirit [1251] .
   Christ is one and the same Christ, whether in the body, or abiding by
   the Spirit in the prophets. Speaking through the mouth of the holy
   Patriarch David, He says, Thy God, O God, hath anointed Thee with the
   oil of gladness above Thy fellows [1252] , which refers to no less a
   mystery than the Dispensation of His assumption of flesh. He, Who now
   sends the message to His brethren that their Father is His Father, and
   their God His God, announced Himself then as anointed by His God above
   His fellows. No one is fellow to the Only-begotten Christ, God the
   Word: but we know that we are His fellows by the assumption which made
   Him flesh. That anointing did not exalt the blessed and incorruptible
   Begotten Who abides in the nature of God, but it established the
   mystery of His body, and sanctified the manhood which He assumed. To
   this the Apostle Peter witnesses, Of a truth in this city were they
   gathered together against Thy holy Son Jesus, Whom Thou didst anoint
   [1253] : and on another occasion, Ye know that the saying was published
   through all Judæa, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John
   preached: even Jesus of Nazareth, how that God anointed Him with the
   Holy Ghost and with power [1254] . Jesus was anointed, therefore, that
   the mystery of the regeneration of flesh might be accomplished. Nor are
   we left in doubt how He was thus anointed with the Spirit of God and
   with power, when we listen to the Father's voice, as it spoke when He
   came up out of the Jordan, Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten
   Thee [1255] . Thus is testified the sanctification of His flesh, and in
   this testimony we must recognise His anointing with the power of the
   Spirit.

   19. But the Word was God, and with God in the beginning, and therefore
   the anointing could neither be related nor explained, if it referred to
   that nature, of which we are told nothing, except that it was in the
   beginning. And in fact He Who was God had no need to anoint Himself
   with the Spirit and power of God, when He was Himself the Spirit and
   power of God. So He, being God, was anointed by His God above His
   fellows. And, although there were many Christs (i.e. anointed persons)
   according to the Law before the Dispensation of the flesh, yet Christ,
   Who was anointed above His fellows, came after them, for He was
   preferred above His anointed fellows. Accordingly, the words of the
   prophecy bring out the fact that the anointing took place in time, and
   comparatively late in time. Thou hast loved righteousness and hated
   iniquity: therefore Thy God, O God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of
   gladness above Thy fellows. Now, a fact which follows later upon other
   facts, cannot be dated before them. That a reward be deserved
   postulates as a prior condition the existence of one who can deserve
   it, for merit earned implies that there has been one capable of
   acquiring it. If, therefore, we attribute the birth of the
   Only-begotten God to this anointing, which is His reward for loving
   righteousness and hating iniquity, we shall be regarding Him not as
   born, but as promoted by unction, to be the Only-begotten God. But then
   we imply that He advanced with gradual progress and promotion to
   perfect divinity, and that He was not born God, but afterwards for His
   merit anointed God. Thus we shall make Christ as God Himself
   conditioned, whereas He is the final cause of all conditions; and what
   becomes then of the Apostle's words, All things are through Him and in
   Him, and He is before all, and in Him all things consist [1256] ? The
   Lord Jesus Christ was not deified because of anything, or by means of
   anything, but was born God: God by origin, not promoted to divinity for
   any cause after His birth, but as the Son; and one in kind with God
   because begotten of Him. His anointing then, though it is the result of
   a cause, did not enhance that in Him, which could not be made more
   perfect. It concerned that part of Him which was to be made perfect
   through the perfection of the Mystery: that is, our manhood was
   sanctified in Christ by unction. If then the prophet here also teaches
   us the dispensation of the servant, for which Christ is anointed by His
   God above His fellows, and that because He loved righteousness and
   hated iniquity, then surely the words of the prophet must refer to that
   nature in Christ, by which He has fellows through His assumption of
   flesh. Can we doubt this when we note how carefully the Spirit of
   prophecy chooses His words? God is anointed by His God; that is, in His
   own nature He is God, but in the dispensation of the anointing God is
   His God. God is anointed: but tell me, is that Word anointed, Who was
   God in the beginning? Manifestly not, for the anointing comes after His
   divine birth. It was then not the begotten Word, God with God in the
   beginning, Who was anointed, but that nature in God which came to Him
   through the dispensation later than His divinity [1257] : and when His
   God anointed Him, He anointed in Him the whole nature of the servant,
   which He assumed in the mystery of His flesh.

   20. Let no one then defile with his godless interpretations the mystery
   of great godliness which was manifested in the flesh, or reckon himself
   equal to the Only-begotten in respect of His divine substance. Let Him
   be our brother and our fellow, inasmuch as the Word made flesh dwelt
   among us, inasmuch as the man Jesus Christ is Mediator between God and
   man. Let Him, after the manner of servants, have a common Father and a
   common God with us, and as anointed above His fellows, let Him be of
   the same nature as His anointed fellows, though His be an unction of
   special privilege. In the mystery of the Mediatorship let Him be at
   once very man and very God, Himself God of God, but having a common
   Father and God with us in that community by which He is our brother.

   21. But perhaps that subjection, that delivering of the kingdom, and
   lastly that end betoken the dissolution of His nature, or the loss of
   His power, or the enfeebling of His divinity. Many argue thus: Christ
   is included in the common subjection of all to God, and by the
   condition of subjection loses His divinity: He surrenders His Kingdom,
   therefore He is no longer King: the end which overtakes Him entails as
   its consequence the loss of His power.

   22. It will not be out of place here if we review the full meaning of
   the Apostle's teaching upon this subject. Let us take, then, each
   single sentence and expound it, that we may grasp the entire Mystery by
   comprehending it in its fulness. The words of the Apostle are, For
   since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.
   For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ are all made alive. But each
   in his own order: Christ the firstfruits, then they that are Christ's
   at His coming. Then cometh the end, when He shall have delivered the
   Kingdom to God, even the Father, when He shall have emptied all
   authority and all power. For He must reign until He put all enemies
   under His feet. The last enemy that shall be conquered is death. But
   when He saith, All things are put in subjection, He is excepted Who did
   subject all things unto Him. But when all things have been subjected to
   Him, then shall He also Himself be subjected to Him, that did subject
   all things unto Him, that God may be all in all [1258] .

   23. The Apostle who was chosen not of men nor through man, but through
   Jesus Christ, to be the teacher of the Gentiles [1259] , expounds in
   language as express as he can command the secrets of the heavenly
   Dispensations. He who had been caught up into the third heaven and had
   heard unspeakable words [1260] , reveals to the perception of human
   understanding as much as human nature can receive. But he does not
   forget that there are things which cannot be understood in the moment
   of hearing. The infirmity of man needs time to review before the true
   and perfect tribunal of the mind, that which is poured indiscriminately
   into the ears. Comprehension follows the spoken words more slowly than
   hearing, for it is the ear which hears, but the reason which
   understands, though it is God Who reveals the inner meaning to those
   who seek it. We learn this from the words written among many other
   exhortations to Timothy, the disciple instructed from a babe in the
   Holy Scriptures by the glorious faith of his grandmother and mother
   [1261] : Understand what I say, for the Lord shall give thee
   understanding in all things [1262] . The exhortation to understand is
   prompted by the difficulty of understanding. But God's gift of
   understanding is the reward of faith, for through faith the infirmity
   of sense is recompensed with the gift of revelation. Timothy, that man
   of God' as the Apostle witnesses of him [1263] , Paul's true child in
   the faith [1264] , is exhorted to understand because the Lord will give
   him understanding in all things: let us, therefore, knowing that the
   Lord will grant us understanding in all things, remember that the
   Apostle exhorts us also to understand.

   24. And if, by an error incident to human nature, we be clinging to
   some preconception of our own, let us not reject the advance in
   knowledge through the gift of revelation. If we have hitherto used only
   our own judgment, let that not make us ashamed to change its decisions
   for the better. Guiding this advance wisely and carefully, the same
   blessed Apostle writes to the Philippians, Let us therefore as many as
   be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye are otherwise minded,
   this also shall God reveal unto you. Only, wherein we have hastened, in
   that same let us walk [1265] . Reason cannot anticipate with
   preconceptions the revelation of God. For the Apostle has here shewn us
   wherein consists the wisdom of those who have the perfect wisdom, and
   for those who are otherwise minded, he awaits the revelation of God,
   that they may obtain the perfect wisdom. If any, then, have otherwise
   conceived this profound dispensation of the hidden knowledge, and if
   that which we offer them is in any respect more right or better
   approved, let them not be ashamed to receive the perfect wisdom, as the
   Apostle advises, through the revelation of God, and if they hate to
   abide in untruth let them not love ignorance more. If to them, who had
   another wisdom, God has revealed this also, the Apostle exhorts them to
   hasten on the road in which they have started, to cast aside the
   notions of their former ignorance, and obtain the revelation of perfect
   understanding by the path into which they have eagerly entered. Let us,
   therefore, keep on in the path along which we have hastened: or, if the
   error of our wandering steps has delayed our eager haste, let us,
   notwithstanding, start again through the revelation of God towards the
   goal of our desire, and not turn our feet from the path. We have
   hastened towards Christ Jesus the Lord of Glory, the King of the
   eternal ages, in Whom are restored all things in Heaven and in earth,
   by Whom all things consist, in Whom and with Whom we shall abide for
   ever. So long as we walk in this path we have the perfect wisdom: and
   if we have another wisdom, God will reveal to us what is the perfect
   wisdom. Let us, then, examine in the light of the Apostle's faith the
   mystery of the words before us: and let our treatment be, as it always
   has been, a refutation from the actual truth of the Apostle's
   confession of every interpretation, which they would profanely foist
   upon his words.

   25. Three assertions are here disputed, which, in the order in which
   the Apostle makes them, are first the end, then the delivering, and
   lastly the subjection. The object is to prove that Christ ceases to
   exist at the end, that He loses His kingdom, when He delivers it up,
   that He strips Himself of the divine nature, when He is subjected to
   God.

   26. At the outset take note that this is not the order of the Apostle's
   teaching, for in that order the surrender of the Kingdom is first, then
   the subjection, and lastly the end. But every cause is itself the
   result of its particular cause, so that, in every chain of causation,
   each cause, itself producing a result, has inevitably its underlying
   antecedent. Thus the end will come, but when He has delivered the
   Kingdom to God. He will deliver the Kingdom, but when He has abolished
   all authority and power. He will abolish all authority and power,
   because He must reign. He will reign until He has put all enemies under
   His feet. He will put all enemies under His feet, because God has
   subjected everything under His feet. God has so subjected them as to
   make death the last enemy to be conquered by Him. Then, when all things
   are subjected unto God, except Him Who subjected all things unto Him,
   He too will be subjected unto Him, Who subjects all to Himself. But the
   cause of the subjection is none other than that God may be all in all;
   and therefore the end is that God is all in all.

   27. Before going any further we must now enquire whether the end is a
   dissolution, or the delivering a forfeiture, or the subjection an
   enfeebling of Christ. And if we find that these are contraries, which
   cannot be connected as causes and effects, we shall be able to
   understand the words in the true sense in which they were spoken.

   28. Christ is the end of the law [1266] ; but, tell me, is He come to
   destroy it or to fulfil it? And if Christ, the end of the law, does not
   destroy it, but fulfils it (as He says, I am come not to destroy the
   law but fulfil it [1267] ), is not the end of the law, so far from
   being its dissolution, the very opposite, namely its final perfection?
   All things are advancing towards an end, but that end is a condition of
   rest in the perfection, which is the goal of their advance, and not
   their abolition. Further, all things exist for the sake of the end, but
   the end itself is not the means to anything beyond: it is an ultimate,
   all-embracing whole, which rests in itself. And because it is
   self-contained, and works for no other time or object than itself, the
   goal is always that to which our hopes are directed. Therefore the Lord
   exhorts us to wait with patient and reverent faith until the end comes:
   Blessed is He that endureth to the end [1268] . It is not a blessed
   dissolution, which awaits us, nor is non-existence the fruit, and
   annihilation the appointed reward of faith: but the end is the final
   attainment of the promised blessedness, and they are blessed who endure
   until the goal of perfect happiness is reached, when the expectation of
   faithful hope has no object beyond. Their end is to abide with unbroken
   rest in that condition, towards which they are pressing. Similarly, as
   a deterrent, the Apostle warns us of the end of the wicked, Whose end
   is perdition, . . . . . but our expectation is in heaven [1269] .
   Suppose then we interpret the end as a dissolution, we are forced to
   acknowledge that, since there is an end for the blessed and for the
   wicked, the issue levels the godly with the ungodly, for the appointed
   end of both is a common annihilation. What of our expectation in
   heaven, if for us as well as for the wicked the end is a cessation of
   being? But even if there remains for the saints an expectation, whereas
   for the wicked there waits the end they have deserved, we cannot
   conceive that end as a final dissolution. What punishment would it be
   for the wicked to be beyond the feeling of avenging torments, because
   the capability of suffering has been removed by dissolution? The end
   is, therefore, a culminating and irrevocable condition which awaits us,
   reserved for the blessed and prepared for the wicked.

   29. We can therefore no longer doubt that by the end is meant an
   ultimate and final condition and not a dissolution. We shall have
   something more to say upon this subject, when we come to the
   explanation of this passage, but for the present this is enough to make
   our meaning clear. Let us, therefore, turn now to the delivering of the
   Kingdom, and see whether it means a surrender of rule, whether the Son
   by delivering ceases to possess that which He delivers to the Father.
   If this is what the wicked contend in their unreasoning infatuation,
   they must allow that the Father, by delivering, lost all, when He
   delivered all to the Son, if delivery implies the surrender of that
   which is delivered. For the Lord said, All things have been delivered
   unto Me of My Father [1270] , and again, All authority hath been given
   unto Me in heaven and earth [1271] . If, therefore, to deliver is to
   yield possession, the Father no longer possessed that which He
   delivered. But if the Father did not cease to possess that which He
   delivered, neither does the Son surrender that which He delivers.
   Therefore, if He did not lose by the delivering that which He
   delivered, we must recognise that only the Dispensation explains how
   the Father still possesses what He delivered, and the Son does not
   forfeit what He gave.

   30. As to the subjection, there are other facts which come to the help
   of our faith, and prevent us from putting an indignity on Christ upon
   this score, but above all this passage contains its own defence. First,
   however, I appeal to common reason: is the subjection still to be
   understood as the subordination of servitude to lordship, weakness to
   power, meanness to honour, qualities the opposite of one another? Is
   the Son in this manner subjected to the Father by the distinction of a
   different nature? If, indeed, we would think so, we shall find in the
   Apostle's words a preventive for such errors of the imagination. When
   all things are subjected to Him, says He, then must He be subjected to
   Him, Who subjects all things to Himself; and by this then' he means to
   denote the temporal Dispensation. For if we put any other construction
   on the subjection, Christ, though then to be subjected, is not
   subjected now, and thus we make Him an insolent and impious rebel, whom
   the necessity of time, breaking as it were and subduing His profane and
   overweening pride, will reduce to a tardy obedience. But what does He
   Himself say? I am not come to do Mine own will, but the will of Him
   that sent Me [1272] : and again, Therefore hath the Father loved Me
   because I do all things that are pleasing unto Him [1273] : and,
   Father, Thy will be done [1274] . Or hear the Apostle, He humbled
   Himself, becoming obedient even unto death [1275] . Although He humbled
   Himself, His nature knew no humiliation: though He was obedient, it was
   a voluntary obedience, for He became obedient by humbling Himself. The
   Only-begotten God humbled Himself, and obeyed His Father even to the
   death of the Cross: but as what, as man or as God, is He to be
   subjected to the Father, when all things have been subjected to Him? Of
   a truth this subjection is no sign of a fresh obedience, but the
   Dispensation of the Mystery, for the allegiance is eternal, the
   subjection an event within time. The subjection is then in its
   signification simply a demonstration of the Mystery.

   31. What that is must be understood in view of this same hope of our
   faith. We cannot be ignorant that the Lord Jesus Christ rose again from
   the dead, and sits at the right hand of God, for we have also the
   witness of the Apostle, According to the working of the strength of His
   might, which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the dead,
   and made Him to sit at His right hand in the heavenly places above all
   rule and authority and power and dominion, and every name that is named
   not only in this world but also in that which is to came, and put all
   things in subjection under His feet [1276] . The language of the
   Apostle, as befits the power of God, speaks of the future as already
   past: for that which is to be wrought by the completion of time already
   exists in Christ, in Whom is all fulness, and future' refers only to
   the temporal order of the Dispensation, not to a new development. Thus,
   God has put all things under His feet, though they are still to be
   subjected. By their subjection, conceived as already past, is expressed
   the immutable power of Christ: by their subjection, as future, is
   signified their consummation at the end of the ages as the result of
   the fulness of time.

   32. The meaning of the abolishing of every power which is against Him
   is not obscure. The prince of the air, the power of spiritual
   wickedness, shall be delivered to eternal destruction, as Christ says,
   Depart from Me, ye cursed, into the eternal fire which My Father hath
   prepared for the devil and his angels [1277] . The abolishing is not
   the same as the subjecting. To abolish the power of the enemy is to
   sweep away for ever his prerogative of power, so that by the abolition
   of his power is brought to an end the rule of his kingdom. Of this the
   Lord testifies when He says, My kingdom is not of this world [1278] :
   as He had once before testified that the ruler of that kingdom is the
   prince of the world, whose power shall be destroyed by the abolition of
   the rule of His kingdom [1279] . A subjection, on the other hand, which
   implies obedience and allegiance, is a proof of submission and
   mutability.

   33. So when their authority is abolished, His enemies shall be
   subjected: and so subjected, that He shall subject them to Himself.
   Moreover He shall so subject them to Himself, that God shall subject
   them to Him. Was the Apostle ignorant, think you, of the force of these
   words in the Gospel, No one cometh to Me, except the Father draw Him to
   Me [1280] which stand side by side with those other words, No one
   cometh unto the Father but by Me [1281] : just as in this Epistle
   Christ subjects His enemies to Himself, yet God subjects them to Him,
   and He witnesses throughout this, his work of subjection, that God is
   working in Him? Except through Him there is no approach to the Father,
   but there is also no approach to Him, unless the Father draw us.
   Understanding Him to be the Son of God, we recognise in Him the true
   nature of the Father. Hence, when we learn to know the Son, God the
   Father calls us: when we believe the Son, God the Father receives us;
   for our recognition and knowledge of the Father is in the Son, Who
   shews us in Himself God the Father, Who draws us, if we be devout, by
   His fatherly love into a mutual bond with His Son. So then the Father
   draws us, when, as the first condition, He is acknowledged Father: but
   no one comes to the Father except through the Son, because we cannot
   know the Father, unless faith in the Son is active in us, since we
   cannot approach the Father in worship, unless we first adore the Son,
   while if we know the Son, the Father draws us to eternal life and
   receives us. But each result is the work of the Son, for by the
   preaching of the Father, Whom the Son preaches, the Father brings us to
   the Son, and the Son leads us to the Father. The statement of this
   Mystery was necessary for the more perfect understanding of the present
   passage, to shew that through the Son the Father draws us and receives
   us; that we might understand the two aspects, the Son subjecting all to
   Himself, and the Father subjecting all to Him. Through the birth the
   nature of God is abiding in the Son, and does that which He Himself
   does. What He does God does, but what God does in Him, He Himself does:
   in the sense that where He acts Himself we must believe the Son of God
   acts; and where God acts, we must perceive the properties of the
   Father's nature existing in Him as the Son.

   34. When authorities and powers are abolished, His enemies shall be
   subjected under His feet. The same Apostle tells who are these enemies,
   As touching the Gospel they are enemies for your sakes, but as touching
   the election they are beloved for the fathers' sake [1282] . We
   remember that they are enemies of the cross of Christ; let us remember
   also that, because they are beloved for the fathers' sake, they are
   reserved for the subjection, as the Apostle says, I would not,
   brethren, have you ignorant of this mystery, lest ye be wise in your
   own conceits, that a hardening in part hath befallen Israel, until the
   fulness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved,
   even as it is written, There shall come out of Sion a Deliverer, and
   shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: and this is the covenant firm
   Me to them, when I have taken away their sins [1283] . So His enemies
   shall be subjected under His feet.

   35. But we must not forget what follows the subjection, namely, Last of
   all is death conquered by Him [1284] . This victory over death is
   nothing else than the resurrection from the dead: for when the
   corruption of death is stayed, the quickened and now heavenly nature is
   made eternal, as it is written, For this corruptible must put on
   incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. But when this
   mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the
   saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in strife. O death, where
   is thy sting? O death, where is thy strife [1285] ? In the subjection
   of His enemies death is conquered; and, death conquered, life immortal
   follows. The Apostle tells us also of the special reward attained by
   this subjection which is made perfect by the subjection of belief: Who
   shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be
   conformed to the body of His glory, according to the works of His
   power, whereby He is able to subject all things to Himself [1286] .
   There is then another subjection, which consists in a transition from
   one nature to another, for our nature ceases, so far as its present
   character is concerned, and is subjected to Him, into Whose form it
   passes. But by ceasing' is implied not an end of being, but a promotion
   into something higher. Thus our nature by being merged into the image
   of the other nature which it receives, becomes subjected through the
   imposition of a new form.

   36. Hence the Apostle, to make his explanation of this Mystery
   complete, after saying that death is the last enemy to be conquered,
   adds: But when He saith, All things are put in subjection except Him,
   Who did subject all things to Him, then must He be subjected to Him,
   that did subject all things to Him, that God may be all in all [1287] .
   The first step of the Mystery is that all things are subjected to Him:
   then He is subjected to Him, Who subjects all things to Himself. As we
   are subjected to the glory of the rule of His body, so He also,
   reigning in the glory of His body, is by the same Mystery in turn
   subjected to Him, Who subjects all things to Himself. And we are
   subjected to the glory of His body, that we may share that splendour
   with which He reigns in the body, since we shall be conformed to His
   body.

   37. Nor are the Gospels silent concerning the glory of His present
   reigning body. It is written that the Lord said, Verily, I say unto
   you, there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of
   death till they see the Son of Man coming in His Kingdom. And it came
   to pass, after six days Jesus taketh with Him Peter and James and John
   His brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart. And Jesus
   was transfigured before them, and His face did shine as the sun, and
   His garments became as snow. [1288] Thus was shewn to the Apostles the
   glory of the body of Christ coming into His Kingdom: for in the fashion
   of His glorious Transfiguration, the Lord stood revealed in the
   splendour of His reigning body.

   38. He promised also to the Apostles the participation in this His
   glory. So shall it be in the end of the world. The Son of Man shall
   send forth His angels, and they shall gather together out of His
   Kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and them that do iniquity, and
   He shall send them into the furnace of fire: there shall be the weeping
   and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun
   in the Kingdom of their Father. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear
   [1289] . Were their natural and bodily ears closed to the hearing of
   the words, that the Lord should need to admonish them to hear? Yet the
   Lord, hinting at the knowledge of the Mystery, commands them to listen
   to the doctrine of the faith. In the end of the world all things that
   cause stumbling shall be removed from His Kingdom. We see the Lord then
   reigning in the splendour of His body, until the things that cause
   stumbling are removed. And we see ourselves, in consequence, conformed
   to the glory of His body in the Kingdom of the Father, shining as with
   the splendour of the sun, the splendour in which He shewed the fashion
   of His Kingdom to the Apostles, when He was transfigured on the
   mountain.

   39. He shall deliver the Kingdom to God the Father, not in the sense
   that He resigns His power by the delivering, but that we, being
   conformed to the glory of His body, shall form the Kingdom of God. It
   is not said, He shall deliver up His Kingdom, but, He shall deliver up
   the Kingdom [1290] , that is, deliver up to God us who have been made
   the Kingdom by the glorifying of His body. He shall deliver us into the
   Kingdom, as it is said in the Gospel, Come, ye blessed of My Father,
   inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world
   [1291] . The just shall shine like the sun in the Kingdom of their
   Father, and the Son shall deliver to the Father, as His Kingdom, those
   whom He has called into His Kingdom, to whom also He has promised the
   blessedness of this Mystery, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
   shall see God [1292] . While He reigns, He shall remove all things that
   cause stumbling, and then the just shall shine as the sun in the
   Kingdom of the Father. Afterwards He shall deliver the Kingdom to the
   Father, and those whom He has handed to the Father, as the Kingdom,
   shall see God. He Himself witnesses to the Apostles what manner of
   Kingdom this is: The Kingdom of God is within you [1293] . Thus it is
   as King that He shall deliver up the Kingdom, and if any ask Who it is
   that delivers up the Kingdom, let him hear, Christ is risen from the
   dead, the firstfruits of them that sleep; since by man came death, by
   man came also the resurrection of the dead [1294] . All that is said on
   the point before us concerns the Mystery of the body, since Christ is
   the firstfruits of the dead. Let us gather also from the words of the
   Apostle by what Mystery Christ rose from the dead: Remember that Christ
   hath risen from the dead, of the seed of David [1295] . Here he teaches
   that the death and resurrection are due only to the Dispensation by
   which Christ was flesh.

   40. In His body, the same body though now made glorious, He reigns
   until the authorities are abolished, death conquered, and His enemies
   subdued. This distinction is carefully preserved by the Apostle: the
   authorities and powers are abolished, the enemies are subjected [1296]
   . Then, when they are subjected, He, that is the Lord, shall be
   subjected to Him that subjecteth all things to Himself, that God may be
   all in all [1297] , the nature of the Father's divinity imposing itself
   upon the nature of our body which was assumed. It is thus that God
   shall be all in all: according to the Dispensation He becomes by His
   Godhead and His manhood the Mediator between men and God, and so by the
   Dispensation He acquires the nature of flesh, and by the subjection
   shall obtain the nature of God in all things, so as to be God not in
   part, but wholly and entirely. The end of the subjection is then simply
   that God may be all in all, that no trace of the nature of His earthly
   body may remain in Him. Although before this time the two were combined
   within Him, He must now become God only; not, however, by casting off
   the body, but by translating it through subjection; not by losing it
   through dissolutions, but by transfiguring it in glory: adding humanity
   to His divinity, not divesting Himself of divinity by His humanity. And
   He is subjected, not that He may cease to be, but that God may be all
   in all, having, in the mystery of the subjection, to continue to be
   that which He no longer is [1298] , not having by dissolution to be
   robbed of Himself, that is, to be deprived of His being.

   41. We have a sufficient and sacred guarantee for this belief in the
   authority of the Apostle. Through the Dispensation, and within time,
   the Lord Jesus Christ, the firstfruits of them that sleep, is to be
   subjected, that God may be all in all, and this subjection is not the
   debasement of His divinity, but the promotion of His assumed nature,
   for He Who is God and Man is now altogether God. But some may think
   that, when we say He was both glorified in the body whilst reigning in
   the body, and is hereafter to be subjected that God may be all in all,
   our belief finds no support for itself in the Gospels nor yet in the
   Epistles. We will, therefore, produce testimony of our faith, not only
   from the words of the Apostle, but also from our Lord's mouth. We will
   shew that Christ said first with His own lips what He afterwards said
   by the mouth of Paul.

   42. Does He not reveal to His Apostles the Dispensation of this glory
   by the express signification of the words, Now is the Son of Man
   glorified, and God is glorified in Him. If God hath been glorified in
   Him, God hath glorified Him in Himself, and straightway hath He
   glorified Him [1299] . In the words, Now is the Son of Man honoured,
   and God is honoured in Him, we have first the glory of the Son of Man,
   then the glory of God in the Son of Man. So there is first signified
   the glory of the body, which it borrows from its association with the
   divine nature: and then follows the promotion to a fuller glory derived
   from an addition to the glory of the body. If God hath been honoured in
   Him, God hath honoured Him in Himself, and straightway hath God
   honoured Him. God has glorified Him in Himself, because He has already
   been glorified in Him. God was glorified in Him: this refers to the
   glory of the body, for by this glory is expressed in a human body the
   glory of God, in the glory of the Son of Man is seen the divine glory.
   God was glorified in Him, and therefore hath God glorified Him in
   Himself: that is, by His promotion to the Godhead, whose glory was
   increased in Him, God has glorified Him in Himself. Already before this
   He was reigning in the glory which springs from the divine glory: from
   henceforth, however, He is Himself to pass into the divine glory. God
   hath glorified Him in Himself: that is, in that nature by which God is
   what He is. That God may be all in all: that His whole being, leaving
   behind the Dispensation by which He is man, may be eternally
   transformed into divinity. Nor is the time of this hidden from us: And
   God hath glorified Him in Himself, and straightway hath He glorified
   Him. At the moment when Judas arose to betray Him, He signified as
   present the glory which He would obtain after His Passion through the
   Resurrection, but assigned to the future the glory with which God would
   glorify Him with Himself. The glory of God is seen in Him in the power
   of the Resurrection, but He Himself, out of the Dispensation of
   subjection, will be taken eternally into the glory of God, that is,
   into God, the all in all.

   43. But what absurd folly is it of the heretics to regard as
   unattainable for God that goal to which man hopes to attain, to imply
   that He is powerless to effect in Himself that which He is mighty to
   effect in us. It is not the language of reason or common sense to say
   that God is bound by some necessity of His nature to consult our
   happiness, but cannot bestow the like blessings upon Himself. God does
   not, indeed, need any further blessedness, for His nature and power
   stand fast in their eternal perfection. But although in the
   Dispensation, that mystery of great godliness, He Who is God became
   man, He is not powerless to make Himself again entirely God, for
   without doubt He will transform us also into that which as yet we are
   not. The final sequel of man's life and death is the resurrection: the
   assured reward of our warfare is immortality and incorruption, not the
   ceaseless persistence of everlasting punishment, but the unbroken
   enjoyment and happiness of eternal glory. These bodies of earthly
   origin shall be exalted to the fashion of a higher nature, and
   conformed to the glory of the Lord's body. But what then of God found
   in the form of a servant? Though already, while still in the form of a
   servant, glorified in the body, shall He not be also conformed to God?
   Shall He bestow upon us the form of His glorified body, and yet be able
   to do for His own body nothing more than He does for Himself in common
   with us? For the most part the heretics interpret the words, Then shall
   He be subjected to Him that did subject all things to Himself, that God
   may be all in all, as if they meant that the Son is to be subjected to
   God the Father, in order that by the subjection of the Son, God the
   Father may be all in all. But is there still lacking in God some
   perfection which He is to obtain by the subjection of the Son? Can they
   believe that God does not already possess that final accession of
   blessed divinity, because it is said that by the coming of the fulness
   of time He shall be made all in all?

   44. To me, who hold that God cannot be known except by devotion, even
   to answer such objections seems no less unholy than to support them.
   What presumption to suppose that words can adequately describe His
   nature, when thought is often too deep for words, and His nature
   transcends even the conceptions of thought! What blasphemy even to
   discuss whether anything is lacking in God, whether He is Himself full,
   or it remains for Him to be fuller than His fulness! If God, Who is
   Himself the source of His own eternal divinity, were capable of
   progress, that He should be greater to-day than yesterday, He could
   never reach the time when nothing would be wanting to Him, for the
   nature to which advance is still possible must always in its progress
   leave some ground ahead still untrodden: if it be subject to the law of
   progress, though always progressing it must always be susceptible of
   further progress. But to Him, Who abides in perfect fulness, Who for
   ever is, there is no fulness left by which He can be made more full,
   for perfect fulness cannot receive an accession of further fulness. And
   this is the attitude of thought in which reverence contemplates God,
   namely, that nothing is wanting to Him, that He is full.

   45. But the Apostle does not neglect to say with what manner of
   confession we should bear witness of God. O the depth of the riches
   both of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are
   His judgments, and His ways past tracing out! For who hath known the
   mind of the Lord? Or who hath been His counsellor? Or who hath first
   given to Him, and it shall be recompensed unto him? For of Him, and
   through Him, and in Him are all things. To Him be the glory for ever
   and ever [1300] . No earthly mind can define God, no understanding can
   penetrate with its perception to sound the depth of His wisdom. His
   judgments defy the searching scrutiny of His creatures: the trackless
   paths of His knowledge baffle the zeal of all pursuers. His ways are
   plunged in the depths of incomprehensibility: nothing can be fathomed
   or traced to the end in the things of God. No one has ever been taught
   to know His mind, no one besides Himself ever permitted to share His
   counsel. But all this applies to us men only, and not to Him, through
   Whom are all things, the Angel of mighty Counsel [1301] , Who said, No
   one knoweth the Son save the Father: neither doth any one know the
   Father save the Son, and him to whom the Son hath willed to reveal Him
   [1302] . It is to curb our own feeble intellect, when it strains itself
   to fathom the depth of the divine nature with its descriptions and
   definitions, that we must re-echo the language of the Apostle's
   exclamation, lest we should attempt by rash conjecture to snatch from
   God more than He has been pleased to reveal to us.

   46. It is a recognised axiom of natural philosophy, that nothing falls
   within the scope of the senses unless it is subjected to their
   observation, as for instance an object placed before the eyes, or an
   event posterior to the birth of human sense and intelligence. The
   former we can see and handle, and therefore the mind is qualified to
   pass a verdict upon it, since it can be examined by the senses of touch
   and sight. The latter, which is an event in time, produced or
   constituted since the origin of man, falls within the limits in which
   the discerning sense may claim to pass judgment, since it is not prior
   in time to our perception and reason. For our sight cannot perceive the
   invisible, since it only distinguishes the seen; our reason cannot
   project itself into the time when it was not, because it can only judge
   of that, to which it is prior in time. And even within these limits,
   the infirmity which is bound up with its nature robs it of absolutely
   certain knowledge of the sequence of cause and effect. How much less
   then can it go back behind the time when it had its origin, and
   comprehend with its perception things which existed before it in the
   realms of eternity?

   47. The Apostle then recognised that nothing can fall within our
   knowledge, except it be posterior in time to the faculty of sense.
   Accordingly when he had asserted the depth of the wisdom of God, the
   infinity of His inscrutable judgments, the secret of His unsearchable
   ways, the mystery of His unfathomable mind, the incomprehensibility of
   His uncommunicated counsel, he continued, For who hath first given to
   Him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of Him, and
   through Him, and in Him are all things. The eternal God is neither
   subject to limitation, nor did human reason and intelligence exercise
   their functions before He had His being. His whole being is therefore a
   depth, which we can neither examine nor penetrate. We say His whole
   being, not to define it as limited, but to understand it in its
   unlimited boundlessness: because of no one has He received His being,
   no antecedent giver can claim service from Him in return for a gift
   bestowed: for of Him and through Him and in Him are all things. He does
   not lack things that are of Him and through Him and in Him. The Source
   and Maker of all, Who contains all, Who is beyond all, does not need
   that which is within Him, the Creator His creatures, the Possessor His
   possessions. Nothing is prior to Him, nothing derived from any other
   than Him, nothing beyond Him. What element of fulness is still lacking
   in God, which time will supply to make Him all in all? Whence can He
   receive it, if outside Him is nothing, and while nothing is outside
   Him, He is eternally Himself? And if He is eternally Himself, and there
   is nothing outside Him, with what increase shall He be made full, by
   what addition shall He be made other than He is? Did He not say, I am
   and I change not [1303] ? What possibility is there of change in Him?
   What scope for progress? What is prior to eternity? What more divine
   than God? The subjection of the Son will not therefore make God to be
   all in all, nor will any cause perfect Him, from Whom and through Whom
   and in Whom are all causes. He remains God as He ever was, and He needs
   nothing further, for what He is, He is eternally of Himself and for
   Himself.

   48. But neither is it necessary for the Only-begotten God that He
   should change. He is God, and that is the name of full and perfect
   divinity. For, as we said before, the meaning of the repeated
   glorifying, and the cause of the subjection is that God may be all in
   all: but it is a Mystery, not a necessity, that God is to be all in
   all. Christ abode in the form of God when He assumed the form of a
   servant, not being subjected to change, but emptying Himself; hiding
   within Himself, and remaining master of Himself though He was emptied.
   He constrained Himself even to the form and fashion of a man, lest the
   weakness of the assumed humility should not be able to endure the
   immeasurable power of His nature. His unbounded might contracted
   itself, until it could fulfil the duty of obedience even to the
   endurance of the body to which it was yoked. But since He was
   self-contained even when He emptied Himself, His authority suffered no
   diminution, for in the humiliation of the emptying He exercised within
   Himself the power of that authority which was emptied.

   49. It is therefore for the promotion of us, the assumed humanity, that
   God shall be all in all. He Who was found in the form of a servant,
   though He was in the form of God, is now again to be confessed in the
   glory of God the Father: that is, without doubt He dwells in the form
   of God, in Whose glory He is to be confessed. All is therefore a
   dispensation only, and not a change of His nature; for He abides still
   in Him, in Whom He ever was. But there intervenes a new nature, which
   began in Him with His human birth, and so all that He obtains is on
   behalf of that nature which before was not God, since after the Mystery
   of the Dispensation God is all in all. It is, therefore, we who are the
   gainers, we who are promoted, for we shall be conformed to the glory of
   the body of God. Further the Only-begotten God, despite His human
   birth, is nothing less than God, Who is all in all. That subjection of
   the body, by which all that is fleshly in Him, is swallowed up into the
   spiritual nature, will make Him to be God and all in all, since He is
   Man also as well as God; and His humanity which advances towards this
   goal is ours also. We shall be promoted to a glory conformable to that
   of Him Who became Man for us, being renewed unto the knowledge of God,
   and created again in the image of the Creator, as the Apostle says,
   Having put off the old man with his doings, and put on the new man,
   which is being renewed unto the knowledge of God, after the image of
   Him that created him [1304] . Thus is man made the perfect image of
   God. For, being conformed to the glory of the body of God, he is
   exalted to the image of the Creator, after the pattern assigned to the
   first man. Leaving sin and the old man behind, he is made a new man
   unto the knowledge of God, and arrives at the perfection of his
   constitution, since through the knowledge of his God he becomes the
   perfect image of God. Through godliness he is promoted to immortality,
   through immortality he shall live for ever as the image of his Creator.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1224] Eph. iv. 4-6.

   [1225] The text is very corrupt here, but the meaning seems to be that,
   while we have the authority of the Bible to speak of God, if we do not
   attach its full meaning to the word (e.g. Psalm lxxxii. 6, "I have
   said, Ye are Gods,'"), yet if we use the name in its proper
   significance it is blasphemous to call Christ God. The reading of the
   earlier editions and some mss., duos dici irreligiosum est, et Deum non
   intelligi,' is probably a gloss to soften the difficulty.

   [1226] Reading unus est, si filius sit, si Deus sit.'

   [1227] Cf. Col. i. 15, and Phil. ii. 6.

   [1228] i.e. the occasions when Christ was speaking of His humanity and
   those when He was referring to His divine nature.

   [1229] St. John xx. 17.

   [1230] 1 Cor. xv. 27, 28.

   [1231] 1 Tim. iii. 16.

   [1232] I.e. the Incarnation is the Mystery of godliness, not the
   infirmity of necessity.

   [1233] St. John xx. 17.

   [1234] Ps. xlv. 7. The general reading is, "Therefore God, thy God,
   &c." (R.V.).

   [1235] St. John xiv. 9.

   [1236] Ib. 10.

   [1237] Ib. x. 29.

   [1238] Ib. 30.

   [1239] Ib. v. 22, 23.

   [1240] Ib. xiv. 11; cf. x. 38.

   [1241] Ib. xiv. 28.

   [1242] Ib. v. 19.

   [1243] Ps. xxii. 6.

   [1244] Ib. 22.

   [1245] Col. i. 18.

   [1246] Rom. viii. 29.

   [1247] St. John i. 14.

   [1248] Eph. i. 16, 17.

   [1249] St. Matt. i. 21; St. Luke i. 31.

   [1250] I.e. divine.

   [1251] By Spirit' Hilary means God considered as a spiritual (as
   opposed to a material) Being: cf. in the previous chapter, "to the
   prophets Christ the Lord is Spirit.'"

   [1252] Ps. xlv. 7.

   [1253] Acts iv. 27.

   [1254] Ib. x. 37, 38.

   [1255] Ps. ii. 7. The last words occur in neither in St. Matt. (iii.
   17), nor St. Mark (i. 11), nor St. Luke (iii. 22) : but there is
   evidence of the existence of such a reading. See Tischendorf, Nov.
   Test. Græc., on St. Matt. iii. 17, and St. Luke iii. 22.

   [1256] Col. i. 16, 17.

   [1257] Reading quam' instead of quâ.

   [1258] 1 Cor. xv. 21-28.

   [1259] Cf. Gal. i. 1.

   [1260] Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4.

   [1261] Cf. 2 Tim. i. 5; iii. 15.

   [1262] 2 Tim. ii. 7.

   [1263] 1 Tim. v. 11.

   [1264] Ib. i. 2.

   [1265] Phil. iii. 15, 16.

   [1266] Rom. x. 4.

   [1267] St. Matt. v. 17.

   [1268] St. Matt. x. 22; cf. St. Mark xiii. 13.

   [1269] Phil. iii. 19, 20. The Greek paraphrased expectation' is ,
   citizenship' (R.V.), or commonwealth' (marg.).

   [1270] St. Luke x. 22.

   [1271] St. Matt. xxviii. 18.

   [1272] St. John vi. 38.

   [1273] Cf. ib. viii. 29.

   [1274] Cf. St. Matt. xxvi. 39, 42; St. Mark xiv. 36; St. Luke xxii. 42.

   [1275] Phil. ii. 8.

   [1276] Eph. i. 19 b-22 a.

   [1277] St. Matt. xxv. 41.

   [1278] St. John xviii. 36.

   [1279] Ib. xvi. 11. "The prince of this world hath been judged."

   [1280] Ib. vi. 44.

   [1281] Ib. xiv. 6.

   [1282] Rom. xi. 28.

   [1283] Ib. 25-27.

   [1284] Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 26.

   [1285] Ib. 53-55. The reading strife' instead of victory' arose from
   the confusion of neikos (=strife) and nikos (=victory) in the original
   Greek.

   [1286] Phil. iii. 21.

   [1287] 1 Cor. xv. 27, 28.

   [1288] St. Matt. xvi. 28-xvii. 2.

   [1289] Ib. xiii. 40-43.

   [1290] 1 Cor. xv. 24.

   [1291] St. Matt. xxv. 34.

   [1292] St. Matt. v. 8.

   [1293] St. Luke xvii. 21.

   [1294] 1 Cor. xv. 20, 21.

   [1295] 2 Tim. ii. 8.

   [1296] 1 Cor. xv. 24, 25.

   [1297] Ib. 28.

   [1298] The humanity is eternal, although He is no longer man.

   [1299] St. John xiii. 31, 32. There is another reading in the text of
   Hilary, glorificabit, "shall glorify Him in Himself," and though it is
   not well supported by ms. authority, and in ix. 40 all the mss. agree
   in the perfect honorificavit, the future is favoured by the last two
   sentences of this chapter. The variation between honoured and glorified
   shews the confusion of texts which preceded the Vulgate and caused it
   to be welcomed.

   [1300] Rom. xi. 33-36.

   [1301] Isai. ix. 6 in the LXX and Old Latin.

   [1302] St. Matt. xi. 27.

   [1303] Mal. iii. 6.

   [1304] Col. iii. 9, 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book XII.

   1. At length, with the Holy Ghost speeding our way, we are approaching
   the safe, calm harbour of a firm faith. We are in the position of men,
   long tossed about by sea and wind, to whom it very often happens, that
   while great heaped-up waves delay them for a time around the coasts
   near the ports, at last that very surge of the vast and dreadful
   billows drives them on into a trusty, well-known anchorage. And this, I
   hope, will befall us, as we struggle in this twelfth book against the
   storm of heresy; so that while we venture out trusty bark therein upon
   the wave of this grievous impiety, this very wave may bring us to the
   haven of rest for which we long. For while all are driven about by the
   uncertain wind of doctrine, there is panic here and danger there, and
   then again there often is even shipwreck, because it is maintained on
   prophetic authority that God Only-begotten is a creature--so that to
   Him there belongs not birth but creation, because it has been said in
   the character of Wisdom, The Lord created Me as the beginning of His
   ways [1305] . This is the greatest billow in the storm they raise, this
   is the big wave of the whirling tempest: yet when we have faced it, and
   it has broken without damage to our ship, it will speed us forward even
   to the all-safe harbour of the shore for which we long.

   2. Yet we do not rest, like sailors, on uncertain or on idle hopes:
   whom, as they shape their course to their wish, and not by assured
   knowledge, at times the shifting, fickle winds forsake or drive from
   their course. But we have by our side the unfailing Spirit of faith,
   abiding with us by the gift of the Only-begotten God, and leading us to
   smooth waters in an unwavering course. For we recognise the Lord Christ
   as no creature, for indeed He is none such; nor as something that has
   been made, since He is Himself the Lord of all things that are made;
   but we know Him to be God, God the true generation of God the Father.
   All we indeed, as His goodness has thought fit, have been named and
   adopted as sons of God: but He is to God the Father the one, true Son,
   and the true and perfect birth, which abides only in the knowledge of
   the Father and the Son. But this only, and this alone, is our religion,
   to confess Him as the Son not adopted but born, not chosen but
   begotten. For we do not speak of Him either as made, or as not born;
   since we neither compare the Creator to His creatures, nor falsely
   speak of birth without begetting. He does not exist of Himself, Who
   exists through birth; nor is He not born, Who is the Son; nor can He,
   Who is the Son, come to exist otherwise than by being born, because He
   is the Son.

   3. Moreover no one doubts that the assertions of impiety always
   contradict and resist the assertions of religious faith; and that that
   cannot be piously held now which is already condemned as impiously
   conceived; as, for instance, the discrepancy and variance which these
   new correctors of the apostolic faith maintain between the Spirit of
   the Evangelists and that of Prophets; or their assertion that the
   Prophets prophesied one thing and the Evangelists preached another,
   since Solomon calls upon us to adore a creature, while Paul convicts
   those who serve a creature. And certainly these two texts do not seem
   to agree together, according to the blasphemous theory, whereby the
   Apostle, who was trained by the law, and separated by divine
   appointment, and spoke through Christ speaking in him, either was
   ignorant of the prophecy, or was not ignorant but contradicted it; and
   thus did not know Christ to be a creature when he named Him the
   Creator; and forbade the worship of a creature, warning us that the
   Creator alone is to be served, and saying, Who changed the truth of God
   into a lie, and served the creature, passing by the Creator Who is
   blessed for ever and ever [1306]

   4. Does Christ, Who is God, speaking in Paul, fail to refute this
   impiety of falsehood? Does He fail to condemn this lying perversion of
   truth? For through the Lord Christ all things were created; and
   therefore it is His proper name that He should be the Creator. Does not
   both the reality and the title of His creative power belong to Him?
   Melchisedec is our witness, thus declaring God to be Creator of heaven
   and earth: Blessed be Abraham of God most high, Who created heaven and
   earth [1307] . The prophet Hosea also is witness, saying, I am the Lord
   thy God, that establish the heavens and create the earth, Whose hands
   have created all the host of heaven [1308] . Peter too is witness,
   writing thus, Committing your souls as to a faithful Creator [1309] .
   Why do we apply the name of the work to the Maker of that work? Why do
   we give the same name to God and to our fellowmen? He is our Creator,
   He is the Creator of all the heavenly host.

   5. Since by the faith of the Apostles and Evangelists these statements
   are referred in their meaning to the Son, through Whom all things were
   made, how shall He be made equal to the very works of His hands and be
   in the same category of nature as all other things? In the first place
   our human intelligence repudiates this statement that the Creator is a
   creature; since creation comes to exist by means of the Creator. But if
   He is a creature, He is both subject to corruption and exposed to the
   suspense of waiting, and is subjected to bondage. For the same blessed
   Apostle Paul says: For the long expectation of the creature waiteth for
   the revelation of the sons of God. For the creature was subject to
   vanity, not of its own will, but on account of Him Who has made it
   subject in hope. Because also the creature itself shall be freed from
   the slavery of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children
   of God [1310] . If, therefore, Christ is a creature, it must needs be
   that He is in uncertainty, hoping always with a tedious expectation,
   and that His long expectation, rather than ours, is waiting, and that
   while He waits He is subjected to vanity, and is subjected through a
   subjection due to necessity, not of His own will. But since He is
   subjected not of His own will, He must needs be also a bondservant;
   moreover since He is a bondservant He must needs also be dwelling in a
   corruptible nature. For the Apostle teaches that all these things
   belong to the creature, and that, when it shall be freed from these
   through a long expectation, it will shine with a glory proper to man.
   But what a thoughtless and impious assertion about God is this, to
   imagine Him exposed, through the insults which the creature bears, to
   such mockeries as that He should hope and serve, and be under
   compulsion and receive recognition, and be freed hereafter into a
   condition which is ours, not His; while really it is of His gift that
   we make our little progress.

   6. But our impiety, by the licence of this forbidden language, waxes
   apace with yet deeper faithlessness; asserting that since the Son is a
   creature it is bound to maintain that the Father also does not differ
   from a creature. For Christ, remaining in the form of God, took the
   form of a servant; and if He is a creature Who is in the form of God,
   God can never be separate from the creature, because there is a
   creature in the form of God. But to be in the form of God can only be
   understood to mean, remaining in the nature of God; whence also God is
   a creature, because there is a creature with His nature. But He Who was
   in the form of God, did not grasp at being equal with God, because from
   equality with God, that is, from the form of God, He descended into the
   form of a servant. But He could not descend from God into man, except
   by emptying Himself, as God, of the form of God. But when He emptied
   Himself, He was not effaced, so as not to be; since then He would have
   become other in kind than He had been. For neither did He, Who emptied
   Himself within Himself, cease to be Himself; since the power of His
   might remains even in the power of emptying Himself; and the transition
   into the form of a servant does not mean the loss of the nature of God,
   since to have put off the form of God is nothing less than a mighty act
   of divine power.

   7. But to be in this way in the form of God is nothing else than to be
   equal with God: so that equality of honour is owed to the Lord Jesus
   Christ, Who is in the form of God, as He Himself says, That all men may
   honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not
   the Son honoureth not the Father Who sent Him [1311] . There is never a
   difference between things which does not also imply a different degree
   of honour. The same objects deserve the same reverence; for otherwise
   the highest honour will be unworthily bestowed on those which are
   inferior, or with insult to the superior the inferior will be made
   equal to them in honour. But if the Son, regarded as a creation rather
   than a birth, be treated with a reverence equal to that paid the
   Father, then we grant no special meed of honour to the Father, since we
   charge ourselves with only such reverence towards Him as is shewn to a
   creature. But since He is equal to God the Father, inasmuch as He is
   born as God from Him, He is also equal to Him in honour, for He is a
   Son and not a creature.

   8. This again is a notable utterance of the Father concerning Him: From
   the womb, before the morning star I begat Thee [1312] . Here, as we
   have often said already, nothing derogatory to God is implied in the
   concession to our weakness of understanding; as though, because He said
   that He begot Him from the womb, He were therefore composed of inner
   and outer parts, which unite to form His members, and owed His being to
   the same causes within time to which earthly bodies owe theirs; when in
   fact He Whose existence is due to no natural necessities, free and
   perfect, and eternal Lord of all nature, in explanation of the true
   character of the birth of His Only-begotten, points to power of His own
   unchangeable nature. For though Spirit be born of Spirit (consistently,
   be it remembered, with the true character of Spirit, through which
   itself is also Spirit), nevertheless its only cause for being born lies
   within those perfect and unchangeable causes. And though it is from a
   perfect and unchangeable cause that it is born, it must needs be born
   from that cause, in accordance with the true character of that cause.
   Now the necessary process of human birth is conditioned by the causes
   which operate upon the womb. But as God is not made up of parts, but is
   unchangeable as being Spirit, for God is Spirit, He is subject to no
   natural necessity working within Him. But since He was telling us of
   the birth of Spirit from Spirit, He instructed our understanding by an
   example from causes which work among us: not to give an example of the
   manner of birth, but to declare the fact of generation; not that the
   example might prove Him subject to necessity, but that it might
   enlighten our mind. If, therefore, God Only-begotten is a created
   being, what meaning is there in a revelation which uses the common
   facts of human birth to indicate that He was divinely generated?

   9. For often by means of these members of our bodies, God illustrates
   for us the method of His own operations, enlightening our intelligence
   by using terms commonly understood: as when He says, Whose hands
   created all the host of heaven [1313] ; or again, The eyes of the Lord
   are upon the righteous [1314] ; or again, I have found David, the son
   of Jesse, a man after My own heart [1315] . Now by the heart is denoted
   the desire, to which David was well-pleasing through the uprightness of
   his character; and knowledge of the whole universe, whereby nothing is
   beyond God's ken, is expressed under the term eyes;' and His creative
   activity, whereby nothing exists which is not of God, is understood by
   the name of hands.' Therefore as God wills and foresees and does
   everything, and even in the use of terms denoting bodily action must be
   understood to have no need of the assistance of a body; surely, now, in
   the statement that He begat from the womb, the idea is brought forward
   not of a human origin produced by a bodily act, but of a birth which
   must be understood as spiritual, since in the other cases where members
   are spoken of, this is done to represent to us other active powers in
   God.

   10. Therefore since heart is put for desire, and eyes for sight, and
   hands for work achieved,--and yet, without in any way being made up of
   parts, God desires and foresees and acts, these same operations being
   expressed by the words heart, and eyes, and hand,--is not the meaning
   of the phrase that He begat from the womb an assertion of the reality
   of the birth? Not that He begat the Son from His womb, just as neither
   does He act by means of a hand, nor see by means of eyes, nor desire by
   means of a heart. But since by the employment of these terms it is made
   clear that He really acts and sees and wills everything, so from the
   word womb' it is clear that He really begot from Himself Him Whom He
   begat; not that he made use of a womb, but that He purposed to express
   reality. Just in the same way He does not will or see or act through
   bodily faculties, but uses the names of these members in order that
   through the services performed by corporeal forces we may understand
   the power of forces which are not corporeal.

   11. Now the constitution of human society does not allow, nor indeed do
   the words of our Lord's teaching permit, that the disciple should be
   above his master, or the slave rule over his lord; because, in these
   contrasted positions, subordination to knowledge is the fitting state
   of ignorance, and unconditional submission the appointed lot of
   servitude. And since it is the common judgment of all that this is so,
   whose rashness now shall induce us to say or think that God is a
   creature, or that the Son has been made? For nowhere do we find that
   our Master and Lord spoke thus of Himself to His servants and
   disciples, or that He taught that His birth was a creation or a making.
   Moreover, the Father never bore witness to Him as being aught else but
   a Son, nor did the Son profess that God was aught else than His own
   true Father, assuredly affirming that He was born, not made nor
   created, as He says, Every one that loveth the Father, loveth also the
   Son Who is born of Him [1316] .

   12. On the other hand His works in creation are acts of making and not
   a birth through generation. For the heaven is not a son, neither is the
   earth a son, nor is the world a birth; for of these it is said, All
   things were made through Him [1317] ; and by the prophet, The heavens
   are the works of Thy hands [1318] ; and by the same prophet, Neglect
   not the works of Thy hands [1319] . Is the picture a son of the
   painter, or the sword a son of the smith or the house a son of the
   architect? These are the works of their making: but He alone is the Son
   of the Father Who is born of the Father.

   13. And we indeed are sons of God, but sons because the Son has made us
   such. For we were once sons of wrath, but have been made sons of God
   through the Spirit of adoption, and have earned that title by favour,
   not by right of birth. And since everything that is made, before it was
   made, was not, so we, although we were not sons, have been made what we
   are. For formerly we were not sons: but after we have earned the name
   we are such. Moreover, we have not been born, but made; not begotten,
   but purchased. For God purchased a people for Himself, and by this act
   begot them. But we never learn that God begot sons in the strict sense
   of the term. For He does not say, "I have begotten and brought up My
   sons," but only, I have begotten and brought up sons [1320] .

   14. Yet perchance inasmuch as He says, My firstborn Son Israel [1321] ,
   some one will interpret the fact that He said, My firstborn, so as to
   deprive the Son of the characteristic property of birth; as though,
   because God also applied to Israel the epithet Mine, the adoption of
   those who have been made sons was misrepresented as though it were an
   actual birth, and therefore the phrase used of Him, This is My beloved
   Son [1322] , is not solely applicable to the birth of God, since the
   epithet My is (so it is asserted) shared with those who clearly were
   not born sons. But that they were not really born, although they are
   said to have been born, is shewn even from that passage where it is
   said, A people which shall be born, whom the Lord hath made [1323] .

   15. Therefore the people of Israel is born, in such wise that it is
   made; nor do we take the assertion that it is born as contradictory to
   the fact that it is made. For it is a son by adoption, not by
   generation; nor is this its true character, but its title. For although
   the words, My firstborn are written of it; there is yet a great and
   wide difference between My beloved Son, and My firstborn son. For where
   there is birth, there we see, My beloved Son; but where there is a
   choice from among the nations, and adoption through an act of will,
   there is My firstborn son. Here the people is God's, in regard to its
   character as firstborn; in the former case the fact that He is God's,
   relates to His character as a Son. Again, in a case of birth the
   father's ownership comes first, and then his love; in a case of
   adoption the primary fact is that the son is made a firstborn, and then
   comes the ownership. Thus to Israel, adopted for a son out of all the
   peoples of the earth, properly belonged the character of a firstborn;
   but to Him alone, Who is born God, properly belongs the character of a
   Son. Accordingly there is no true and complete birth where sonship is
   imputed rather than real: since it is not doubtful that that people,
   which is born into a state of sonship, is also made. But since it would
   not have been what it is now become, and inasmuch as its birth is but a
   name for its being made, it has no true birth, since it was something
   else before it was born. And for this reason it was not before it was
   born, that is, before it was made, because that which is a son from
   among the nations was a nation before it was a son: and accordingly it
   is not truly a son, because it was not always a son. But God
   Only-begotten was neither at any time not a Son, nor was He anything
   before He was a Son, nor is He Himself anything except a Son. And so He
   Who is always a Son, has rendered it impossible for us to think of Him
   that there was a time when He was not.

   16. For indeed human births involve a previous non-existence, because,
   as a first reason, all are born from those, all of whom formerly were
   not. For although each one who is born has his origin from one who has
   been, nevertheless that very parent, from whom he is born, was not
   before he was born. Again, as a second reason, he who is born, is born
   after that he was not, for time existed before he was born. For if he
   is born to-day, in the time which was yesterday, he was not; and he has
   come into a state of being from a state of not being; and our reason
   enforces that that which is born to-day did not exist yesterday. And so
   it remains that his birth, by virtue of which he is, took place after a
   state of non-existence; since necessarily today implies the previous
   existence of yesterday, so that it is true of it that there was a time
   when it was not. And these facts hold good of the origin of everything
   relating to man: all receive a beginning, previously to which they had
   not been: firstly, as we have explained, in respect of time, and then
   in respect of cause. And in respect of time indeed there is no doubt
   that things which now begin to be, formerly were not; and this is true
   also in respect of cause, since it is certain that their existence is
   not derived from a cause within themselves. For think over all the
   causes of beginnings, and direct your understanding to their
   antecedents: you will find that nothing began by self-causation, since
   nothing is born by the free act of the parent, but all things are
   created what they are through the power of God. Whence also it is a
   natural property of each class of things by virtue of actual heredity,
   that it once was not and then began to be, beginning after time began,
   and existing within time. And while all existing things have an origin
   later than that of time, their causes also, in their turn, were once
   nonexistent, being born from things which once were not. Even Adam, the
   first parent of the human race, was formed from the earth, which was
   made out of nothing, and after time, that is to say, after the heaven
   and earth, and the day and the sun, moon and stars, and he had no first
   beginning in being born, and began to be when he once had not been.

   17. But for God Only-begotten, Who is preceded by no antecedent time,
   the possibility is excluded that at some time He was not, since that
   "some time" thus becomes prior to Him; and again, the assertion that He
   was not involves the notion of time: whence time will not begin to be
   after Him, but He Himself will begin to be after time, and, inasmuch as
   He was not before He was born, the very period when He was not will
   take precedence of Him. Further, He Who is born from Him Who really is,
   cannot be understood to have been born from that which was not: since
   He Who really is, is the cause of His existing, and His birth cannot
   have its origin in that which is not. And therefore since in His case
   it is not true either in regard of time that He ever was not, or in
   regard of the Father, that is, the Author of His being, that He has
   come into existence out of nothing, He has left no possibility with
   regard to Himself either of His having been born out of nothing, or of
   His not having existed before He was born.

   18. Now I am not ignorant that most of those, whose mind being dulled
   by impiety does not accept the mystery of God, or who through the
   strong influence of a hostile spirit are ready to manifest, under the
   cover of reverence, a mad passion for disparaging God, are wont to make
   strange assertions in the ears of simple-minded men. They assert that
   since we say that the Son always has been, and that He never has been
   anything which He has not always been, we are therefore declaring that
   He is without birth, inasmuch as He always has been; since, according
   to the workings of human reason, that which always has existed cannot
   possibly have been born: since (so they urge) the cause of a thing
   being born, is that something, which was not, may come into existence,
   while the coming into existence of something which was not, means
   nothing else, according to the judgment of common sense, than its being
   born. They may add those arguments, subtle enough and pleasant to
   hear;--"If He was born, He began to be; at the time when He began to
   be, He was not: and when He was not, it cannot be that He was." By such
   proofs let them maintain that it is the language of reasonable piety to
   say, "He was not before He was born: because in order that He might
   come to be, One Who was not, not One Who was, was born. Nor did He Who
   was, require a birth, although He Who was not was born, to the end that
   He might come to be."

   19. Now, first of all, men professing a devout knowledge of divine
   things, in matters where the truth preached by Evangelists and Apostles
   shewed the way, ought to have laid aside the intricate questions of a
   crafty philosophy, and rather to have followed after the faith which
   rests in God: because the sophistry of a syllogistical question easily
   disarms a weak understanding of the protection of its faith, since
   treacherous assertion lures on the guileless defender, who tries to
   support his case by enquiry into facts, till at last it robs him, by
   means of his own enquiry, of his certainty; so that the answerer no
   longer retains in his consciousness a truth which by his admission he
   has surrendered. For what answer accommodates itself so well to the
   questioner's purpose, as the admission on our part, when we are asked,
   "Does anything exist before it is born?" that that which is born, did
   not previously exist? For it is contrary both to nature and to
   necessary reason that a thing which already exists should be born:
   since a thing must needs be born in order that it may come to be, and
   not because it already existed. But when we have made this concession,
   because it is rightly made, we lose the certainty of our faith, and
   being ensnared we fall in with their impious and unchristian designs.

   20. But the blessed Apostle Paul, taking precaution against this, as we
   have often shewn, warned us to be on our guard, saying: Take heed lest
   any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, according to the
   tradition of men, according to the elements of the world, and not
   according to Christ, in Whom dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
   bodily [1324] . Therefore we must be on our guard against philosophy,
   and methods which rest upon traditions of men we must not so much avoid
   as refute. Any concession that we make must imply not that we are
   out-argued but that we are confused, for it is right that we, who
   declare that Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God, should
   not flee from the doctrines of men, but rather overthrow them; and we
   must restrain and instruct the simple-minded lest they be spoiled by
   these teachers. For since God can do all things, and in His wisdom can
   do all things wisely, for neither is His purpose unarmed with power nor
   His power unguided by purpose, it behoves those who proclaim Christ to
   the world, to face the irreverent and faulty doctrines of the world
   with the knowledge imparted by that wise Omnipotence, according to the
   saying of the blessed Apostle: For our weapons are not carnal but
   powerful for God, for the casting down of strongholds, casting down
   reasonings and every high thing which is exalted against the knowledge
   of God [1325] . The Apostle did not leave us a faith which was bare and
   devoid of reason; for although a bare faith may be most mighty to
   salvation, nevertheless, unless it is trained by teaching, while it
   will have indeed a secure retreat to withdraw to in the midst of foes,
   it will yet be unable to maintain a safe and strong position for
   resistance. Its position will be like that which a camp affords to a
   weak force after a flight; not like the undismayed courage of men who
   have a camp to hold. Therefore we must beat down the insolent arguments
   which are raised against God, and destroy the fastnesses of fallacious
   reasoning, and crush cunning intellects which hit themselves up to
   impiety, with weapons not carnal but spiritual, not with earthly
   learning but with heavenly wisdom; so that in proportion as divine
   things differ from human, so may the philosophy of heaven surpass the
   rivalry of earth.

   21. Accordingly let misbelief abandon its efforts; let it not think,
   because it does not understand, that we deny a truth which, in fact, we
   alone rightly understand and believe. For while we declare in so many
   words that He was born, nevertheless we do not assert that He was ever
   not born [1326] . For it is not the same thing to be not born and to be
   born: since the latter term expresses origin derived from some other,
   the former origin derived from none. And it is one thing to exist
   always, as the Eternal, without any source of being, and another to be
   co-eternal with a Father, having Him for the Source of being. For where
   a father is the source of being, there also is birth; and further,
   where the Source of being is eternal, the birth also is eternal: for
   since birth comes from the source of being, birth which comes from an
   eternal Source of being must be eternal. Now everything which always
   exists, is also eternal. But nevertheless, not everything which is
   eternal is also not born; since that which is born from eternity has
   eternally the character of having been born; but that which is not born
   is ingenerate as well as eternal. But if that which has been born from
   the Eternal is not born eternal, it will follow that the Father also is
   not an eternal Source of being. Therefore if any measure of eternity is
   wanting to Him Who has been born of the eternal Father, clearly the
   very same measure is wanting to the Author of His being; since what
   belongs in an infinite degree to Him Who begets, belongs in an infinite
   degree to Him also Who is born. For neither reason nor intelligence
   allows of any interval between the birth of God the Son and the
   generation by God the Father; since the generation consists in the
   birth, and the birth in the generation. Thus each of these events
   coincides exactly with the other; neither took place unless both took
   place. Therefore that which owes its existence to both these events
   cannot be eternal unless they both are eternal; since neither of the
   two correlatives, apart from the other, has any reality, because it is
   impossible for one to exist without the other.

   22. But some one, who cannot receive this divine mystery, will say,
   "Everything which has been born, once was not; since it was born in
   order that it might come into existence."

   23. But does any one doubt that all human beings that have been born,
   at one time were not? It is, however, one thing to be born of some one
   who once was not, and another to be born of One Who always is. For
   every state of infancy, since previously it had no existence, began
   from some point of time. And this again, growing up into childhood,
   still later urges on youth to fatherhood. Yet the man was not always a
   father, for he advanced to youth through boyhood, and to boyhood
   through original infancy. Therefore he who was not always a father,
   also did not always beget: but where the Father is eternal, the Son
   also is eternal. And so if you hold, whether by argument or by
   instinct, that God, in the mystery of our knowledge of Whom one
   property is that He is Father, was not always the Father of the
   begotten Son, you hold also, as a matter of understanding and of
   knowledge, that the Son, Who was begotten, did not always exist. But if
   the property of fatherhood be co-eternal with the Father, then
   necessarily also the property of sonship must be co-eternal with the
   Son. And how will it square with our language or our understanding to
   maintain that He was not before He was born, Whose property it is that
   He always was what He has been born.

   24. And so God Only-begotten, containing in Himself the form and image
   of the invisible God, in all things which are properties of God the
   Father is equal to Him by virtue of the fulness of true Godhead in
   Himself. For, as we have shewn in the former books, in respect of power
   and veneration He is as mighty and as worthy of honour as the Father:
   so also, inasmuch as the Father is always Father, He too, inasmuch as
   He is the Son, possesses the like property of being always the Son. For
   according to the words spoken to Moses, He Who is, hath sent Me unto
   you [1327] , we obtain the unambiguous conception that absolute being
   belongs to God; since that which is, cannot be thought of or spoken of
   as not being. For being and not being are contraries, nor can these
   mutually exclusive descriptions be simultaneously true of one and the
   same object: for while the one is present, the other must be absent.
   Therefore, where anything is, neither conception nor language will
   admit of its not being. When our thoughts are turned backwards, and are
   continually carried back further and further to understand the nature
   of Him Who is, this sole fact about Him, that He is, remains ever prior
   to our thoughts; since that quality, which is infinitely present in
   God, always withdraws itself from the backward gaze of our thoughts,
   though they reach back to an infinite distance. The result is that the
   backward straining of our thoughts can never grasp anything prior to
   God's property of absolute existence; since nothing presents itself, to
   enable us to understand the nature of God, even though we go on seeking
   to eternity, save always the fact that God always is. That then which
   has both been declared about God by Moses, that of which our human
   intelligence can give no further explanation; that very quality the
   Gospels testify to be a property of God Only-begotten; since in the
   beginning was the Word, and since the Word was with God, and since He
   was the true Light, and since God Only-begotten is in the bosom of the
   Father [1328] , and since Jesus Christ is God over all [1329] .

   25. Therefore He was, and He is, since He is from Him Who always is
   what He is. But to be from Him, that is to say, to be from the Father,
   is birth. Moreover, to be always from Him, Who always is, is eternity;
   but this eternity is derived not from Himself, but from the Eternal.
   And from the Eternal nothing can spring but what is eternal: for if the
   Offspring is not eternal, then neither is the Father, Who is the source
   of generation, eternal. Now since it is the special characteristic of
   His being that His Father always exists, and that He is always His Son,
   and since eternity is expressed in the name He that is, therefore,
   since He possesses absolute being, He possesses also eternal being.
   Moreover, no one doubts that generation implies birth, and that birth
   points to one existing from that time forth, and not to one who does
   not continue. Furthermore, there can be no doubt that no one who
   already was in existence could be born. For no cause of birth can
   accrue to Him, Who of Himself continues eternal. But God Only-begotten,
   Who is the Wisdom of God, and the Power and the Word of God, since He
   was born, bears witness to the Father as the source of His being. Since
   He was born of One, Who eternally exists, He was not born of nothing.
   Since He was born before times eternal, His birth must necessarily be
   prior to all thought. There is no room for the verbal quibble, "He was
   not, before He was born." For if He is within the range of our thought,
   in the sense that He was not before He was born, then both our thought
   and time are prior to His birth; since everything which once was not,
   is within the compass of thought and time, by the very meaning of the
   assertion that it once was not, which separates off, within time, a
   period when it did not exist. But He is from the Eternal, and yet has
   always been; He is not ingenerate, yet never was non-existent; since to
   have always been transcends time, and to have been born is birth.

   26. And so we confess that God Only-begotten was born, but born before
   times eternal: since we must make our confession within such limits as
   the express preaching of Apostles and Prophets assigns to us; though at
   the same time human thought cannot grasp any intelligible idea of birth
   out of time, since it is inconsistent with the nature of earthly beings
   that any of them should be born before all times. But when we make this
   assertion, how can we reconcile with it, as part of the same doctrine,
   the contradictory statement that before His birth He was not, when
   according to the Apostle He is God Only-begotten before times eternal?
   If, therefore, the belief that He was born before times eternal is not
   only the reasonable conclusion of human intelligence, but the
   confession of thoughtful faith, then, since birth implies some author
   of being, and what surpasses all time is eternal, and whatever is born
   before times eternal transcends earthly perception, we are certainly
   exalting by impious self-will a notion of human reason, if we maintain
   in a carnal sense that before He was born He was not, since He is born
   eternal, beyond human perception or carnal intelligence. And again,
   whatever transcends time is eternal.

   27. For we can embrace all time in imagination or knowledge, since we
   know that what is now to-day, did not exist yesterday, because what was
   yesterday is not now; and on the other hand what is now, is only now
   and was not also yesterday. And by imagination we can so span the past
   that we have no doubt that before some city was founded, there existed
   a time in which that city had not been founded. Since, therefore, all
   time is the sphere of knowledge or imagination, we judge of it by the
   perceptions of human reason; hence we are considered to have reasonably
   asserted about anything, "It was not, before it was born," since
   antecedent time is prior to the origin of every single thing. But on
   the other hand, since in things of God, that is to say, in regard to
   the birth of God, there is nothing that is not before time eternal: it
   is illogical to use of Him the phrase "before He was born," or to
   suppose that He Who possesses before times eternal the eternal promise,
   is merely (in the language of the blessed Apostle [1330] ) in hope of
   eternal life, which God Who cannot lie has promised before times
   eternal, or to say that once He was not. For reason rejects the notion
   that He began to exist after anything, Who, so we must confess, existed
   before times eternal.

   28. We may grant that for anything to be born before times eternal is
   not the way of human nature, nor a matter which we can understand; and
   yet in this we believe God's declarations about Himself. How then does
   the infidelity of our own day assert, according to the conceptions of
   human intelligence, that that had no existence before it was born,
   which the Apostolic faith tells us was, in some manner inconceivable to
   the human [1331] understanding, always born, or in other words existed
   before times eternal? For what is born before time is always born;
   since that which exists before time eternal, always exists. But what
   has always been born, cannot at any time have had no existence; since
   non-existence at a given time is directly contrary to eternity of
   existence. Moreover, existing always excludes the idea of not having
   existed always. And the idea of not having existed always being
   excluded by the postulate that He has always been born, we cannot
   conceive the supposition that He did not exist before He was born. For
   it is obvious that He Who was born before times eternal, has always
   been born, although we can form no positive conception of anything
   having been born before all time. For if we must confess (as is clearly
   necessary) that He has been born before every creature, whether
   invisible or corporeal, and before all ages and times eternal, and
   before all perception, Who always exists through the very fact that He
   has been so born;--then by no manner of thought can it be conceived
   that before He was born, He did not exist; since He Who has been born
   before times eternal, is prior to all thought, and we can never think
   that once He did not exist, when we have to confess that He always
   exists.

   29. But our opponent cunningly anticipates us with this carping
   objection. "If," he urges, "it is inconceivable that He did not exist
   before He was born, it must be conceivable that One Who already existed
   was born."

   30. I will ask this objector in reply, whether he remembers my calling
   Him anything else than born, and whether I did not say that existence
   before times eternal and birth have the same meaning in the case of Him
   that was. For the birth of One already existing is not really birth,
   but a self-wrought change through birth, and the eternal existence of
   One Who is born means that in His birth He is prior to any conception
   of time, and that there is no room for the mind to suppose that at any
   time He was unborn. And so an eternal birth before times eternal is not
   the same as existence before being born. But to have been born always
   before times eternal excludes the possibility of having had no
   existence before birth.

   31. Again, this same fact excludes the possibility of saying that He
   existed before He was born; because He Who transcends perception
   transcends it in every respect. For if the notion of being born, though
   always existing, transcends thought, it is equally impossible that the
   notion that He did not exist before He was born should be a subject of
   thought. And so, since we must confess that to have been always born
   means for us nothing beyond the fact of birth, the question whether He
   did or did not exist before He was born cannot be determined under our
   conditions of thought; since this one fact that He was born before
   times eternal ever eludes the grasp of our thought. So He was born and
   yet has always existed; He Who does not allow anything else to be
   understood or said about Him than that He was born. For since He is
   prior to time itself within which thought exists (since time eternal is
   previous to thought), He debars thought from determining concerning
   Him, whether He was or was not before He was born; since existence
   before birth is incompatible with the idea of birth, and previous
   non-existence involves the idea of time. Therefore, while the infinity
   of times eternal is fatal to any explanation involving the idea of
   time--that is to say, to the notion that He did not exist; His birth
   equally forbids any that is inconsistent with it,--that is to say, the
   notion that He existed before He was born. For if the question of His
   existence or His non-existence can be determined under our conditions
   of thought, then the birth itself must be after time; for He Who does
   not always exist must, of necessity, have begun to be after some given
   point of time.

   32. Therefore the conclusion reached by faith and argument and thought
   is that the Lord Jesus both was born and always existed: since if the
   mind survey the past in search of knowledge concerning the Son, this
   one fact and nothing else, will be constantly present to the enquirer's
   perception, that He was born and always existed. As therefore it is a
   property of God the Father to exist without birth, so also it must
   belong to the Son to exist always through birth. But birth can declare
   nothing except that there is a Father and the title Father nothing else
   except that there is a birth. For neither those names nor the nature of
   the case, will allow of any intermediate position. For either He was
   not always a Father, unless there was always also a Son; or if He was
   always a Father, there was always also a Son; since whatever period of
   time is denied to the Son, to make His sonship non-eternal, just so
   much the Father lacks of having been always a Father: so that although
   He was always God, nevertheless He cannot have been also a Father for
   the same infinity during which He is God.

   33. Now the declarations of impiety even go so far as not only [1332]
   to ascribe to the Son birth in time, but also generation in time [1333]
   to the Father; because the process of generation and the birth take
   place within one period.

   34. But, heretic, do you consider it pious and devout to confess that
   God indeed always existed, yet was not always Father? For if it is
   pious for you to think so, you must then condemn Paul of impiety, when
   he says that the Son existed before times eternal [1334] : you must
   also accuse Wisdom itself, when it bears witness concerning itself that
   it was founded before the ages: for it was present with the Father when
   He was preparing the heaven. But in order that you may assign to God a
   beginning of His being a Father, first determine the starting-point at
   which the times must have begun. For if they had a beginning, the
   Apostle is a liar for declaring them to be eternal. For you all are
   accustomed to reckon the times from the creation of the sun and the
   moon, since it is written of them, And let them be for signs and for
   times and for years [1335] . But He Who is before the heaven, which in
   your view is even before time, is also before the ages. Nor is He
   merely before the ages, but also before the generations of generations
   which precede the ages. Why do you limit things divine and infinite by
   what is perishable and earthly and narrow? With regard to Christ, Paul
   knows of nothing except an eternity of times. Wisdom does not say that
   it is after anything, but before everything. In your judgment the times
   were established by the sun and the moon; but David shews that Christ
   remains before the sun, saying, His is name is before the sun [1336] .
   And lest you should think that the things of God began with the
   formation of this universe, he says again, And for generations of
   generations before the moon [1337] . These great men counted worthy of
   prophetic inspiration look down upon time: every opening is barred
   whereby human perception might penetrate behind the birth, which
   transcends times eternal. Yet let the faith of a devout imagination
   accept this as limit of its speculations, remembering that the Lord
   Jesus Christ, God Only-begotten, is born in a manner to be acknowledged
   as a perfect birth, and in the reverence paid to His divinity, not
   forgetting that He is eternal.

   35. But we are accused of lying, and together with us the doctrine
   preached by the Apostle is attacked, because while it confesses the
   birth, it asserts the eternity of that birth: the result being that,
   while the birth bears witness to an Author of being, the assertion of
   eternity in the mystery of the divine birth transgresses the limits of
   human thought. For there is brought forward against us the declaration
   of Wisdom concerning itself, when it taught that it was created in
   these words: The Lord created Me for the beginning of His ways [1338] .

   36. And, O wretched heretic! you turn the weapons granted to the Church
   against the Synagogue, against belief in the Church's preaching, and
   distort against the common salvation of all the sure meaning of a
   saving doctrine. For you maintain by these words that Christ is a
   creature, instead of silencing the Jew, who denies that Christ was God
   before eternal ages, and that His power is active in all the working
   and teaching of God, by these words of the living Wisdom! For Wisdom
   has in this passage asserted that it had been created for the beginning
   of the ways of God and for His works from the commencement of the ages,
   lest perchance it might be supposed that it did not subsist before
   Mary; yet has not employed this word created' in order to signify that
   its birth was a creation, since it was created for the beginning of
   God's ways and for His works. Nay rather lest any one should suppose
   that this beginning of the ways, which is indeed the starting-point for
   the human knowledge of things divine, was meant to subordinate an
   infinite birth to conditions of time, Wisdom declared itself
   established before the ages. For, since it is one thing to be created
   for the beginning of the ways and for the works of God, and another to
   be established before the ages, the establishing was intended to be
   understood as prior to the creation; and the very fact of its being
   established for God's works before the ages was intended to point to
   the mystery of the creation; since the establishing is before the ages,
   but the creation for the beginning of the ways and for the works of God
   is after the commencement of the ages.

   37. But now, lest the terms creation' and establishing' should be an
   obstacle to belief in the divine birth, these words follow, Before He
   made the earth, before He made firm the mountains, before all the hills
   He begat Me [1339] . Thus He is begotten before the earth, Who is
   established before the ages; and not only before the earth, but also
   before the mountains and hills. And indeed in these expressions, since
   Wisdom speaks of itself, more is meant than is said. For all objects
   which are used to convey the idea of infinity must be of such a kind as
   to be subsequent in point of time to no single thing and to no class of
   things. But things existing in time cannot possibly be fitted to
   indicate eternity; because, from the very fact that they are posterior
   to other things, they are incapable of suggesting the thought of
   infinity as a beginning, themselves having their own beginning in time.
   For what wonder is it, that God should have begotten the Lord Christ
   before the earth, when the origin of the angels is found to be prior to
   the creation of the earth? Or why should He, Who was said to be
   begotten before the earth, be also declared to be born before the
   mountains, and not only before the mountains but also before the hills;
   the hills being mentioned, as an afterthought, after the mountains, and
   reason requiring that there should be a world before mountains could
   exist? For such reasons it cannot be supposed that these words were
   used merely in order that He might be understood to exist prior to
   hills and mountains and earth, Who surpasses by the eternity of His own
   infinity things which are themselves prior to earth and mountains and
   hills.

   38. But this divine discourse has not left our understandings
   unenlightened, since it explains the reason of the phrase in what
   follows:--God made the regions, both the uninhabitable parts and the
   heights which are inhabited under the heaven. When He was preparing the
   heaven, I was with Him; and when He was setting apart His own seat.
   When above the winds He made the clouds huge in the upper air, and when
   He placed securely the springs under the heaven, and when He made firm
   the foundations of the earth, I was by Him, joining all things together
   [1340] . What period in time is here? Or how far are the conceptions of
   human intelligence allowed to reach beyond the infinite birth of God
   Only-begotten? By means of things whose creation we can conceive in our
   mind, it is not possible to understand the generation of Him, Who is
   prior to all these things; and hence we cannot maintain that He came,
   indeed, first in time, yet was not infinite, inasmuch as the only
   privilege bestowed upon Him was a birth prior to things temporal. For
   in that case, since they, by their constitution, are subject to the
   conditions of time, He, though prior to them all, would be equally
   subject to conditions of time, because their creation within time would
   define the time of His birth, namely that He was born before then; for
   that which is antecedent to temporal things stands in the same relation
   to time as they.

   39. But the voice of God, our instruction in true wisdom, speaks what
   is perfect, and expresses the absolute truth, when it teaches that
   itself is prior not merely to things of time, but even to things
   infinite. For when the heaven was being prepared, it was present with
   God. Is the preparation of the heaven an act of God within time; so
   that an impulse of thought suddenly surprised His mind, as though it
   had been previously dull and inert, and after the fashion of men He
   sought for materials and instruments for fashioning the heaven? Nay,
   the prophet's conception of the working of God is far different, when
   He says, By the word of the Lord were the heavens established, and all
   their power by the breath of His mouth [1341] . Yet the heavens needed
   the command of God, that they might be established; for their
   arrangement and excellence in this firm unshaken constitution, which
   they display, did not arise from the blending and commingling of some
   kind of matter, but from the breath of the mouth of God. What then does
   it mean, that Wisdom begotten of God was present with Him, when He was
   preparing the heaven? For neither does the creation of heaven consist
   in a preparation of material, nor does it consist with the nature of
   God to linger over preliminary thoughts concerning His work. For
   everything, which there is in created things, was always with God: for
   although these things in respect of their creation have a beginning,
   nevertheless they have no beginning in respect of the knowledge and
   power of God. And here the prophet is our witness, saying, O God, Who
   hast made all things which shall be [1342] . For although things
   future, in so far as they are to be created, are still to be made, yet
   to God, with Whom there is nothing new or sudden in creation, they have
   already been made; since there is a dispensation of times for their
   creation, and in the prescient working of the divine power they have
   already been made. Here, therefore, Wisdom, in teaching that it was
   born before the ages, teaches that it is not merely prior to things
   which have been created, but is even co-eternal with what is eternal,
   to wit, with the preparation of the heaven, and the setting apart of
   the abode of God. For this abode was not set apart at the time when it
   was actually made, for setting apart and fashioning an abode are
   different things. Nor again was the heaven formed at the time when it
   was (ideally) prepared, for Wisdom was with God both when He prepared
   and when He set apart the heaven. And afterwards it was fashioning the
   heaven by the side of God Who formed it: it proves its eternity by its
   presence with Him as He prepares; it reveals its functions, when it
   fashions by the side of God Who forms. Therefore, in the passage before
   us it said that it was begotten even before the earth and mountains and
   hills, because it meant to teach that it was present at the preparation
   of the heaven; in order that it might shew that, even when the heaven
   was being prepared, this work was already finished in the counsel of
   God, for to Him there is nothing new.

   40. For the preparation for creation is perpetual and eternal: nor was
   the frame of this universe actually made by isolated acts of thought,
   in the sense that first the heaven was thought of, and afterwards there
   came into God's mind a thought and plan concerning the earth; that He
   thought of each part singly, so that first the earth was spread out as
   a plain, and then through better counsels was made to rise up in
   mountains, and yet again was diversified with hills, and in the fourth
   place was also made habitable even in the heights; that so the heaven
   was prepared and the abode of God set apart, and huge clouds in the
   upper air held the exhalations caught up by the winds; then afterwards
   sure springs began to run under the heaven, and, last of all, the earth
   was made firm with strong foundations. For Wisdom declares that it is
   prior to all these things. But since all things under the heaven were
   made through God, and Christ was present at the fashioning of the
   heaven, and preceded even the eternity of the heaven which was
   prepared, this fact does not allow us to think in respect to God of
   disconnected thoughts on details, since the whole preparation of these
   things is co-eternal with God. For although, as Moses teaches, each act
   of creation had its proper order;--the making the firmament solid, the
   laying bare of the dry land, the gathering together of the sea, the
   ordering of the stars, the generation by the waters and the earth when
   they brought forth living creatures out of themselves; yet the creation
   of the heaven and earth and other elements is not separated by the
   slightest interval in God's working, since their preparation had been
   completed in like infinity of eternity in the counsel of God.

   41. Thus, though Christ was present in God with these infinite and
   eternal decrees, He has granted to us nothing more than a knowledge of
   the fact of His birth; in order that, just as an apprehension of the
   birth is the means which leads to faith in God, so also the knowledge
   of the eternity of His birth might avail to sustain piety; since
   neither reason nor experience allow us to speak of any but an eternal
   Son as proceeding from a Father Who is eternal.

   42. But perhaps the word creation,' and its employment of Him, disturbs
   us. Certainly the word creation' would disturb us, if birth before the
   ages and creation for the beginning of the ways of God and for His
   works were not affirmed of Him. For birth cannot be understood to
   denote creation, since the birth precedes causation, but the creation
   takes place through causation. For before the preparation of the heaven
   and before the commencement of the ages was He established, Who was
   created for the beginning of the ways of God and for His works. Is it
   possible that to be created for the beginning of the ways of God and
   for His works, means the same as to be born before all things? No: one
   of these ideas relates to time employed in action, but the other bears
   a sense which has no relation to time.

   43. Or perhaps you wish the assertion that He was created for the works
   to be understood in the sense that He was created on account of the
   works; in other words that Christ was created for the sake of
   performing the works. In that case He exists as a servant and a builder
   of the universe, and was not born the Lord of Glory; He was created for
   the service of forming the ages, and was not always the beloved Son and
   the King of the ages. But, although the general understanding of
   Christians contradicts this impious thought of yours, recognising that
   it is one thing to be created for the beginning of the ways of God and
   for His works, and another to be born before the ages, yet this very
   same passage thwarts your purpose of falsely asserting that the Lord
   Christ was created, on account of the formation of the universe, since
   it shews that God the Father is the Maker and Former of the universe,
   and shews it convincingly, since Christ Himself was present fashioning
   by the side of Him Who was forming all things. But, while all Scripture
   was designed to speak of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Creator of the
   universe, Wisdom, to destroy all occasion for impiety, has here
   declared that though God the Father was the Constructor of the
   universe, yet itself was not absent from Him while constructing it,
   since it was present with Him even when He was preparing it beforehand,
   and that when the Father formed the universe, Wisdom also was
   fashioning it by the side of Him Who formed it, and was present with
   Him even when He prepared it. Whence Wisdom would have us understand
   that it was not created on account of God's works [1343] , by the very
   fact that it had been present at the eternal preparation of works yet
   to be, and proves Scripture not to be false, by the fact that it
   fashioned the universe by the side of God when He formed it.

   44. Learn at last, heretic, from the revelation of Catholic teaching,
   what is the meaning of the saying that Christ was created for the
   beginning of the ways of God and for His works; and be taught by the
   words of Wisdom itself the folly of your impious dulness. For thus it
   begins: If I shall declare unto you the things which are done every
   day, I will remember to recount those things which are from of old
   [1344] . For Wisdom had said before, You, O men, I entreat, and I utter
   my voice to the sons of men. O ye simple, understand subtilty, moreover
   ye unlearned, apply your heart [1345] ; and again, Through Me kings
   reign, and mighty men decree justice. Through Me princes are magnified,
   and through Me despots possess the earth [1346] ; and again, I walk in
   the ways of equity, and move in the midst of the paths of justice; that
   I may divide substance to those that love Me, and fill their treasures
   with good things [1347] . Wisdom is not silent about its daily work.
   And firstly entreating all men, it advises the simple to understand
   subtilty, and the unlearned to apply their heart, in order that a
   zealous and diligent reader may ponder the different and separate
   meanings of the words. And so it teaches that by its methods and
   ordinances all success, all attainment of knowledge or fame or wealth,
   is achieved: it shews that within itself are contained the reigns of
   kings and the prudence of the mighty, and the famous works of princes,
   and the justice of despots who possess the earth; that it moreover does
   not mingle with wicked deeds and has no part in acts of injustice; and
   that all this is done by Wisdom in order that, by taking part in every
   work of equity and justice, it may supply to those that love it, a
   wealth of eternal goods and incorruptible treasures. Therefore Wisdom,
   after declaring that it will relate the things which are done every
   day, promises that it will also be mindful to recount the things which
   are from of old. And now what blindness is it, to think that things
   were performed before the beginning of the ages, which are expressly
   declared to date merely from the beginning of the ages! For every work
   among those which date from the beginning of the ages is itself
   posterior to that beginning: but on the contrary, things which are
   before the beginning of the ages, precede the ordering of the ages,
   which are later than they. And so Wisdom, after declaring that it is
   mindful to speak of the things which date from the beginning of the
   ages, says, The Lord created Me for the beginning of His ways for His
   works, by these words denoting things performed from the date of the
   beginning of the ages. Thus Wisdom's teaching concerns not a generation
   declared to precede the ages, but a dispensation which began with the
   ages themselves.

   45. We must also enquire what is the meaning of the saying that God,
   born before the ages, was again created for the beginning of the ways
   of God and for His works. This surely is said because where there is a
   birth before the commencement of the ages, there is the eternity of an
   endless generation: but where the same birth is represented as a
   creation from the commencement of the ages, for the ways of God and for
   His works, it is applied as the creative cause to the works and to the
   ways. And first, since Christ is Wisdom, we must see whether He is
   Himself the beginning of the way of the works of God. Of this, I think,
   there is no doubt; for He says, I am the way, and, No man cometh to the
   Father except through Me [1348] . A way is the guide of those who go,
   the course marked out for those who hasten, the safeguard of the
   ignorant, a teacher, so to speak, of things unknown and longed for.
   Therefore He is created for the beginning of the ways, for the works of
   God; because He is the Way and leads men to the Father. But we must
   seek for the purpose of this creation, which is from the commencement
   of the ages. For it is also the mystery of the last dispensation,
   wherein Christ was again created in bodily form, and declared that He
   was the way of the works of God. Again, He was created for the ways of
   God from the commencement of the ages, when, subjecting Himself to the
   visible form of a creature, He took the form of a created being.

   46. And so let us see for what ways of God, and for what works of God,
   Wisdom was created from the commencement of the ages, though born of
   God before all ages. Adam heard the voice of One walking in Paradise.
   Do you think that His approach could have been heard, had He not
   assumed the guise of a created being? Is not the fact, that He was
   heard as He walked, proof that He was present in a created form? I do
   not ask in what guise He spoke to Cain and Abel and Noah, and in what
   guise He was near to Enoch also, blessing him. An Angel speaks to
   Hagar, and certainly He is also God. Has He the same form, when He
   appears like an Angel, as He has in that nature, by virtue of which He
   is God? Certainly the form of an Angel is revealed, where afterwards
   mention is made of the nature of God. But why should I speak of an
   Angel? He comes as a man to Abraham. Under the guise of a man, in the
   shape of that created being, is not Christ present in that nature,
   which He possesses as being also God? A man speaks, and is present in
   the body, and is nourished by food; and yet God is adored. Surely He
   Who was an Angel is now also man, in order to save us from the
   assumption that any of these diverse aspects of one state, that of the
   creature, is His natural form as God. Again, He comes to Jacob in human
   shape, and even grasps him for wrestling; and He takes hold with His
   hands, and struggles with His limbs, and bends His flanks, and adopts
   every movement and gesture of ours. But again He is revealed, this time
   to Moses, and as a fire; in order that you might learn to believe that
   this created nature was to provide Him with an outward guise, not to
   embody the reality of His nature. He possessed, at that moment, the
   power of burning, but He did not assume the destructive property which
   is inherent in the nature of fire, for the fire evidently burned and
   yet the bush was not injured.

   47. Glance over the whole course of time, and realise in what guise He
   appeared to Joshua the son of Nun, a prophet bearing His name, or to
   Isaiah, who relates that he saw Him, as the Gospel also bears witness
   [1349] , or to Ezekiel, who was admitted even to knowledge of the
   Resurrection, or to Daniel, who confesses the Son of Man in the eternal
   kingdom of the ages, or to all the rest to whom He presented Himself in
   the form of various created beings, for the ways of God and for the
   works of God, that is to say, to teach us to know God, and to profit
   our eternal state. Why does this method, expressly designed for human
   salvation, bring about at the present time such an impious attack upon
   His eternal birth? The creation, of which you speak, dates from the
   commencement of the ages; but His birth is without end, and before the
   ages. Maintain by all means that we are doing violence to words, if a
   Prophet, or the Lord, or an Apostle, or any oracle whatever has
   described by the name of creation the birth of His eternal divinity. In
   all these manifestations God, Who is a consuming fire, is present, as
   created, in such a manner that He could lay aside the created form by
   the same power by which He assumed it, being able to destroy again that
   which had come into existence merely that it might be looked upon.

   48. But that blessed and true birth of the flesh conceived within the
   Virgin the Apostle has named both a creating and a making, for then
   there was born both the nature and form of our created being. And
   without doubt in his view this name belongs to Christ's true birth as a
   man, since he says, But when the fulness of the time came, God sent His
   Son, made of a woman, made under the law, in order that He might redeem
   those who are under the law, that we might obtain the adoption of sons
   [1350] . And so He is God's own Son, Who is made in human form and of
   human origin; nor is He only made but also created, as it is said: Even
   as the truth is in Jesus, that ye put away according to your former
   manner of life, that old man, which becomes corrupt according to the
   lusts of deceit. However, be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and
   put ye on that new man, which is created according to God [1351] . So
   the new man is to be put on Who has been created according to God. For
   He Who was Son of God was born also Son Man. This was not the birth of
   the divinity, but the creating of the flesh; the new Man taking the
   title of the race, and being created according to God Who was born
   before the ages. And how the new man was created according to God, he
   explains in what follows, adding, in righteousness, and in holiness,
   and in truth [1352] . For there was no guile in Him; and He has been
   made unto us righteousness and sanctification, and is Himself the
   Truth. This, then, is the Christ, created a new man according to God,
   Whom we put on.

   49. If, then, Wisdom, in saying that it was mindful of the things which
   have been performed since the beginning of the ages, said that it was
   created for the works of God and for the ways of God; and yet, while
   saying that it was created, taught that it was established before the
   ages, lest we should suppose that the mystery of that created form, so
   variously and frequently assumed, involved some change in its
   nature;--for although the firmness with which it was established would
   not allow of any disturbance that could overthrow it, yet, lest the
   establishment might seem to mean something less than birth, Wisdom
   declared itself to be begotten before all things:--if this is so, why
   is the term creation' now applied to the birth of that which was both
   begotten before all things, and also established before the ages?
   Because that which was established before the ages was created anew
   from the commencement of the ages for the beginning of the ways of God
   and for His works. In this sense must we understand the difference
   between creation from the commencement of the ages and that birth which
   precedes the ages and all things. Impiety at least has not this excuse,
   that it can plead error as the cause of its profanity.

   50. For although the weakness of the understanding might hinder the
   perceptions of a man devoutly disposed, so that, even after this
   explanation, he might fail to grasp the meaning of "creation,"
   nevertheless, even the letter of the Apostle's saying, when he applies
   [1353] the term "making" to a true birth, should have sufficed for a
   sincere, if not intelligent, belief, that the term "creation" was
   designed to conduce to a belief in generation. For when the Apostle was
   minded to assert the birth of One from one Parent, that is to say, the
   birth of the Lord from a virgin without a conception due to human
   passions, he clearly had a definite purpose in calling Him "made of a
   woman," Whom he knew and had frequently asserted to have been born. He
   desired that the birth' should point to the reality of the generation,
   and the making' should testify to the birth of One from one Parent;
   because the term making' excludes the idea of a conception by means of
   human intercourse, it being expressly stated that He was made of a
   virgin, though it is equally certain that He was born and not made. But
   see, heretic, how impious you are. No sentence of prophet, or
   evangelist, or apostle has said that Jesus Christ was created from God,
   rather than born from Him: yet you deny the birth, and assert the
   creation, but not according to the Apostle's meaning, when he said that
   He was made, lest there should be any doubt that He was born as One
   from one Parent. You make your assertion in a most impious sense,
   implying that God did not derive His being by way of birth conveying
   nature; although a creature would rather have come into being out of
   nothing. This is the primary infection in your unhappy mind, not that
   you term birth a creating, but that you adapt your faith to the idea of
   creation instead of birth. And yet while it would mark a poor
   intellect, still it would not mark a man entirely undevout, if you had
   called Christ created, in order that men might recognise His impossible
   birth from God, as being that of One from One.

   51. But none of these phrases does a firm apostolic faith permit. For
   it knows in what dispensation of time Christ was created, and in what
   eternity of times He was born. Moreover, He was born God of God, and
   the divinity of His true birth and perfect generation is not doubtful.
   For in relation to God we acknowledge only two modes of being, birth
   and eternity: birth, moreover, not after anything, but before all
   things, so that birth only bears witness to a Source of being, and does
   not predicate any incongruity between the offspring and the Source of
   being. Still, by common admission, this birth, because it is from God,
   implies a secondary position in respect to the Source of being, and yet
   cannot be separated from that Source, since any attempt of thought to
   pass beyond acceptance of the fact of birth, must also necessarily
   penetrate the mystery of the generation. And so this is the only pious
   language to use about God: to know Him as Father, and with Him to know
   also Him, Who is the Son born of Him. Nor assuredly are we taught
   anything concerning God, except that He is the Father of God the
   Only-begotten and the Creator. So let not human weakness overreach
   itself; and let it make this only confession, in which alone lies its
   salvation--that, before the mystery of the Incarnation, it is ever
   assured, concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, of this one fact that He had
   been born.

   52. For my part, so long as I shall have the power by means of this
   Spirit Whom Thou hast granted me, Holy Father, Almighty God, I will
   confess Thee to be not only eternally God, but also eternally Father.
   Nor will I ever break out into such folly and impiety, as to make
   myself the judge of Thy omnipotence and Thy mysteries, nor shall this
   weak understanding arrogantly seek for more than that devout belief in
   Thy infinitude and faith in Thy eternity, which have been taught me. I
   will not assert that Thou wast ever without Thy Wisdom, and Thy Power,
   and Thy Word, without God Only-begotten, my Lord Jesus Christ. The weak
   and imperfect language, to which our nature is limited, does not
   dominate my thoughts concerning Thee, so that my poverty of utterance
   should choke faith into silence. For although we have a word and wisdom
   and power of our own, the product of our free inward activity, yet
   Thine is the absolute generation of perfect God, Who is Thy Word and
   Wisdom and Power; so that He can never be separated from Thee, Who in
   these names of Thy eternal properties is shewn to be born of Thee. Yet
   His birth is only so far shewn as to make manifest the fact that Thou
   art the Source of His being; yet sufficiently to confirm our belief in
   His infinity, inasmuch as it is related that He was born before times
   eternal.

   53. For in human affairs Thou hast set before us many things of such a
   sort, that though we do not know their cause, yet the effect is not
   unknown; and reverence inculcates faith, where ignorance is inherent in
   our nature. Thus when I raised to Thy heaven these feeble eyes of mine,
   my certainty regarding it was limited to the fact that it is Thine. For
   seeing therein these orbits where the stars are fixed, and their annual
   revolutions, and the Pleiades and the Great Bear and the Morning Star,
   each having their varied duties in the service which is appointed them,
   I recognise Thy presence, O God, in these things whereof I cannot gain
   any clear understanding. And when I view the marvellous swellings of
   Thy sea, I know that I have failed to comprehend not merely the origin
   of the waters but even the movements of this changeful expanse; yet I
   grasp at faith in some reasonable cause, although it is one that I
   cannot see, and fail not to recognise Thee in these things also, which
   I do not know. Furthermore, when in thought I turn to the earth, which
   by the power of hidden agencies causes to decay all the seeds which it
   receives, quickens them when decayed, multiplies them when quickened,
   and makes them strong when multiplied; in all these changes I find
   nothing which my mind can understand, yet my ignorance helps towards
   recognising Thee, for though I know nothing of the nature that waits on
   me, I recognise Thee by actual experience of the advantages I possess.
   Moreover, though I do not know myself, yet I perceive so much that I
   marvel at Thee the more because I am ignorant of myself. For without
   understanding it, I perceive a certain motion or order or life in my
   mind when it exercises its powers; and this very perception I owe to
   Thee, for though Thou deniest the power of understanding my natural
   first beginning, yet Thou givest that of perceiving nature with its
   charms. And since in what concerns myself I recognise Thee, ignorant as
   I am, so recognising Thee I will not in what concerns Thee cherish a
   feebler faith in Thy omnipotence, because I do not understand. My
   thoughts shall not attempt to grasp and master the origin of Thy
   Only-begotten Son, nor shall my faculties strain to reach beyond the
   truth that He is my Creator and my God.

   54. His birth is before times eternal. If anything exist which precedes
   eternity, it will be something which, when eternity is comprehended,
   still eludes comprehension. And this something is Thine, and is Thy
   Only-begotten; no portion, nor extension, nor any empty name devised to
   suit some theory of Thy mode of action. He is the Son, a Son born of
   Thee, God the Father, Himself true God, begotten by Thee in the unity
   of Thy nature, and meet to be acknowledged after Thee, and yet with
   Thee, since Thou art the eternal Author of His eternal origin. For
   since He is from Thee, He is second to Thee; yet since He is Thine,
   Thou art not to be separated from Him. For we must never assert that
   Thou didst once exist without Thy Son, lest we should be reproaching
   Thee either with imperfection, as then unable to generate, or with
   superfluousness after the generation. And so the exact meaning for us
   of the eternal generation is that we know Thee to be the eternal Father
   of Thy Only-begotten Son, Who was born of Thee before times eternal.

   55. But, for my part, I cannot be content by the service of my faith
   and voice, to deny that my Lord and my God, Thy Only-begotten, Jesus
   Christ, is a creature; I must also deny that this name of creature'
   belongs to Thy Holy Spirit, seeing that He proceeds from Thee and is
   sent through Him, so great is my reverence for everything that is
   Thine. Nor, because I know that Thou alone art unborn and that the
   Only-begotten is born of Thee, will I refuse to say that the Holy
   Spirit was begotten, or assert that He was ever created. I fear the
   blasphemies which would be insinuated against Thee by such use of this
   title creature,' which I share with the other beings brought into being
   by Thee. Thy Holy Spirit, as the Apostle says, searches and knows Thy
   deep things, and as Intercessor for me speaks to Thee words I could not
   utter; and shall I express or rather dishonour, by the title creature,'
   the power of His nature, which subsists eternally, derived from Thee
   through Thine Only-begotten? Nothing, except what belongs to Thee,
   penetrates into Thee; nor can the agency of a power foreign and strange
   to Thee measure the depth of Thy boundless majesty. To Thee belongs
   whatever enters into Thee; nor is anything strange to Thee, which
   dwells in Thee through its searching power.

   56. But I cannot describe Him, Whose pleas for me I cannot describe. As
   in the revelation that Thy Only-begotten was born of Thee before times
   eternal, when we cease to struggle with ambiguities of language and
   difficulties of thought, the one certainty of His birth remains; so I
   hold fast in my consciousness the truth that Thy Holy Spirit is from
   Thee and through Him, although I cannot by my intellect comprehend it.
   For in Thy spiritual things I am dull, as Thy Only-begotten says,
   Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be born anew. The Spirit
   breathes where it will, and thou hearest the voice of it; but dost not
   know whence it comes or whither it goes. So is every one who is born of
   water and of the Holy Spirit [1354] . Though I hold a belief in my
   regeneration, I hold it in ignorance; I possess the reality, though I
   comprehend it not. For my own consciousness had no part in causing this
   new birth, which is manifest in its effects. Moreover the Spirit has no
   limits; He speaks when He will, and what He will, and where He will.
   Since, then, the cause of His coming and going is unknown, though the
   watcher is conscious of the fact, shall I count the nature of the
   Spirit among created things, and limit Him by fixing the time of His
   origin? Thy servant John says, indeed, that all things were made
   through the Son [1355] , Who as God the Word was in the beginning, O
   God, with Thee. Again, Paul recounts all things as created in Him, in
   heaven and on earth, visible and invisible [1356] . And, while he
   declared that everything was created in Christ and through Christ, he
   thought, with respect to the Holy Spirit, that the description was
   sufficient, when he called Him Thy Spirit. With these men, peculiarly
   Thine elect, I will think in these matters; just as, after their
   example, I will say nothing beyond my comprehension about Thy
   Only-begotten, but simply declare that He was born, so also after their
   example I will not trespass beyond that which human intellect can know
   about Thy Holy Spirit, but simply declare that He is Thy Spirit. May my
   lot be no useless strife of words, but the unwavering confession of an
   unhesitating faith!

   57. Keep, I pray Thee, this my pious faith undefiled, and even till my
   spirit departs, grant that this may be the utterance of my convictions:
   so that I may ever hold fast that which I professed in the creed of my
   regeneration, when I was baptized in the Father, and the Son, and the
   Holy Spirit. Let me, in short, adore Thee our Father, and Thy Son
   together with Thee; let me win the favour of Thy Holy Spirit, Who is
   from Thee, through Thy Only-begotten. For I have a convincing Witness
   to my faith, Who says, Father, all Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine
   [1357] , even my Lord Jesus Christ, abiding in Thee, and from Thee, and
   with Thee, for ever God: Who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1305] Prov. viii. 22.

   [1306] Rom. i. 23.

   [1307] Gen. xiv. 19.

   [1308] Hos. xiii. 4 (LXX.).

   [1309] 1 Pet. iv. 19.

   [1310] Rom. viii. 19-21.

   [1311] St. John v. 23.

   [1312] Ps. cix. 3 (LXX.).

   [1313] Hos. xiii. 4, according to LXX.

   [1314] Ps. xxxiv. 15.

   [1315] Acts xiii. 22; cf. Ps. lxxxix. 20.

   [1316] 1 St. John v. 1.

   [1317] St. John i. 3.

   [1318] Ps. cii. 25.

   [1319] Ib. cxxxviii. 8.

   [1320] Is. i. 2 (LXX.).

   [1321] Ex. iv. 22.

   [1322] St. Matt. xvii. 5.

   [1323] Ps. xxi. 32 (LXX.).

   [1324] Col. ii. 8, 9.

   [1325] 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.

   [1326] i.e. not yet born.

   [1327] Ex. iii. 14 (in LXX.).

   [1328] St. John i. 1, 9, 18.

   [1329] Rom. ix. 5.

   [1330] 2 Tim. i. 9, Tit. i. 2.

   [1331] Reading humanæ.

   [1332] Reading non solum.

   [1333] Reading generationis.

   [1334] Tit. i. 2.

   [1335] Gen. i. 14.

   [1336] Ps. lxxi. 17 (in LXX.).

   [1337] Ib. 5 (LXX.).

   [1338] Prov. viii. 22 (LXX.).

   [1339] Ib. 24, 25 (LXX.).

   [1340] Prov. viii. 26-30 (LXX.).

   [1341] Ps. xxxii. 6 (LXX.).

   [1342] Is. xlv. 11 (LXX. but altered from the 3rd person to the 2nd).

   [1343] Reading per id ipsum ea neque propter opera.

   [1344] Prov. viii. 21 (LXX.).

   [1345] Ib. 4, 5.

   [1346] Ib. 15, 16.

   [1347] Ib. 20, 21.

   [1348] St. John xiv. 6.

   [1349] St. John xii. 41.

   [1350] Gal. iv. 4, 5.

   [1351] Eph. iv. 21-24.

   [1352] Ib. 24.

   [1353] Deputantis, conj. edd. Benedict.

   [1354] St. John iii. 7, 8.

   [1355] Ib. i. 1, 3.

   [1356] Col. i. 16.

   [1357] St. John xvii. 10.
