# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume XIV.   The Seven Ecumenical Councils
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume XIV
# father: Ecumenical Councils
# work: Sixth Ecumenical Council and Trullo (680-692)
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Percival / Schaff English translation.
   The Sixth Ecumenical Council.

   The Third Council of Constantinople.

   a.d. 680-681.

   Emperor.--Constantine Pogonatus.

   Pope.--Agatho I.

   Elenchus.

   Historical Introduction.

   Extracts from the Acts, Session I.

   The Letter of Pope Agatho to the Emperor.

   The Letter of the Roman Synod to the Council.

   Introductory Note.

   Extracts from the Acts, Session VIII.

   The Sentence against the Monothelites, Session XIII.

   The Acclamations, Session XVI.

   The Definition of Faith.

   Abstract of the Prosphoneticus to the Emperor.

   The Synodal Letter to Pope Agatho.

   Excursus on the Condemnation of Pope Honorius.

   The Imperial Edict in abstract.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Historical Introduction.

   The Sixth Ecumenical Council met on November 7, 680, for its first
   session, and ended its meetings, which are said to have been eighteen
   in number, on September 16th of the next year.  The number of bishops
   present was under three hundred and the minutes of the last session
   have only 174 signatures attached to them.

   When the Emperor first summoned the council he had no intention that it
   should be ecumenical.  From the Sacras it appears that he had summoned
   all the Metropolitans and bishops of the jurisdiction of
   Constantinople, and had also informed the Archbishop of Antioch that he
   might send Metropolitans and bishops.  A long time before he had
   written to Pope Agatho on the subject.

   When the synod assembled however, it assumed at its first session the
   title "Ecumenical," and all the five patriarchs were represented,
   Alexandria and Jerusalem having sent deputies although they were at the
   time in the hands of the infidel.

   In this Council the Emperor presided in person surrounded by high court
   officials.  On his right sat the Patriarchs of Constantinople and
   Antioch and next to them the representative of the Patriarch of
   Alexandria.  On the Emperor's left were seated the representatives of
   the Pope.  In the midst were placed, as usual, the Holy Gospels.  After
   the eleventh session however the Emperor was no longer able to be
   present, but returned and presided at the closing meeting.

   The sessions of the council were held in the domed hall (or possibly
   chapel) in the imperial palace; which, the Acts tell us, was called
   Trullo (en to sekreto tou theiou palatiou, to houto legomeno Troullo).

   It may be interesting to remark that the Sacras sent to the bishops of
   Rome and Constantinople are addressed, the one to "The Most holy and
   Blessed Archbishop of Old Rome and Ecumenical Pope," and the other to
   "The Most holy and Blessed Archbishop of Constantinople and Ecumenical
   Patriarch."  Some of the titles given themselves by the signers of the
   "Prosphoneticus" are interesting--"George, an humble presbyter of the
   holy Roman Church, and holding the place of the most blessed Agatho,
   ecumenical Pope of the City of Rome...," "John, an humble deacon of the
   holy Roman Church and holding the place of the most blessed Agatho, and
   ecumenical Pope of the City of Rome...," "George, by the mercy of God
   bishop of Constantinople which is New Rome," "Peter a presbyter and
   holding the place of the Apostolic See of the great city
   Alexandria...," "George, an humble presbyter of the Holy Resurrection
   of Christ our God, and holding the place of Theodore the presbyter,
   beloved of God, who holds the place of the Apostolic See of
   Jerusalem...," "John, by the mercy of God bishop of the City of
   Thessalonica, and legate of the Apostolic See of Rome," "John, the
   unworthy bishop of Portus, legate of the whole Council of the holy
   Apostolic See of Rome," "Stephen, by the mercy of God, bishop of
   Corinth, and legate of the Apostolic See of Old Rome."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Extracts from the Acts.

   Session I.

   (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 609 et seqq.)

   [After a history of the assembly of the Council, the Acts begin with
   the Speech of the Papal Legates, as follows:]

   Most benign lord, in accordance with the Sacra to our most holy Pope
   [325] from your God-instructed majesty, we have been sent by him to the
   most holy footsteps of your God-confirmed serenity, bearing with us his
   suggestion (anaphoras, suggestione) as well as the other suggestion of
   his Synod equally addressed to your divinely preserved Piety by the
   venerable bishops subject to it, which also we offered to your
   God-crowned Fortitude.  Since, then, during the past forty-six years,
   more or less, certain novelties in expression, contrary to the Orthodox
   faith, have been introduced by those who were at several times bishops
   of this, your royal and God-preserved city, to wit:  Sergius, Paul,
   Pyrrhus, and Peter, as also by Cyrus, at one time archbishop of the
   city of Alexandria, as well also as by Theodore, who was bishop of a
   city called Pharan, and by certain others their followers, and since
   these things have in no small degree brought confusion into the Church
   throughout the whole world, for they taught dogmatically that there was
   but one will in the dispensation of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, one of the Holy Trinity, and one operation; and since many
   times your servant, our apostolic see, has fought against this, and
   then prayed against it, and by no means been able, even up to now, to
   draw away from such a depraved opinion its advocates, we beseech your
   God-crowned fortitude, that such as share these views of the most holy
   church of Constantinople may tell us, what is the source of this
   new-fangled language.

   [Answer of the Monothelites made at the Emperor's bidding:]

   We have brought out no new method of speech, but have taught whatever
   we have received from the holy Ecumenical Synods, and from the holy
   approved Fathers, as well as from the archbishops of this imperial
   city, to wit:  Sergius, Paul, Pyrrhus, and Peter, as also from Honorius
   who was Pope of Old Rome, and from Cyrus who was Pope of Alexandria,
   that is to say with reference to will and operation, and so we have
   believed, and so we believe, so we preach; and further we are ready to
   stand by, and defend this faith.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [325] The word "our" omitted in the Latin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Letter of Agatho, Pope of Old Rome, to the Emperor, and the Letter
   of Agatho and of 125 Bishops of the Roman Synod, Addressed to the Sixth
   Council.

   (Read at the Fourth Session, November 15, at the request of George,
   Patriarch of Constantinople and his Suffragans.)

   Introductory Note.

   (Bossuet, Defensio Cler. Gal. Lib. VII., cap. xxiv.)

   All the fathers spoke one by one, and only after examination were the
   letters of St. Agatho and the whole Western Council approved.  Agatho,
   indeed, and the Western Bishops put forth their decrees thus [We have
   directed persons from our humility to your valour protected of God,
   which shall offer to you the report of us all, that is, of all the
   Bishops in the Northern or Western Regions, in which too we have summed
   up the confession of our Apostolic Faith, yet [326] ] not as those who
   wished to contend about these things as being uncertain, but, being
   certain and unchangeable to see them forth in a brief definition,
   [suppliantly beseeching you that, by the favour of your sacred majesty,
   you would command these same things to be preached to all, and to have
   force with all.']  Undoubtedly, therefore, so far as in them lay, they
   defined the matter.  The question was, whether the other Churches
   throughout the world would agree, and a matter so great was only made
   clear after Episcopal examination.  But the high, magnificent, yet true
   expressions, which St. Agatho had used of his See, namely, that resting
   on the promise of the Lord it had never turned aside from the path of
   truth, and that its Pontiffs, the predecessors of Agatho, who were
   charged in the person of Peter to strengthen their brethren, had ever
   discharged that office, this the Fathers of the Council hear and
   receive.  But not the less they examine the matter, they inquire into
   the decrees of Roman Pontiffs, and, after inquiry held, approve
   Agatho's decrees, condemn those of Honorius:  a certain proof that they
   did not understand Agatho's expressions as if it were necessary to
   receive without discussion every decree of Roman Pontiffs even de fide,
   inasmuch as they are subjected to the supreme and final examination of
   a General Council:  but as if these expressions taken as a whole, in
   their total, hold good in the full and complete succession of Peter, as
   we have often said, and in its proper place shall say at greater
   length.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [326] The words in brackets are not quoted by Bossuet.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Letter of Pope Agatho.

   (Found in Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LXXXVII., col. 1161; L. and C., Tom.
   VI., col. 630.)

   Agatho a bishop and servant of the servants of God to the most devout
   and serene victors and conquerors, our most beloved sons and lovers of
   God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Emperor Constantine the Great,
   and to Heraclius and Tiberius, Augustuses.

   While contemplating the various anxieties of human life, and while
   groaning with vehement weeping before the one true God, in prayer that
   he might impart to my wavering soul the comfort of his divine mercy,
   and might lift me by his right hand out of the depths of grief and
   anxiety, I most gratefully recognize, my most illustrious lords and
   sons, that your purpose [i.e. of holding a Council] afforded me deep
   and wonderful consolation.  For it was most pious and emanated from
   your most meek tranquillity, taught by the divine benignity for the
   benefit of the Christian commonwealth divinely entrusted to your
   keeping, that your imperial power and clemency might have a care to
   enquire diligently concerning the things of God (through whom Kings do
   reign, who is himself King of Kings and Lord of Lords) and might seek
   after the truth of his spotless faith as it has been handed down by the
   Apostles and by the Apostolic Fathers, and be zealously affected to
   command that in all the churches the pure tradition be held.  And that
   no one may be ignorant of this pious intention of yours, or suspect
   that we have been compelled by force, and have not freely consented to
   the carrying into effect of the imperial decrees touching the preaching
   of our evangelical faith which was addressed to our predecessor Donus,
   a pontiff of Apostolic memory, they have through our ministry been sent
   to and entirely approved by all nations and peoples; for these decrees
   the Holy Spirit by his grace dictated to the tongue of the imperial
   pen, out of the treasure of a pure heart, as the words of an adviser
   not of an oppressor, defending himself, not looking with contempt upon
   others; not afflicting, but exhorting; and inviting to those things
   which are of God in godly wise, because he, the Maker and Redeemer of
   all men, who had he come in the majesty of his Godhead into the world,
   might have terrified mortals, preferred to descend through his
   inestimable clemency and humility to the estate of us whom he had
   created and thus to redeem us, who also expects from us a willing
   confession of the true faith.

   And this it is that the blessed Peter, the prince of the Apostles,
   teaches:  "Feed the flock of Christ which is among you, not by
   constraint, but willingly, exhorting it according to God."  Therefore,
   encouraged by these imperial decrees, O most meek lords of all things,
   and relieved from the depths of affliction and raised to the hope of
   consolation, I have begun, refreshed somewhat by a better confidence,
   to comply with promptness with the things which were sometime ago
   bidden by the Sacra of your gentlest fortitude, and am endeavouring in
   obedience therewith to find persons, such as our deficient times and
   the quality of this obedient province permit, and taking advice with my
   fellow-servant bishops, as well concerning the approaching synod of
   this Apostolic See, as concerning our own clergy, the lovers of the
   Christian Empire, and, afterwards concerning the religious servants of
   God, that I might exhort them to follow in haste the footsteps of your
   most pious Tranquillity.  And, were it not that the great compass of
   the provinces, in which our humility's council is situated had caused
   so great a loss of time, our servitude a while ago could have fulfilled
   with studious obedience what even now has scarcely been done.  For
   while from the various provinces a council has been gathering about us,
   and while we have been able to select some persons of those from this
   very Roman city immediately subject to your most serene power, or from
   those near by, others again we have been obliged to wait for from far
   distant provinces, in which the word of Christian faith was preached by
   those sent by the predecessors of my littleness; and thus quite a space
   of time has elapsed:  and I pass over my bodily pains in consequence of
   which life to a perpetually suffering person is neither possible nor
   pleasant.  Therefore, most Christian lords and sons, in accordance with
   the most pious jussio of your God-protected clemency, we have had a
   care to send, with the devotion of a prayerful heart (from the
   obedience we owe you, not because we relied on the [superabundant]
   knowledge of those whom we send to you), our fellow-servants here
   present, Abundantius, John, and John, our most reverend brother
   bishops, Theodore and George our most beloved sons and presbyters, with
   our most beloved son John, a deacon, and with Constantine, a subdeacon
   of this holy spiritual mother, the Apostolic See, as well as Theodore,
   the presbyter legate of the holy Church of Ravenna and the religious
   servants of God the monks.  For, among men placed amid the Gentiles,
   and earning their daily bread by bodily labour with considerable
   distraction, how could a knowledge of the Scriptures, in its fulness,
   be found unless what has been canonically defined by our holy and
   apostolic predecessors, and by the venerable five councils, we preserve
   in simplicity of heart, and without any distorting keep the faith come
   to us from the Fathers, always desirous and endeavouring to possess
   that one and chiefest good, viz.:  that nothing be diminished from the
   things canonically defined, and that nothing be changed nor added
   thereto, but that those same things, both in words and sense, be
   guarded untouched?  To these same commissioners we also have given the
   witness of some of the holy Fathers, whom this Apostolic Church of
   Christ receives, together with their books, so that, having obtained
   from the power of your most benign Christianity the privilege of
   suggesting, they might out of these endeavour to give satisfaction,
   (when your imperial Meekness shall have so commanded) as to what this
   Apostolic Church of Christ, their spiritual mother and the mother of
   your God-sprung empire, believes and preaches, not in words of worldly
   eloquence, which are not at the command of ordinary men, but in the
   integrity of the apostolic faith, in which having been taught from the
   cradle, we pray that we may serve and obey the Lord of heaven, the
   Propagator of your Christian empire, even unto the end.  Consequently,
   we have granted them faculty or authority with your most tranquil
   mightiness, to afford satisfaction with simplicity whenever your
   clemency shall command, it being enjoined on them as a limitation that
   they presume not to add to, take away, or to change anything; but that
   they set forth this tradition of the Apostolic See in all sincerity as
   it has been taught by the apostolic pontiffs, who were our
   predecessors.  For these delegates we most humbly implore with bent
   knees of the mind your clemency ever full of condescension, that
   agreeably to the most benign and most august promise of the imperial
   Sacra, your Christlike Tranquillity may deem them worthy of acceptance
   and may deign to give a favourable hearing to their most humble
   suggestions.  Thus may your meekest Piety find the ears of Almighty God
   open to your prayers, and may you order that they return to their own
   unharmed in their rectitude of our Apostolic faith, as well as in the
   integrity of their bodies.  And thus may the supernal Majesty restore
   to the benign rule of your government through the most heroic and
   unconquerable labours of your God-strengthened clemency, the whole
   Christian commonwealth, and may he subdue hostile nations to your
   mighty sceptre, that there may be satisfaction from this time forth to
   every soul and to all nations, because what you deigned to promise
   solemnly by your most august letters about the immunity and safety of
   those who came to the Council, you have fulfilled in all respects.  It
   is not their wisdom that gave us confidence to make bold to send them
   to your pious presence; but our littleness obediently complied with
   what your imperial benignity, with a gracious order, exhorted to.  And
   briefly we shall intimate to your divinely instructed Piety, what the
   strength of our Apostolic faith contains, which we have received
   through Apostolic tradition and through the tradition of the
   Apostolical pontiffs, and that of the five holy general synods, through
   which the foundations of Christ's Catholic Church have been
   strengthened and established; this then is the status [and the regular
   tradition [327] ] of our Evangelical and Apostolic faith, to wit, that
   as we confess the holy and inseparable Trinity, that is, the Father,
   the Son and the Holy Ghost, to be of one deity, of one nature and
   substance or essence, so we will profess also that it has one natural
   will, power, operation, domination, majesty, potency, and glory.  And
   whatever is said of the same Holy Trinity essentially in singular
   number we understand to refer to the one nature of the three
   consubstantial Persons, having been so taught by canonical logic.  But
   when we make a confession concerning one of the same three Persons of
   that Holy Trinity, of the Son of God, or God the Word, and of the
   mystery of his adorable dispensation according to the flesh, we assert
   that all things are double in the one and the same our Lord and Saviour
   Jesus Christ according to the Evangelical tradition, that is to say, we
   confess his two natures, to wit the divine and the human, of which and
   in which he, even after the wonderful and inseparable union, subsists.
   And we confess that each of his natures has its own natural propriety,
   and that the divine, has all things that are divine, without any sin.
   And we recognize that each one (of the two natures) of the one and the
   same incarnated, that is, humanated (humanati) Word of God is in him
   unconfusedly, inseparably and unchangeably, intelligence alone
   discerning a unity, to avoid the error of confusion.  For we equally
   detest the blasphemy of division and of commixture.  For when we
   confess two natures and two natural wills, and two natural operations
   in our one Lord Jesus Christ, we do not assert that they are contrary
   or opposed one to the other (as those who err from the path of truth
   and accuse the apostolic tradition of doing.  Far be this impiety from
   the hearts of the faithful!), nor as though separated (per se
   separated) in two persons or subsistences, but we say that as the same
   our Lord Jesus Christ has two natures so also he has two natural wills
   and operations, to wit, the divine and the human:  the divine will and
   operation he has in common with the coessential Father from all
   eternity:  the human, he has received from us, taken with our nature in
   time.  This is the apostolic and evangelic tradition, which the
   spiritual mother of your most felicitous empire, the Apostolic Church
   of Christ, holds.

   This is the pure expression of piety.  This is the true and immaculate
   profession of the Christian religion, not invented by human cunning,
   but which was taught by the Holy Ghost through the princes of the
   Apostles.  This is the firm and irreprehensible doctrine of the holy
   Apostles, the integrity of the sincere piety of which, so long as it is
   preached freely, defends the empire of your Tranquillity in the
   Christian commonwealth, and exults [will defend it, will render it
   stable; and exulting], and (as we firmly trust) will demonstrate it
   full of happiness.  Believe your most humble [servant], my most
   Christian lords and sons, that I am pouring forth these prayers with my
   tears, or its stability and exultation [in Greek exaltation].  And
   these things I (although unworthy and insignificant) dare advise
   through my sincere love, because your God-granted victory is our
   salvation, the happiness of your Tranquillity is our joy, the
   harmlessness of your kindness is the security of our littleness.  And
   therefore I beseech you with a contrite heart and rivers of tears, with
   prostrated mind, deign to stretch forth your most clement right hand to
   the Apostolic doctrine which the co-worker of your pious labours, the
   blessed apostle Peter, has delivered, that it be not hidden under a
   bushel, but that it be preached in the whole earth more shrilly than a
   bugle:  because the true confession thereof for which Peter was
   pronounced blessed by the Lord of all things, was revealed by the
   Father of heaven, for he received from the Redeemer of all himself, by
   three commendations, the duty of feeding the spiritual sheep of the
   Church; under whose protecting shield, this Apostolic Church of his has
   never turned away from the path of truth in any direction of error,
   whose authority, as that of the Prince of all the Apostles, the whole
   Catholic Church, and the Ecumenical Synods have faithfully embraced,
   and followed in all things; and all the venerable Fathers have embraced
   its Apostolic doctrine, through which they as the most approved
   luminaries of the Church of Christ have shone; and the holy orthodox
   doctors have venerated and followed it, while the heretics have pursued
   it with false criminations and with derogatory hatred.  This is the
   living tradition of the Apostles of Christ, which his Church holds
   everywhere, which is chiefly to be loved and fostered, and is to be
   preached with confidence, which conciliates with God through its
   truthful confession, which also renders one commendable to Christ the
   Lord, which keeps the Christian empire of your Clemency, which gives
   far-reaching victories to your most pious Fortitude from the Lord of
   heaven, which accompanies you in battle, and defeats your foes; which
   protects on every side as an impregnable wall your God-sprung empire,
   which throws terror into opposing nations, and smites them with the
   divine wrath, which also in wars celestially gives triumphal palms over
   the downfall and subjection of the enemy, and ever guards your most
   faithful sovereignty secure and joyful in peace.  For this is the rule
   of the true faith, which this spiritual mother of your most tranquil
   empire, the Apostolic Church of Christ, has both in prosperity and in
   adversity always held and defended with energy; which, it will be
   proved, by the grace of Almighty God, has never erred from the path of
   the apostolic tradition, nor has she been depraved by yielding to
   heretical innovations, but from the beginning she has received the
   Christian faith from her founders, the princes of the Apostles of
   Christ, and remains undefiled unto the end, according to the divine
   promise of the Lord and Saviour himself, which he uttered in the holy
   Gospels to the prince of his disciples:  saying, "Peter, Peter, behold,
   Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift you as wheat; but I
   have prayed for thee, that (thy) faith fail not.  And when thou art
   converted, strengthen thy brethren."  Let your tranquil Clemency
   therefore consider, since it is the Lord and Saviour of all, whose
   faith it is, that promised that Peter's faith should not fail and
   exhorted him to strengthen his brethren, how it is known to all that
   the Apostolic pontiffs, the predecessors of my littleness, have always
   confidently done this very thing:  of whom also our littleness, since I
   have received this ministry by divine designation, wishes to be the
   follower, although unequal to them and the least of all.  For woe is
   me, if I neglect to preach the truth of my Lord, which they have
   sincerely preached.  Woe is me, if I cover over with silence the truth
   which I am bidden to give to the exchangers, i.e., to teach to the
   Christian people and imbue it therewith.  What shall I say in the
   future examination by Christ himself, if I blush (which God forbid!) to
   preach here the truth of his words?  What satisfaction shall I be able
   to give for myself, what for the souls committed to me, when he demands
   a strict account of the office I have received?  Who, then, my most
   clement and most pious lords and sons, (I speak trembling and prostrate
   in spirit) would not be stirred by that admirable promise, which is
   made to the faithful:  "Whoever shall confess me before men, him also
   will I confess before my Father, who is in heaven"?  And which one even
   of the infidels shall not be terrified by that most severe threat, in
   which he protests that he will be full of wrath, and declares that
   "Whoever shall deny me before men, him also will I deny before my
   Father, who is in heaven"?  Whence also blessed Paul, the apostle of
   the Gentiles, gives warning and says:  "But though we, or an angel from
   the heaven should preach to you any other Gospel from what we have
   evangelized to you, let him be anathema."  Since, therefore, such an
   extremity of punishment overhangs the corruptors, or suppressors of
   truth by silence, would not any one flee from an attempt at curtailing
   the truth of the Lord's faith?  Wherefore the predecessors of Apostolic
   memory of my littleness, learned in the doctrine of the Lord, ever
   since the prelates of the Church of Constantinople have been trying to
   introduce into the immaculate Church of Christ an heretical innovation,
   have never ceased to exhort and warn them with many prayers, that they
   should, at least by silence, desist from the heretical error of the
   depraved dogma, lest from this they make the beginning of a split in
   the unity of the Church, by asserting one will, and one operation of
   the two natures in the one Jesus Christ our Lord:  a thing which the
   Arians and the Apollinarists, the Eutychians, the Timotheans, the
   Acephali, the Theodosians and the Gaianitæ taught, and every heretical
   madness, whether of those who confound, or of those who divide the
   mystery of the Incarnation of Christ.  Those that confound the mystery
   of the holy Incarnation, inasmuch as they say that there is one nature
   of the deity and humanity of Christ, contend that he has one will, as
   of one, and (one) personal operation.  But they who divide, on the
   other hand, the inseparable union, unite the two natures which they
   acknowledge that the Saviour possesses, not however in an union which
   is recognized to be hypostatic; but blasphemously join them by concord,
   through the affection of the will, like two subsistences, i.e., two
   somebodies.  Moreover, the Apostolic Church of Christ, the spiritual
   mother of your God-founded empire, confesses one Jesus Christ our Lord
   existing of and in two natures, and she maintains that his two natures,
   to wit, the divine and the human, exist in him unconfused even after
   their inseparable union, and she acknowledges that each of these
   natures of Christ is perfect in the proprieties of its nature, and she
   confesses that all things belonging to the proprieties of the natures
   are double, because the same our Lord Jesus Christ himself is both
   perfect God and perfect man, of two and in two natures:  and after his
   wonderful Incarnation, his deity cannot be thought of without his
   humanity, nor his humanity without his deity.  Consequently, therefore,
   according to the rule of the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of
   Christ, she also confesses and preaches that there are in him two
   natural wills and two natural operations.  For if anybody should mean a
   personal will, when in the holy Trinity there are said to be three
   Persons, it would be necessary that there should be asserted three
   personal wills, and three personal operations (which is absurd and
   truly profane).  Since, as the truth of the Christian faith holds, the
   will is natural, where the one nature of the holy and inseparable
   Trinity is spoken of, it must be consistently understood that there is
   one natural will, and one natural operation.  But when in truth we
   confess that in the one person of our Lord Jesus Christ the mediator
   between God and men, there are two natures (that is to say the divine
   and the human), even after his admirable union, just as we canonically
   confess the two natures of one and the same person, so too we confess
   his two natural wills and two natural operations.  But that the
   understanding of this truthful confession may become clear to your
   Piety's mind from the God-inspired doctrine of the Old and the New
   Testament, (for your Clemency is incomparably more able to penetrate
   the meaning of the sacred Scriptures, than our littleness to set it
   forth in flowing words), our Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is true and
   perfect God, and true and perfect man, in his holy Gospels shews forth
   in some instances human things, in others, divine, and still in others
   both together, making a manifestation concerning himself in order that
   he might instruct his faithful to believe and preach that he is both
   true God and true man.  Thus as man he prays to the Father to take away
   the cup of suffering, because in him our human nature was complete, sin
   only excepted, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
   nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt."  And in another
   passage:  "Not my will, but thine be done."  If we wish to know the
   meaning of which testimony as explained by the holy and approved
   Fathers, and truly to understand what "my will," what "thine" signify,
   the blessed Ambrose in his second book to the Emperor Gratian, of
   blessed memory, teaches us the meaning of this passage in these words,
   saying:  "He then, receives my will, he takes my sorrow, I confidently
   call it sorrow as I am speaking of the cross, mine is the will, which
   he calls his, because he bears my sorrow as man, he spoke as a man, and
   therefore he says:  Not as I will but as thou wilt.'"  Mine is the
   sadness which he has received according to my affection. [328]   See,
   most pious of princes, how clearly here this holy Father sets forth
   that the words our Lord used in his prayer, "Not my will," pertain to
   his humanity; through which also he is said, according to the teaching
   of Blessed Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, to have "become obedient
   unto death, even the death of the Cross."  Wherefore also it is taught
   us that he was obedient to his parents, which must piously be
   understood to refer to his voluntary obedience, not according to his
   divinity (by which he governs all things), but according to his
   humanity, by which he spontaneously submitted himself to his parents.
   St. Luke the Evangelist likewise bears witness to the same thing,
   telling how the same our Lord Jesus Christ prayed according to his
   humanity to his Father, and said, "Father, if it be possible let the
   cup pass from me; nevertheless not my will but thine be done,"--which
   passage Athanasius, the Confessor of Christ, and Archbishop of the
   Church of Alexandria, in his book against Apollinaris the heretic,
   concerning the Trinity and the Incarnation, also understanding the
   wills to be two, thus explains:  And when he says, "Father, if it be
   possible, let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not my will but thine
   be done," and again, "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak;" he
   shews that there are two wills, the one human which is the will of the
   flesh, but the other divine.  For his human will, out of the weakness
   of the flesh was fleeing away from the passion, but his divine will was
   ready for it.  What truer explanation could be found?  For how is it
   possible not to acknowledge in him two wills, to wit, a human and a
   divine, when in him, even after the inseparable union, there are two
   natures according to the definitions of the synods?  For John also, who
   leaned upon the Lord's breast, his beloved disciple, shews forth the
   same self-restraint in these words:  "I came down from heaven not to do
   mine own will but the will of the Father that sent me."  And again:
   "This is the will of him that sent me, that of all that he gave me I
   should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day."
   Again he introduces the Lord as disputing with the Jews, and saying
   among other things:  "I seek not mine own will, but the will of him
   that sent me."  On the meaning of which divine words blessed Augustine,
   a most illustrious doctor, thus writes in his book against Maximinus
   the Arian.  He says, "When the Son says to the Father Not what I will,
   but what thou wilt,' what doth it profit thee, that thou broughtest thy
   words into subjection and sayest, It shews truly that his will was
   subject to his Father, as though we would deny that the will of man
   should be subject to the will of God?  For that the Lord said this in
   his human nature, anyone will quickly see who studies attentively this
   place of the Gospel.  For therein he says, My soul is exceeding
   sorrowful even unto death.'  Can this possibly be said of the nature of
   the One Word?  But, O man, who thinkest to make the nature of the Holy
   Ghost to groan, why do you say that the nature of the Only-begotten
   Word of God cannot be sad?  But to prevent anyone arguing in this way,
   he does not say I am sad;' (and even if he had so said, it could
   properly only have been understood of his human nature) but he says My
   soul is sad,' which soul he has as man; however in this also which he
   said, Not what I will' he shewed that he willed something different
   from what the Father did, which he could not have done except in his
   human nature, since he did not introduce our infirmity into his divine
   nature, but would transfigure human affection.  For had he not been
   made man, the Only Word could in no way have said to the Father, Not
   what I will.'  For it could never be possible for that immutable nature
   to will anything different from what the Father willed.  If you would
   but make this distinction, O ye Arians, ye would not be heretics."

   In this disputation this venerable Father shews that when the Lord says
   "his own" he means the will of his humanity, and when he says not to do
   "his own will," he teaches us not chiefly to seek our own wills but
   that through obedience we should submit our wills to the Divine Will.
   From all which it is evident that he had a human will by which he
   obeyed his Father, and that he had in himself this same human will
   immaculate from all sin, as true God and man.  Which thing St. Ambrose
   also thus treats of in his explanation of St. Luke the Evangelist.

   [After this follows a catena of Patristic quotations which I have not
   thought worth while to produce in full.  After St. Ambrose he cites St.
   Leo, then St. Gregory Nazianzen, then St. Augustine.  (L. & C., col.
   647.)]

   From which testimonies it is clear that each of those natures which the
   spiritual Doctor has here enumerated has its own natural property, and
   that to each one a will ought to be assigned.  For an angelic nature
   cannot have a divine or a human will, neither can a human nature have a
   divine or an angelic will.  For no nature can have anything or any
   motion which pertains to another nature but only that which is
   naturally given by creation.  And as this is the truth of the matter it
   is most certainly clear that we must needs confess that in our Lord
   Jesus Christ there are two natures and substances, to wit, the Divine
   and human, united in his one subsistence or person, and that we further
   confess that there are in him two natural wills, viz.:  the divine and
   the human, for his divinity so far as its nature is concerned could not
   be said to possess a human will, nor should his humanity be believed to
   have naturally a divine will:  And again, neither of these two
   substances of Christ must be confessed as being without a natural will;
   but his human will was lifted up by the omnipotency of his divinity,
   and his divine will was revealed to men through his humanity.
   Therefore it is necessary to refer to him as God such things as are
   divine, and as man such things as are human; and each must be truly
   recognized through the hypostatic union of the one and the same our
   Lord Jesus Christ, which the most true decree of the Council of
   Chalcedon sets forth--[Here follows citation.]  This same thing also
   the holy synod which was gathered together in Constantinople in the
   time of the Emperor Justinian of august memory, teaches in the vii^th.
   chapter of its definitions.  [Here follows the citation.]  Moreover it
   is necessary that we should faithfully keep what those Venerable Synods
   taught, so that we never take away the difference of natures as a
   result of the union, but confess one Christ, true and perfect God and
   also true and perfect man, the propriety of each nature being kept
   intact.  Wherefore, if in no respect the difference of the natures of
   our Lord Jesus Christ has been taken away, it is necessary that we
   preserve this same difference in all its proprieties.  For whoso
   teaches that the difference is in no respect to be taken away, declares
   that it must be preserved in all things.  But when the heretics and the
   followers of heretics say that there is but one will and one operation,
   how is this difference recognized?  Or where is the difference which
   has been defined by this holy Synod preserved?  While if it is asserted
   that there is but one will in him (which is absurd), those who make
   this assertion must needs say that that will is either human or divine,
   or else composite from both, mixed and confused, or (according to the
   teaching of all heretics) that Christ has one will and one operation,
   proceeding from his one composite nature (as they hold).  And thus,
   without any doubt, the difference of nature is destroyed, which the
   holy synods declared to be preserved in all respects even after the
   admirable union.  Because, though they taught that Christ was one, his
   person and substance one, yet on account of the union of the natures
   which was made hypostatically, they likewise decreed that we should
   clearly acknowledge and teach the difference of those natures which
   were united in him, after the admirable union.  Therefore if the
   proprieties of the natures in the same our one Lord Jesus Christ were
   preserved on account of the difference [of the natures], it is
   congruous that we should with full faith confess also the difference of
   his natural wills and operations, in order that we may be shown to have
   followed in all respects their doctrine, and may admit into the Church
   of Christ no heretical novelty.

   And although there exist numerous works of the other holy Fathers,
   nevertheless we subjoin to this our humble exposition a few testimonies
   out of the books which are in Greek, for the sake of fastidiousness.
   [329]

   [Here follows a catena of passages from the Greek fathers, viz.:  St.
   Gregory Theologus, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. John bishop of
   Constantinople, St. Cyril, bishop of Alexandria.  (L. & C., col. 654.)]

   From these truthful testimonies it is also demonstrated that these
   venerable fathers predicated in the one and the same Lord Jesus Christ
   two natural wills, viz.:  a divine and a human, for when St. Gregory
   Nazianzen says, "The willing of that man who is understood to be the
   Saviour," he shows that the human will of the Saviour was deified
   through its union with the Word, and therefore it is not contrary to
   God.  So likewise he proves that he had a human, although deified will,
   and this same he had (as he teaches in what follows) as well as his
   divine will, which was one and the same with that of the Father.  If
   therefore he had a divine and a deified will, he had also two wills.
   For what is divine by nature has no need of being deified; and what is
   deified is not truly divine by nature.  And when St. Gregory Nyssen, a
   great bishop, says that the true confession of the mystery is, that
   there should be understood one human will and another a divine will in
   Christ, what does he bid us understand when he says one and another
   will, except that there are manifestly two wills?

   [He next proceeds to comment upon the passage cited from St. John, then
   upon that from St. Cyril of Alexandria.  After this follow quotations
   from St. Hilary, St. Athanasius, St. Denys the Areopagite, St. Ambrose,
   St. Leo, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Cyril of Alexandria, which are next
   commented on in their order. He then proceeds:  (L. & C., col. 662.)]

   There are not lacking most telling passages in other of the venerable
   fathers, who speak clearly of the two natural operations in Christ, not
   to mention St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. John of Constantinople, or those
   who afterwards conducted the laborious conflicts in defence of the
   venerable council of Chalcedon and of the Tome of St. Leo against the
   heretics from whose error the assertion of this new dogma has arisen:
   that is to say, John, bishop of Scythopolis, Eulogius, bishop of
   Alexandria, Euphræmius and Anastasius the elder, most worthy rulers of
   the church of Theopolis, and above all that emulator of the true and
   apostolic faith, the Emperor Justinian of pious memory, whose
   uprightness of faith exalted the Christian State as much as his sincere
   confession pleased God.  And his pious memory is esteemed worthy of
   veneration by all nations, whose uprightness of faith was disseminated
   with praise throughout the whole world by his most august edicts:  one
   of these, to wit, that addressed to Zoilus, the patriarch of
   Alexandria, against the heresy of the Acephali to satisfy them of the
   rectitude of the apostolic faith, we offer to your most tranquil
   Christianity, sending it together with this paper of our lowliness
   through the same carriers.  But lest this declaration should be thought
   burdensome on account of its length, we have inserted in this
   declaration of our humility only a few of the testimonies of the Holy
   Fathers, especially [when writing to those] on whom the care and
   arrangement of the whole world as on a firm foundation are recognized
   to rest; since this is altogether incomparable and great, that the care
   of the whole Christian State being laid aside for a little out of love
   and zeal for true religion, your august and most religious clemency
   should desire to understand more clearly the doctrine of apostolical
   preaching.  For from the different approved fathers the truth of the
   Orthodox faith has become clear although the treatment is short.  For
   the approved fathers thought it to be superfluous to discourse at
   length upon what was evident and clear to all; for who, even if he be
   dull of wit, does not perceive what is evident to all?  For it is
   impossible and contrary to the order of nature that there should be a
   nature without a natural operation:  and even the heretics did not dare
   to say this, although they were, all of them, hunting for human
   craftiness and cunning questions against the orthodoxy of the faith,
   and arguments agreeable to their depravities.

   How then can that now be asserted which never was said by the holy
   orthodox fathers, nor even was presumptuously invented by the profane
   heretics, viz.:  that of the two natures of Christ, the divine and the
   human, the proprieties of each of which are recognized as being
   preserved in Christ, that anyone in sound mind should declare there was
   but one operation?  Since if there is one, let them say whether it be
   temporal or eternal, divine or human, uncreated or created:  the same
   as that of the Father or different from that of the Father.  If
   therefore it is one, that one and the same must be common to the
   divinity and to the humanity (which is absurd), therefore while the Son
   of God, who is both God and man, wrought human things on earth,
   likewise also the Father worked with him according to his nature
   (naturaliter, phusikos); for what things the Father doeth these the Son
   also doeth likewise.  But if (as is the truth) the human acts which
   Christ did are to be referred to his person alone as the Son, which is
   not the same as that of the Father; in one nature Christ worked one set
   of works, and in the other another, so that according to his divinity
   the Son does the same things that the Father does; and likewise
   according to his humanity, what things are proper to the manhood, those
   same, he as man, did because he is truly both God and man.  For which
   reason we rightly believe that that same person, since he is one, has
   two natural operations, to wit, the divine and the human, one
   uncreated, and the other created, as true and perfect God and as true
   and perfect man, the one and the same, the mediator between God and
   men, the Lord Jesus Christ.  Wherefore from the quality of the
   operations there is recognized a difference void of offence (aproskopos
   ) of the natures which are joined in Christ through the hypostatic
   union.  We now proceed to cite some passages from the execrable
   writings of the heretics hated of God, [330] whose words and sayings we
   equally abominate, for the demonstration of those things which our
   inventors of new dogma have followed teaching that in Christ there is
   but one will and one operation.

   [Then follow quotations from Apollinaris, Severus, Theodosius of
   Alexandria.  (L. & C., col. 667.)]

   Behold, most pious lords and sons, by the testimonies of the holy
   Fathers, as by spiritual rays, the doctrine of the Catholic and
   Apostolic Church has been illustrated and the darkness of heretical
   blindness, which is offering error to men for imitation, has been
   revealed.  Now it is necessary that the new doctrine should follow
   somebody, and by whose authority it is supported, we shall note.

   [Here follow quotations from Cyrus of Alexandria, Theodore of Pharon,
   Sergius of Constantinople, Pyrrhus, Paulus his successor, Peter his
   successor.  (L. & C., col. 670.)]

   Let then your God-founded clemency with the internal eye of
   discrimination, which for the guidance of the Christian people you have
   been deemed worthy to receive by the Grace of God, take heed which one
   of such doctors you think the Christian people should follow, the
   doctrine of which one of these they should embrace so as to be saved;
   for they condemn all, and each one of them the other, according as the
   various and unstable definitions in their writings assert sometimes
   that there is one will and one operation, sometimes that there is
   neither one nor two operations, sometimes one will and operation, and
   again two wills and two operations, likewise one will and one
   operation, and again neither one, nor two, and somebody else one and
   two.

   Who does not hate, and rage against, and avoid such blind errors, if he
   have any desire to be saved and seek to offer to the Lord at his coming
   a right faith?  Therefore the Holy Church of God, the mother of your
   most Christian power, should be delivered and liberated with all your
   might (through the help of God) from the errors of such teachers, and
   the evangelical and apostolic uprightness of the orthodox faith, which
   has been established upon the firm rock of this Church of blessed
   Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, which by his grace and guardianship
   remains free from all error, [that faith I say] the whole number of
   rulers and priests, of the clergy and of the people, unanimously should
   confess and preach with us as the true declaration of the Apostolic
   tradition, in order to please God and to save their own souls.

   And these things we have taken pains to insert in the tractate of our
   humility, for we have been afflicted and have groaned without ceasing
   that such grievous errors should be entertained by bishops of the
   Church, who are zealous to establish their own peculiar views rather
   than the truth of the faith, and think that our sincere fraternal
   admonition has its spring in a contempt for them.  And indeed the
   apostolic predecessors of my humility admonished, begged, upbraided,
   besought, reproved, and exercised every kind of exhortation that the
   recent wound might receive a remedy, moved thereto not by a mind filled
   with hatred (God is my witness) nor through the elation of boasting,
   nor through the opposition of contention, nor through an inane desire
   to find some fault with their teachings, nor through anything akin to
   the love of arrogance, but out of zeal for the uprightness of the
   truth, and for the rule of the confession of the pure Gospel, and for
   the salvation of souls, and for the stability of the Christian state,
   and for the safety of those who rule the Roman Empire.  Nor did they
   cease from their admonitions after the long duration of this
   domesticated error, but always exhorted and bore record, and that with
   fraternal charity, not through malice or pertinacious hatred (far be it
   from the Christian heart to rejoice at another's fall, when the Lord of
   all teaches, "I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he be
   converted and live;" and who rejoiceth over one sinner that repenteth
   more than over ninety-and-nine just persons:  who came down from heaven
   to earth to deliver the lost sheep, inclining the power of his
   majesty), but desiring them with outstretched spiritual arms, and
   exhorting to embrace them returning to the unity of the orthodox faith,
   and awaiting their conversion to the full rectitude of the orthodox
   faith:  that they might not make themselves aliens from our communion,
   that is from the communion of blessed Peter the Apostle, whose
   ministry, we (though unworthy) exercise, and preach the faith he has
   handed down, but that they should together with us pray Christ the
   Lord, the spotless sacrifice, for the stability of your most strong and
   serene Empire.

   We believe, most pious lords [singular in the Latin] of all things,
   that there has been left no possible ambiguity which can prevent the
   recognizing of those who have followed the inventors of new dogma.  For
   the sweetness of spiritual understanding with which the sayings of the
   Fathers are full has become evident to the eyes of all; and the stench
   of the heretics, to be avoided by all the faithful, has been made
   notorious.  Nor has it remained unknown that the inventors of new dogma
   have been shewn to be the followers of heretics, and not the walkers in
   the footsteps of the holy Fathers:  therefore whoever wishes to colour
   any error of his whatever, is condemned by the light of truth, as the
   Apostle of the Gentiles says, "For everything that doth make manifest
   is light," for the truth ever remains constant and the same, but
   falsehood is ever varying, and in its wanderings adopting things
   mutually contradictory.  On this account the inventors of the new dogma
   have been shewn to have taught things mutually contradictory, because
   they were not willing to be followers of the Evangelical and Apostolic
   faith.  Wherefore since the truth has shone forth by the observations
   of your God-inspired piety, and falsity which has been exposed has
   attained the contempt which it deserved, it remains that the crowned
   truth may shine forth victoriously through the pious favours of your
   God-crowned clemency; and that the error of novelty with its inventors
   and with those who follow their doctrine, may receive the punishment
   due their presumption, and be cast forth from the midst of the orthodox
   prelates for the heretical pravity of their innovation, which into the
   holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ they have endeavoured to
   introduce, and to stain with the contagion of heretical pravity the
   indivisible and unspotted body of the Church [of Christ].  For it is
   not just that the injurious should injure the innocent, nor that the
   offences of some should be visited upon the inoffensive, for even if in
   this world to the condemned mercy is extended, yet they who are thus
   spared reap for that sparing no benefit in the judgment of God, and by
   those thus sparing them there is incurred no little danger for their
   unlawful compassion.

   But we believe that Almighty God has reserved for the happy days of
   your gentleness the amending of these things, that filling on earth the
   place and zeal of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, who has vouchsafed to
   crown your rule, ye may judge just judgment for his Evangelical and
   Apostolical truth:  for although he be the Redeemer and Saviour of the
   human race yet he suffered injury, and bore it even until now, and
   inspired the empire of your fortitude, so that you should be worthy to
   follow the cause of his faith (as equity demanded, and as the
   determination of the Holy Fathers and of the Five General Synods
   decreed), and that you should avenge, through his guardianship, on the
   spurners of his faith, the injury done your Redeemer and Colleague in
   reigning, thus fulfilling magnanimously with imperial clemency that
   prophetic utterance with which David the King and Prophet, spake to
   God, saying, "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up."  Wherefore
   having been extolled for so God-pleasing a zeal, he was deemed fit to
   hear that blessed word spoken by the Creator of all men, "I have found
   David, a man after my heart, who will do all my will."  And to him also
   it was promised in the Psalms, "I have found David, my servant, with my
   holy oil have I anointed him:  My hand shall aid him and my arm shall
   comfort him," so that the most pious majesty of your Christian clemency
   may work to further the cause of Christ with burning zeal for the sake
   of remuneration, and may he make all the acts of your most powerful
   empire both happy and prosperous, who hath stored up his promise in the
   Holy Gospels, saying, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and all these
   things shall be added unto you."  For all, to whom has come the
   knowledge of the sacred heads, [331] have been offering innumerable
   thanksgivings and unceasing praises to the defender of your most
   powerful dominion, being filled with admiration for the greatness of
   your clemency, in that you have so benignly set forth the kind
   intention of your august magnanimity; for in truth, as most pious and
   most just princes, you have deigned to treat divine things with the
   fear of God, having promised every immunity to those persons sent to
   you from our littleness.

   And we are confident that what your pious clemency has promised, you
   are powerful to carry out, in order that what has been vowed and
   promised to God by the religious philanthropy beyond your Christian
   power, may nevertheless be fulfilled by the aid of his omnipotency.

   Wherefore let praise by all Christian nations, and eternal memory, and
   frequent prayer be poured forth before the Lord Christ, whose is the
   cause, for your safety, and your triumphs, and your complete victory,
   that the nations of the Gentiles, being impressed by the terror of the
   supernal majesty, may lay down most humbly their necks beneath the
   sceptre of your most powerful rule, that the power of your most pious
   kingdom may continue until the ceaseless joy of the eternal kingdom
   succeeds to this temporal reign.  Nor could anything be found more
   likely to commend the clemency of your unconquerable fortitude to the
   divine majesty, than that those who err from the rule of truth should
   be repelled and the integrity of our Evangelical and Apostolic faith
   should be everywhere set forth and preached.

   Moreover, most pious and God-instructed sons and lords, if the
   Archbishop of the Church of Constantinople shall choose to hold and to
   preach with us this most unblameable rule of Apostolic doctrine of the
   Sacred Scriptures, of the venerable synods, of the spiritual Fathers,
   according to their evangelical understanding, through which the form of
   the truth has been set forth by us through the assistance of the
   Spirit, there will ensue great peace to them that love the name of God,
   and there will remain no scandal of dissension, and that will come to
   pass which is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, when through the
   grace of the Holy Spirit the people had come to the acknowledging of
   Christianity, all of us will be of one heart and of one mind.  But if
   (which God forbid!) he shall prefer to embrace the novelty but lately
   introduced by others; and shall ensnare himself with doctrines which
   are alien to the rule of orthodox truth and of our Apostolic faith, to
   decline which as injurious to souls these have put off, despite the
   exhortation and admonitions of our predecessors in the Apostolic See,
   down to this day, he himself should know what kind of an answer he will
   have to give for such contempt in the divine examination of Christ
   before the judge of all, who is in heaven, to whom when he cometh to
   judgment also we ourselves are about to give an account of the ministry
   of preaching the truth which has been committed to us, or for the
   toleration of things contrary to the Christian religion:  and may we
   (as I humbly pray) preserve unconfusedly and freely, with simplicity
   and purity, whole and undefiled, the Apostolic and Evangelical rule of
   the right faith as we have received it from the beginning.  And may
   your most august serenity, for the affection and reverence which you
   bear to the Catholic and Apostolic right faith, receive the perfect
   reward of your pious labours from our Lord Jesus Christ himself, the
   ruler with you of your Christian empire, whose true confession you
   desire to preserve undefiled, because nothing in any respect has been
   neglected or omitted by your God-crowned clemency, which could minister
   to the peace of the churches, provided always that the integrity of the
   true faith was maintained:  since God, the Judge of all, who disposes
   the ending of all matters as he deems most expedient, seeks out the
   intent of the heart, and will accept a zeal for piety.  Therefore I
   exhort you, O most pious and clement Emperor, and together with my
   littleness every Christian man exhorts you on bended knee with all
   humility, that to all the God-pleasing goodnesses and admirable
   imperial benefits which the heavenly condescension has vouchsafed to
   grant to the human race through your God-accepted care, this also you
   would order, for the redintegration of perfect piety, to offer an
   acceptable sacrifice to Christ the Lord your fellow-ruler, granting
   entire impunity, and free faculty of speech to each one wishing to
   speak, and to urge a word in defence of the faith which he believes and
   holds, so that it may most manifestly be recognized by all that by no
   terror, by no force, by no threat or aversion any one wishing to speak
   for the truth of the Catholic and Apostolic faith, has been prohibited
   or repulsed, and that all unanimously may glorify your imperial
   (divinam) majesty, throughout the whole space of their lives for so
   great and so inestimable a good, and may pour forth unceasing prayers
   to Christ the Lord that your most strong empire may be preserved
   untouched and exalted.  The Subscription.  May the grace from above
   keep your empire, most pious lords, and place beneath its feet the neck
   of all the nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [327] Only in the Latin.

   [328] Meo affectu:  kat' emen diathesin.

   [329] Propter fastidium, what this may mean I have no idea; the Greek
   is still more extraordinary:  rhathumias (vel. baruthumias) charin.

   [330] The meaning of this passage is clear enough but the text is
   slightly corrupt.

   [331] I.e., the imperial edicts.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Letter of Agatho and of the Roman Synod of 125 Bishops which was to
   Serve as an Instruction to the Legates Sent to Attend the Sixth Synod.

   (Found in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 677 et seqq., and
   in Migne, Pat. Lat. Tom. LXXXVII., col. 1215 et seqq.  [This last text,
   which is Mansi's, I have followed].)

   To the most pious Lords and most serene victors and conquerors, our own
   sons beloved of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, Constantine, the
   great Emperor, and Heraclius and Tiberius, Augustuses, Agatho, the
   bishop and servant of the servants of God, together with all the synods
   subject to the council of the Apostolic See.

   [The Letter opens with a number of compliments to the Emperor, much in
   style and matter like the introduction of the preceding letter.  I have
   not thought it worth while to translate this, but have begun at the
   doctrinal part, which is given to the reader in full.  (Labbe and
   Cossart, col. 682.)]

   We believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and
   of all things visible and invisible; and in his only-begotten Son, who
   was begotten of him before all worlds; very God of Very God, Light of
   Light, begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father, that
   is of the same substance as the Father; by him were all things made
   which are in heaven and which are in earth; and in the Holy Ghost, the
   Lord and giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father, and with the
   Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified; the Trinity in
   unity and Unity in trinity; a unity so far as essence is concerned, but
   a trinity of persons or subsistences; and so we confess God the Father,
   God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; not three gods, but one God, the
   Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost:  not a subsistency of three names,
   but one substance of three subsistences; and of these persons one is
   the essence, or substance or nature, that is to say one is the godhead,
   one the eternity, one the power, one the kingdom, one the glory, one
   the adoration, one the essential will and operation of the same Holy
   and inseparable Trinity, which hath created all things, hath made
   disposition of them, and still contains them.

   Moreover we confess that one of the same holy consubstantial Trinity,
   God the Word, who was begotten of the Father before the worlds, in the
   last days of the world for us and for our salvation came down from
   heaven, and was incarnate of the Holy Ghost, and of our Lady, the holy,
   immaculate, ever-virgin and glorious Mary, truly and properly the
   Mother of God, that is to say according to the flesh which was born of
   her; and was truly made man, the same being very God and very man.  God
   of God his Father, but man of his Virgin Mother, incarnate of her flesh
   with a reasonable and intelligent soul:  of one substance with God the
   Father, as touching his godhead, and consubstantial with us as touching
   his manhood, and in all points like unto us, but without sin.  He was
   crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, he suffered, was buried and rose
   again; ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of the
   Father, and he shall come again to judge both the quick and the dead,
   and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

   And this same one Lord of ours, Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of
   God, we acknowledge to subsist of and in two substances unconfusedly,
   unchangeably, indivisibly, inseparably, the difference of the natures
   being by no means taken away by the union, but rather the proprieties
   of each nature being preserved and concurring in one Person and one
   Subsistence, not scattered or divided into two Persons, nor confused
   into one composite nature; but we confess one and the same
   only-begotten Son, God the Word, our Lord Jesus Christ, not one in
   another, nor one added to another, but himself the same in two
   natures--that is to say in the Godhead and in the manhood even after
   the hypostatic union:  for neither was the Word changed into the nature
   of flesh, nor was the flesh transformed into the nature of the Word,
   for each remained what it was by nature.  We discern by contemplation
   alone the distinction between the natures united in him of which
   inconfusedly, inseparably and unchangeably he is composed; for one is
   of both, and through one both, because there are together both the
   height of the deity and the humility of the flesh, each nature
   preserving after the union its own proper character without any defect;
   and each form acting in communion with the other what is proper to
   itself.  The Word working what is proper to the Word, and the flesh
   what is proper to the flesh; of which the one shines with miracles, the
   other bows down beneath injuries.  Wherefore, as we confess that he
   truly has two natures or substances, viz.:  the Godhead and the
   manhood, inconfusedly, indivisibly and unchangeably [united], so also
   the rule of piety instructs us that he has two natural wills and two
   natural operations, as perfect God and perfect man, one and the same
   our Lord Jesus Christ.  And this the apostolic and evangelical
   tradition and the authority of the Holy Fathers (whom the Holy
   Apostolic and Catholic Church and the venerable Synods receive), has
   plainly taught us.

   [The letter goes on to say that this is the traditional faith, and is
   that which was set forth in a council over which Pope Martin presided,
   and that those opposed to this faith have erred from the truth, some in
   one way, and some in another.  It next apologizes for the delay in
   sending the persons ordered by the imperial Sacra, and proceeds thus:
   (Labbe and Cossart, col. 686; Migne, col. 1224).]

   In the first place, a great number of us are spread over a vast extent
   of country even to the sea coast, and the length of their journey
   necessarily took much time.  Moreover we were in hopes of being able to
   join to our humility our fellow-servant and brother bishop, Theodore,
   the archbishop and philosopher of the island of Great Britain, with
   others who have been kept there even till to-day; and to add to these
   divers bishops of this council who have their sees in different parts,
   that our humble suggestion [i.e., the doctrinal definition contained in
   the letters] might proceed from a council of wide-spread influence,
   lest if only a part were cognizant of what was being done, it might
   escape the notice of a part; and especially because among the Gentiles,
   as the Longobards, and the Sclavi, as also the Franks, the French, the
   Goths, and the Britains, there are known to be very many of our
   fellow-servants who do not cease curiously to enquire on the subject,
   that they may know what is being done in the cause of the Apostolic
   faith:  who as they can be of advantage so long as they hold the true
   faith with us, and think in unison with us, so are they found
   troublesome and contrary, if (which may God forbid!) they stumble at
   any article of the faith.  But we, although most humble, yet strive
   with all our might that the commonwealth of your Christian empire may
   be shown to be more sublime than all the nations, for in it has been
   founded the See of Blessed Peter, the prince of the Apostles, by the
   authority of which, all Christian nations venerate and worship with us,
   through the reverence of the blessed Apostle Peter himself.  (This is
   the Latin, which appears to me to be corrupt, the Greek reads as
   follows:  "The authority of which for the truth, all the Christian
   nations together with us worship and revere, according to the honour of
   the blessed Peter the Apostle himself.")

   [The letter ends with prayers for constancy, and blessings on the State
   and Emperor, and hopes for the universal diffusion and acceptance of
   the truth.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Extracts from the Acts.

   Session VIII.

   (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 730.)

   [The Emperor said]

   Let George, the most holy archbishop of this our God-preserved city,
   and let Macarius, the venerable archbishop of Antioch, and let the
   synod subject to them [i.e., their suffragans] say, if they submit to
   the force (ei stoichousi te dunamei) of the suggestions sent by the
   most holy Agatho Pope of Old [332] Rome and by his Synod.

   [The answer of George, with which all his bishops, many of them,
   speaking one by one, agreed except Theodore of Metilene (who handed in
   his assent at the end of the Tenth Session).]

   I have diligently examined the whole force of the suggestions sent to
   your most pious Fortitude, as well by Agatho, the most holy Pope of Old
   [333] Rome, as by his synod, and I have scrutinized the works of the
   holy and approved Fathers, which are laid up in my venerable
   patriarchate, and I have found that all the testimonies of the holy and
   accepted Fathers, which are contained in those suggestions agree with,
   and in no particular differ from, the holy and accepted Fathers.
   Therefore I give my submission to them and thus I profess and believe.

   [The answer of all the rest of the Bishops subject to the See of
   Constantinople.  (Col. 735.)]

   And we, most pious Lord, accepting the teaching of the suggestion sent
   to your most gentle Fortitude by the most holy and blessed Agatho, Pope
   of Old Rome, and of that other suggestion which was adopted by the
   council subject to him, and following the sense therein contained, so
   we are minded, so we profess, and so we believe that in our one Lord
   Jesus Christ, our true God, there are two natures unconfusedly,
   unchangeably, undividedly, and two natural wills and two natural
   operations; and all who have taught, and who now say, that there is but
   one will and one operation in the two natures of our one Lord Jesus
   Christ our true God, we anathematize.

   [The Emperor's demand to Macarius.  (Col. 739.)]

   Let Macarius, the Venerable Archbishop of Antioch, who has now heard
   what has been said by this holy and Ecumenical Synod [demanding the
   expression of his faith], answer what seemeth him good.

   [The answer of Macarius.]

   I do not say that there are two wills or two operations in the
   dispensation of the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, but one will
   and one theandric operation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [332] "Old" omitted in Latin.

   [333] "Old" omitted in Latin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Sentence Against the Monothelites.

   Session XIII.

   (L. and C., Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 943.)

   The holy council said:  After we had reconsidered, according to our
   promise which we had made to your highness, the doctrinal letters of
   Sergius, at one time patriarch of this royal god-protected city to
   Cyrus, who was then bishop of Phasis and to Honorius some time Pope of
   Old Rome, as well as the letter of the latter to the same Sergius, we
   find that these documents are quite foreign to the apostolic dogmas, to
   the declarations of the holy Councils, and to all the accepted Fathers,
   and that they follow the false teachings of the heretics; therefore we
   entirely reject them, and execrate them as hurtful to the soul.  But
   the names of those men whose doctrines we execrate must also be thrust
   forth from the holy Church of God, namely, that of Sergius some time
   bishop of this God-preserved royal city who was the first to write on
   this impious doctrine; also that of Cyrus of Alexandria, of Pyrrhus,
   Paul, and Peter, who died bishops of this God-preserved city, and were
   like-minded with them; and that of Theodore sometime bishop of Pharan,
   all of whom the most holy and thrice blessed Agatho, Pope of Old Rome,
   in his suggestion to our most pious and God-preserved lord and mighty
   Emperor, rejected, because they were minded contrary to our orthodox
   faith, all of whom we define are to be subjected to anathema.  And with
   these we define that there shall be expelled from the holy Church of
   God and anathematized Honorius who was some time Pope of Old Rome,
   because of what we found written by him to Sergius, that in all
   respects he followed his view and confirmed his impious doctrines.  We
   have also examined the synodal letter of Sophronius of holy memory,
   some time Patriarch of the Holy City of Christ our God, Jerusalem, and
   have found it in accordance with the true faith and with the Apostolic
   teachings, and with those of the holy approved Fathers.  Therefore we
   have received it as orthodox and as salutary to the holy Catholic and
   Apostolic Church, and have decreed that it is right that his name be
   inserted in the diptychs of the Holy Churches.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Session XVI.

   (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1010.)

   [The Acclamations of the Fathers.]

   Many years to the Emperor!  Many years to Constantine, our great
   Emperor!  Many years to the Orthodox King!  Many years to our Emperor
   that maketh peace!  Many years to Constantine, a second Martian!  Many
   years to Constantine, a new Theodosius!  Many years to Constantine, a
   new Justinian!  Many years to the keeper of the orthodox faith!  O Lord
   preserve the foundation of the Churches!  O Lord preserve the keeper of
   the faith!

   Many years to Agatho, Pope of Rome!  Many years to George, Patriarch of
   Constantinople!  Many years to Theophanus, Patriarch of Antioch!  Many
   years to the orthodox council!  Many years to the orthodox Senate!

   To Theodore of Pharan, the heretic, anathema!  To Sergius, the heretic,
   anathema!  To Cyrus, the heretic, anathema!  To Honorius, the heretic,
   anathema!  To Pyrrhus, the heretic, anathema!

   To Paul the heretic, anathema!

   To Peter the heretic, anathema!

   To Macarius the heretic, anathema!

   To Stephen the heretic, anathema!

   To Polychronius the heretic, anathema!

   To Apergius of Perga the heretic, anathema!

   To all heretics, anathema!  To all who side with heretics, anathema!

   May the faith of the Christians increase, and long years to the
   orthodox and Ecumenical Council!
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Definition of Faith.

   (Found in the Acts, Session XVIII., L. and C., Concilia, Tom. VI., col.
   1019.)

   The holy, great, and Ecumenical Synod which has been assembled by the
   grace of God, and the religious decree of the most religious and
   faithful and mighty Sovereign Constantine, in this God-protected and
   royal city of Constantinople, New Rome, in the Hall of the imperial
   Palace, called Trullus, has decreed as follows.

   The only-begotten Son, and Word of God the Father, who was made man in
   all things like unto us without sin, Christ our true God, has declared
   expressly in the words of the Gospel, "I am the light of the world; he
   that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
   of life."  And again, "My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
   you."  Our most gentle Sovereign, the champion of orthodoxy, and
   opponent of evil doctrine, being reverentially led by this divinely
   uttered doctrine of peace, and having convened this our holy and
   Ecumenical assembly, has united the judgment of the whole Church.
   Wherefore this our holy and Ecumenical Synod having driven away the
   impious error which had prevailed for a certain time until now, and
   following closely the straight path of the holy and approved Fathers,
   has piously given its full assent to the five holy and Ecumenical
   Synods (that is to say, to that of the 318 holy Fathers who assembled
   in Nice against the raging Arius; and the next in Constantinople of the
   150 God-inspired men against Macedonius the adversary of the Spirit,
   and the impious Apollinaris; and also the first in Ephesus of 200
   venerable men convened against Nestorius the Judaizer; and that in
   Chalcedon of 630 God-inspired Fathers against Eutyches and Dioscorus
   hated of God; and in addition to these, to the last, that is the Fifth
   holy Synod assembled in this place, against Theodore of Mopsuestia,
   Origen, Didymus, and Evagrius, and the writings of Theodoret against
   the Twelve Chapters of the celebrated Cyril, and the Epistle which was
   said to be written by Ibas to Maris the Persian), renewing in all
   things the ancient decrees of religion, and chasing away the impious
   doctrines of irreligion.  And this our holy and Ecumenical Synod
   inspired of God has set its seal to the Creed which was put forth by
   the 318 Fathers, and again religiously confirmed by the 150, which also
   the other holy synods cordially received and ratified for the taking
   away of every soul-destroying heresy.

   The Nicene Creed of the 318 holy Fathers.

   We believe, etc.

   The Creed of the 150 holy Fathers assembled at Constantinople.  We
   believe, etc.

   The holy and Ecumenical Synod further says, this pious and orthodox
   Creed of the Divine grace would be sufficient for the full knowledge
   and confirmation of the orthodox faith.  But as the author of evil,
   who, in the beginning, availed himself of the aid of the serpent, and
   by it brought the poison of death upon the human race, has not
   desisted, but in like manner now, having found suitable instruments for
   working out his will (we mean Theodorus, who was Bishop of Pharan,
   Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter, who were Archbishops of this royal
   city, and moreover, Honorius who was Pope of the elder Rome, Cyrus
   Bishop of Alexandria, Macarius who was lately bishop of Antioch, and
   Stephen his disciple), has actively employed them in raising up for the
   whole Church the stumbling-blocks of one will and one operation in the
   two natures of Christ our true God, one of the Holy Trinity; thus
   disseminating, in novel terms, amongst the orthodox people, an heresy
   similar to the mad and wicked doctrine of the impious Apollinaris,
   Severus, and Themistius, and endeavouring craftily to destroy the
   perfection of the incarnation of the same our Lord Jesus Christ, our
   God, by blasphemously representing his flesh endowed with a rational
   soul as devoid of will or operation.  Christ, therefore, our God, has
   raised up our faithful Sovereign, a new David, having found him a man
   after his own heart, who as it is written, "has not suffered his eyes
   to sleep nor his eyelids to slumber," until he has found a perfect
   declaration of orthodoxy by this our God-collected and holy Synod; for,
   according to the sentence spoken of God, "Where two or three are
   gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them," the
   present holy and Ecumenical Synod faithfully receiving and saluting
   with uplifted hands as well the suggestion which by the most holy and
   blessed Agatho, Pope of ancient Rome, was sent to our most pious and
   faithful Emperor Constantine, which rejected by name those who taught
   or preached one will and one operation in the dispensation of the
   incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ who is our very God, has likewise
   adopted that other synodal suggestion which was sent by the Council
   holden under the same most holy Pope, composed of 125 Bishops, beloved
   of God, to his God-instructed tranquillity, as consonant to the holy
   Council of Chalcedon and to the Tome of the most holy and blessed Leo,
   Pope of the same old Rome, which was directed to St. Flavian, which
   also this Council called the Pillar of the right faith; and also agrees
   with the Synodal Epistles which were written by Blessed Cyril against
   the impious Nestorius and addressed to the Oriental Bishops.  Following
   the five holy Ecumenical Councils and the holy and approved Fathers,
   with one voice defining that our Lord Jesus Christ must be confessed to
   be very God and very man, one of the holy and consubstantial and
   life-giving Trinity, perfect in Deity and perfect in humanity, very God
   and very man, of a reasonable soul and human body subsisting;
   consubstantial with the Father as touching his Godhead and
   consubstantial with us as touching his manhood; in all things like unto
   us, sin only excepted; begotten of his Father before all ages according
   to his Godhead, but in these last days for us men and for our salvation
   made man of the Holy Ghost and of the Virgin Mary, strictly and
   properly the Mother of God according to the flesh; one and the same
   Christ our Lord the only-begotten Son of two natures unconfusedly,
   unchangeably, inseparably indivisibly to be recognized, the
   peculiarities of neither nature being lost by the union but rather the
   proprieties of each nature being preserved, concurring in one Person
   and in one subsistence, not parted or divided into two persons but one
   and the same only-begotten Son of God, the Word, our Lord Jesus Christ,
   according as the Prophets of old have taught us and as our Lord Jesus
   Christ himself hath instructed us, and the Creed of the holy Fathers
   hath delivered to us; defining all this we likewise declare that in him
   are two natural wills and two natural operations indivisibly,
   inconvertibly, inseparably, inconfusedly, according to the teaching of
   the holy Fathers.  And these two natural wills are not contrary the one
   to the other (God forbid!) as the impious heretics assert, but his
   human will follows and that not as resisting and reluctant, but rather
   as subject to his divine and omnipotent will.  For it was right that
   the flesh should be moved but subject to the divine will, according to
   the most wise Athanasius.  For as his flesh is called and is the flesh
   of God the Word, so also the natural will of his flesh is called and is
   the proper will of God the Word, as he himself says:  "I came down from
   heaven, not that I might do mine own will but the will of the Father
   which sent me!" where he calls his own will the will of his flesh,
   inasmuch as his flesh was also his own.  For as his most holy and
   immaculate animated flesh was not destroyed because it was deified but
   continued in its own state and nature (oro te kai logo), so also his
   human will, although deified, was not suppressed, but was rather
   preserved according to the saying of Gregory Theologus:  "His will
   [i.e., the Saviour's] is not contrary to God but altogether deified."

   We glorify two natural operations indivisibly, immutably, inconfusedly,
   inseparably in the same our Lord Jesus Christ our true God, that is to
   say a divine operation and a human operation, according to the divine
   preacher Leo, who most distinctly asserts as follows:  "For each form
   (morphe) does in communion with the other what pertains properly to it,
   the Word, namely, doing that which pertains to the Word, and the flesh
   that which pertains to the flesh."

   For we will not admit one natural operation in God and in the creature,
   as we will not exalt into the divine essence what is created, nor will
   we bring down the glory of the divine nature to the place suited to the
   creature.

   We recognize the miracles and the sufferings as of one and the same
   [Person], but of one or of the other nature of which he is and in which
   he exists, as Cyril admirably says.  Preserving therefore the
   inconfusedness and indivisibility, we make briefly this whole
   confession, believing our Lord Jesus Christ to be one of the Trinity
   and after the incarnation our true God, we say that his two natures
   shone forth in his one subsistence in which he both performed the
   miracles and endured the sufferings through the whole of his economic
   conversation (di holes autou tes oikonomkes anastrophes), and that not
   in appearance only but in very deed, and this by reason of the
   difference of nature which must be recognized in the same Person, for
   although joined together yet each nature wills and does the things
   proper to it and that indivisibly and inconfusedly.  Wherefore we
   confess two wills and two operations, concurring most fitly in him for
   the salvation of the human race.

   These things, therefore, with all diligence and care having been
   formulated by us, we define that it be permitted to no one to bring
   forward, or to write, or to compose, or to think, or to teach a
   different faith.  Whosoever shall presume to compose a different faith,
   or to propose, or teach, or hand to those wishing to be converted to
   the knowledge of the truth, from the Gentiles or Jews, or from any
   heresy, any different Creed; or to introduce a new voice or invention
   of speech to subvert these things which now have been determined by us,
   all these, if they be Bishops or clerics let them be deposed, the
   Bishops from the Episcopate, the clerics from the clergy; but if they
   be monks or laymen:  let them be anathematized.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Prosphoneticus to the Emperor.

   (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1047 et seqq.)

   [This address begins with many compliments to the Emperor, especially
   for his zeal for the true faith.]

   But because the adversary Satan allows no rest, he has raised up the
   very ministers of Christ against him, as if armed and carrying weapons,
   etc.

   [The various heretics are then named and how they were condemned by the
   preceding five councils is set forth.]

   Things being so, it was necessary that your beloved of Christ majesty
   should gather together this all holy, and numerous assembly.

             *          *          *          *          *
   *          *          *          *          *

   Thereafter being inspired by the Holy Ghost, and all agreeing and
   consenting together, and giving our approval to the doctrinal letter of
   our most blessed and exalted pope, Agatho, which he sent to your
   mightiness, as also agreeing to the suggestion of the holy synod of one
   hundred and twenty-five fathers held under him, we teach that one of
   the Holy Trinity, our Lord Jesus Christ, was incarnate, and must be
   celebrated in two perfect natures without division and without
   confusion.  For as the Word, he is consubstantial and eternal with God
   his father; but as taking flesh of the immaculate Virgin Mary, the
   Mother of God, he is perfect man, consubstantial with us and made in
   time.  We declare therefore that he is perfect in Godhead and that the
   same is perfect likewise in manhood, according to the pristine
   tradition of the fathers and the divine definition of Chalcedon.

   And as we recognize two natures, so also we recognize two natural wills
   and two natural operations.  For we dare not say that either of the
   natures which are in Christ in his incarnation is without a will and
   operation:  lest in taking away the proprieties of those natures, we
   likewise take away the natures of which they are the proprieties.  For
   we neither deny the natural will of his humanity, or its natural
   operation:  lest we also deny what is the chief thing of the
   dispensation for our salvation, and lest we attribute passions to the
   Godhead.  For this they were attempting who have recently introduced
   the detestable novelty that in him there is but one will and one
   operation, renewing the malignancy of Arius, Apollinaris, Eutyches and
   Severus.  For should we say that the human nature of our Lord is
   without will and operation, how could we affirm in safety the perfect
   humanity?  For nothing else constitutes the integrity of human nature
   except the essential will, through which the strength of free-will is
   marked in us; and this is also the case with the substantial
   operation.  For how shall we call him perfect in humanity if he in no
   wise suffered and acted as a man?  For like as the union of two natures
   preserves for us one subsistence without confusion and without
   division; so this one subsistence, shewing itself in two natures,
   demonstrates as its own what things belong to each.

   Therefore we declare that in him there are two natural wills and two
   natural operations, proceeding commonly and without division:  but we
   cast out of the Church and rightly subject to anathema all superfluous
   novelties as well as their inventors:  to wit, Theodore of Pharan,
   Sergius and Paul, Pyrrhus, and Peter (who were archbishops of
   Constantinople), moreover Cyrus, who bore the priesthood of Alexandria,
   and with them Honorius, who was the ruler (proedron) of Rome, as he
   followed them in these things.  Besides these, with the best of cause
   we anathematize and depose Macarius, who was bishop of Antioch, and his
   disciple Stephen (or rather we should say master), who tried to defend
   the impiety of their predecessors, and in short stirred up the whole
   world, and by their pestilential letters and by their fraudulent
   institutions devastated multitudes in every direction.  Likewise also
   that old man Polychronius, with an infantile intelligence, who promised
   he would raise the dead and who when they did not rise, was laughed at;
   and all who have taught, or do teach, or shall presume to teach one
   will and one operation in the incarnate Christ....But the highest
   prince of the Apostles fought with us:  for we had on our side his
   imitator and the successor in his see, who also had set forth in his
   letter the mystery of the divine word (theologias).  For the ancient
   city of Rome handed thee a confession of divine character, and a chart
   from the sunsetting raised up the day of dogmas, and made the darkness
   manifest, and Peter spoke through Agatho, and thou, O autocratic King,
   according to the divine decree, with the Omnipotent Sharer of thy
   throne, didst judge.

   *          *          *          *          *          *
   *          *          *          *

   But, O benign and justice-loving Lord, do thou in return do this favour
   to him who hath bestowed thy power upon thee; and give, as a seal to
   what has been defined by us, thy imperial ratification in writing, and
   so confirm them with the customary pious edicts and constitutions, that
   no one may contradict the things which have been done, nor raise any
   fresh question.  For rest assured, O serene majesty, that we have not
   falsified anything defined by the Ecumenical Councils and by the
   approved fathers, but we have confirmed them.  And now we all cry out
   with one mind and one voice, "O God, save the King! etc., etc."

   [Then follow numerous compliments to the Emperor and prayers for his
   preservation.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Letter of the Council to St. Agatho.

   (Found in Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LXXXVII., col. 1247 et seqq.; and
   Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1071 et seqq.)

   A copy of the letter sent by the holy and Ecumenical Sixth Council to
   Agatho, the most blessed and most holy pope of Old Rome.

   The holy and ecumenical council which by the grace of God and the pious
   sanction of the most pious and faithful Constantine, the great Emperor,
   has been gathered together in this God-preserved and royal city,
   Constantinople, the new Rome, in the Secretum of the imperial (theiou,
   sacri) palace called Trullus, to the most holy and most blessed pope of
   Old Rome, Agatho, health in the Lord.

   Serious illnesses call for greater helps, as you know, most blessed
   [father]; and therefore Christ our true God, who is the creator and
   governing power of all things, gave a wise physician, namely your
   God-honoured sanctity, to drive away by force the contagion of
   heretical pestilence by the remedies of orthodoxy, and to give the
   strength of health to the members of the church.  Therefore to thee, as
   to the bishop of the first see of the Universal Church, we leave what
   must be done, since you willingly take for your standing ground the
   firm rock of the faith, as we know from having read your true
   confession in the letter sent by your fatherly beatitude to the most
   pious emperor:  and we acknowledge that this letter was divinely
   written (perscriptas) as by the Chief of the Apostles, and through it
   we have cast out the heretical sect of many errors which had recently
   sprung up, having been urged to making a decree by Constantine who
   divinely reigns, and wields a most clement sceptre.  And by his help we
   have overthrown the error of impiety, having as it were laid siege to
   the nefarious doctrine of the heretics.  And then tearing to pieces the
   foundations of their execrable heresy, and attacking them with
   spiritual and paternal arms, and confounding their tongues that they
   might not speak consistently with each other, we overturned the tower
   built up by these followers of this most impious heresy; and we slew
   them with anathema, as lapsed concerning the faith and as sinners, in
   the morning outside the camp of the tabernacle of God, that we may
   express ourselves after the manner of David, [334] in accordance with
   the sentence already given concerning them in your letter, and their
   names are these:  Theodore, bishop of Pharan, Sergius, Honorius, Cyrus,
   Paul, Pyrrhus and Peter.  Moreover, in addition to these, we justly
   subjected to the anathema of heretics those also who live in their
   impiety which they have received, or, to speak more accurately, in the
   impiety of these God-hated persons, Apollinaris, Severus and
   Themestius, to wit, Macarius, who was the bishop of the great city of
   Antioch (and him we also stripped deservedly of his pastor's robes on
   account of his impenitence concerning the orthodox faith and his
   obstinate stubbornness), and Stephen, his disciple in craziness and his
   teacher in impiety, also Polychronius, who was inveterate in his
   heretical doctrines, thus answering to his name; and finally all those
   who impenitently have taught or do teach, or now hold or have held
   similar doctrines.

   Up to now grief, sorrow, and many tears have been our portion.  For we
   cannot laugh at the fall of our neighbours, nor exult with joy at their
   unbridled madness, nor have we been elated that we might fall all the
   more grievously because of this thing; not thus, O venerable and sacred
   head, have we been taught, we who hold Christ, the Lord of the
   universe, to be both benign and man-loving in the highest degree; for
   he exhorts us to be imitators of him in his priesthood so far as is
   possible, as becometh the good, and to obtain the pattern of his
   pastoral and conciliatory government.  But also to true repentance the
   most Serene Emperor and ourselves have exhorted them in various ways,
   and we have conducted the whole matter with great religiousness and
   care.  Nor have we been moved to do so for the sake of gain, nor by
   hatred, as you can easily see from what things have been done in each
   session, and related in the minutes, which are herewith sent to your
   blessedness:  and you will understand from your holiness's vicars,
   Theodore and George, presbyters beloved of God, and from John, the most
   religious deacon, and from Constantine, the most venerable sub-deacon,
   all of them your spiritual children and our well-loved brethren.  So
   too you will hear the same things from those sent by your holy synod,
   the holy bishops who rightly and uprightly, in accordance with your
   discipline, decreed with us in the first chapter of the faith.

   Thus, illuminated by the Holy Spirit, and instructed by your doctrine,
   we have cast forth the vile doctrines of impiety, making smooth the
   right path of orthodoxy, being in every way encouraged and helped in so
   doing by the wisdom and power of our most pious and serene Emperor
   Constantine.  And then one of our number, the most holy præsul of this
   reigning Constantinople, in the first place assenting to the orthodox
   compositions sent by you to the most pious emperor as in all respects
   agreeable to the teaching of the approved Fathers and of the
   God-instructed Fathers, and of the holy five universal councils, we
   all, by the help of Christ our God, easily accomplished what we were
   striving after.  For as God was the mover, so God also he crowned our
   council.

   Thereupon, therefore, the grace of the Holy Spirit shone upon us,
   displaying his power, through your assiduous prayers, for the uprooting
   of all weeds and every tree which brought not forth good fruit, and
   giving command that they should be consumed by fire.  And we all agree
   both in heart and tongue, and hand, and have put forth, by the
   assistance of the life-giving Spirit, a definition, clean from all
   error, certain, and infallible; not removing the ancient landmarks,' as
   it is written (God forbid!), but remaining steadfast in the testimonies
   and authority of the holy and approved fathers, and defining that, as
   of two and in two natures (to wit, the divinity and the humanity) of
   which he is composed and in which he exists, Christ our true God is
   preached by us, and is glorified inseparably, unchangeably,
   unconfusedly, and undividedly; just so also we predicate of him two
   natural operations, undividedly, incontrovertibly, unconfusedly,
   inseparably, as has been declared in our synodal definition.  These
   decrees the majesty of our God-copying Emperor assented to, and
   subscribed them with his own hand.  And, as has been said, we rejected
   and condemned that most impious and unsubstantial heresy which affirmed
   but one will and one operation in the incarnate Christ our true God,
   and by so doing we have pressed sore upon the crowd who confound and
   who divide, and have extinguished the inflamed storm of other heresies,
   but we have set forth clearly with you the shining light of the
   orthodox faith, and we pray your paternal sanctity to confirm our
   decree by your honourable rescript; through which we confide in good
   hope in Christ that his merciful kindness will grant freely to the
   Roman State, committed to the care of our most clement Emperor,
   stability; and will adorn with daily yokes and victories his most
   serene clemency; and that in addition to the good things he has here
   bestowed upon us, he will set your God-honoured holiness before his
   tremendous tribunal as one who has sincerely confessed the true faith,
   preserving it unsullied and keeping good ward over the orthodox flocks
   committed to him by God.

   We and all who are with us salute all the brethren in Christ who are
   with your blessedness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [334] Psalm C., verse 8 (Heb. ci., ult.) neither LXX. nor Vulgate
   version.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Excursus on the Condemnation of Pope Honorius.

   To this decree attaches not only the necessary importance and interest
   which belongs to any ecumenical decision upon a disputed doctrinal
   question with regard to the incarnation of the Son of God, but an
   altogether accidental interest, arising from the fact that by this
   decree a Pope of Rome is stricken with anathema in the person of
   Honorius.  I need hardly remind the reader how many interesting and
   difficult questions in theology such an action on the part of an
   Ecumenical Council raises, and how all important, not to say vital, to
   such as accept the ruling of the recent Vatican Council, it is that
   some explanation of this fact should be arrived at which will be
   satisfactory.  It would be highly improper for me in these pages to
   discuss the matter theologically.  Volumes on each side have been
   written on this subject, and to these I must refer the reader, but in
   doing so I hope I may be pardoned if I add a word of counsel--to read
   both sides.  If one's knowledge is derived only from modern Eastern,
   Anglican or Protestant writers, such as "Janus and the Council," the
   Père Gratry's "Letters," or Littledale's controversial books against
   Rome, one is apt to be as much one-sided as if he took his information
   from Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal Bellarmine, Rohrbacher's History, or
   from the recent work on the subject by Pennacchi. [335]   Perhaps the
   average reader will hardly find a more satisfactory treatment than that
   by Bossuet in the Defensio.  (Liber VII., cap. xxi., etc.)

   It will be sufficient for the purposes of this volume to state that
   Roman Catholic Curialist writers are not at one as to how the matter is
   to be treated.  Pennacchi, in his work referred to above, is of opinion
   that Honorius's letters were strictly speaking Papal decrees, set forth
   auctoritate apostolica, and therefore irreformable, but he declares,
   contrary to the opinion of almost all theologians and to the decree of
   this Council, that they are orthodox, and that the Council erred in
   condemning them; as he expresses it, the decree rests upon an error in
   facto dogmatico.  To save an Ecumenical Synod from error, he thinks the
   synod ceased to be ecumenical before it took this action, and was at
   that time only a synod of a number of Orientals!  Cardinal Baronius has
   another way out of the difficulty.  He says that the name of Honorius
   was forged and put in the decree by an erasure in the place of the name
   of Theodore, the quondam Patriarch, who soon after the Council got
   himself restored to the Patriarchal position.  Baronius moreover holds
   that Honorius's letters have been corrupted, that the Acts of the
   Council have been corrupted, and, in short, that everything which
   declares or proves that Honorius was a heretic or was condemned by an
   Ecumenical Council as such, is untrustworthy and false.  The
   groundlessness, not to say absurdity, of Baronius's view has been often
   exposed by those of his own communion, a brief but sufficient summary
   of the refutation will be found in Hefele, who while taking a very
   halting and unsatisfactory position himself, yet is perfectly clear
   that Baronius's contention is utterly indefensible. [336]

   Most Roman controversialists of recent years have admitted both the
   fact of Pope Honorius's condemnation (which Baronius denies), and the
   monothelite (and therefore heretical) character of his epistles, but
   they are of opinion that these letters were not his ex cathedrâ
   utterances as Doctor Universalis, but mere expressions of the private
   opinion of the Pontiff as a theologian.  With this matter we have no
   concern in this connexion.

   I shall therefore say nothing further on this point but shall simply
   supply the leading proofs that Honorius was as a matter of fact
   condemned by the Sixth Ecumenical Council.

   1.  His condemnation is found in the Acts in the xiii^th Session, near
   the beginning.

   2.  His two letters were ordered to be burned at the same session.

   3.  In the xvi^th Session the bishops exclaimed "Anathema to the
   heretic Sergius, to the heretic Cyrus, to the heretic Honorius, etc."

   4.  In the decree of faith published at the xviij^th Session it is
   stated that "the originator of all evil...found a fit tool for his will
   in...Honorius, Pope of Old Rome, etc."

   5.  The report of the Council to the Emperor says that "Honorius,
   formerly bishop of Rome" they had "punished with exclusion and
   anathema" because he followed the monothelites.

   6.  In its letter to Pope Agatho the Council says it "has slain with
   anathema Honorius."

   7.  The imperial decree speaks of the "unholy priests who infected the
   Church and falsely governed" and mentions among them "Honorius, the
   Pope of Old Rome, the confirmer of heresy who contradicted himself."
   The Emperor goes on to anathematize "Honorius who was Pope of Old Rome,
   who in everything agreed with them, went with them, and strengthened
   the heresy."

   8.  Pope Leo II. confirmed the decrees of the Council and expressly
   says that he too anathematized Honorius. [337]

   9.  That Honorius was anathematized by the Sixth Council is mentioned
   in the Trullan Canons (No. j.).

   10.  So too the Seventh Council declares its adhesion to the anathema
   in its decree of faith, and in several places in the acts the same is
   said.

   11.  Honorius's name was found in the Roman copy of the Acts.  This is
   evident from Anastasius's life of Leo II.  (Vita Leonis II.)

   12.  The Papal Oath as found in the Liber Diurnus [338] taken by each
   new Pope from the fifth to the eleventh century, in the form probably
   prescribed by Gregory II., "smites with eternal anathema the
   originators of the new heresy, Sergius, etc., together with Honorius,
   because he assisted the base assertion of the heretics."

   13.  In the lesson for the feast of St. Leo II. in the Roman Breviary
   the name of Pope Honorius occurs among those excommunicated by the
   Sixth Synod.  Upon this we may well hear Bossuet:  "They suppress as
   far as they can, the Liber Diurnus:  they have erased this from the
   Roman Breviary.  Have they therefore hidden it?  Truth breaks out from
   all sides, and these things become so much the more evident, as they
   are the more studiously put out of sight." [339]

   With such an array of proof no conservative historian, it would seem,
   can question the fact that Honorius, the Pope of Rome, was condemned
   and anathematized as a heretic by the Sixth Ecumenical Council.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [335] Pennacchi.  De Honorii I., Romani Pontificis, causa in Concilio
   VI.

   [336] Hefele.  History of the Councils.  Vol. V., p. 190 et seqq.

   [337] "Also Honorius, qui hanc apostolicam sedem non apostolicæ
   traditionis doctrina lustravit, sed profana proditione immaculatam
   fidem subvertere conatus est, et omnes, qui in suo errore defuncti
   sunt."

   [338] Ed. Eugène de Rozière.  Paris, 1869, No. 84.

   [339] Bossuet.  Def. Cleri Gal., Lib. vij., cap. xxvj.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Imperial Edict Posted in the Third Atrium of the Great Church Near
   What is Called Dicymbala.

   In the name of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, our God and Saviour,
   the most pious Emperor, the peaceful and Christ-loving Constantine, an
   Emperor faithful to God in Jesus Christ, to all our Christ-loving
   people living in this God-preserved and royal city.

   [The document is very long, Hefele gives the following epitome, which
   is all sufficient for the ordinary reader, who will remember that it is
   an Edict of the Emperor and not anything proceeding from the council.]

   Hefele's Epitome (Hist. of the Councils, Vol. v., p. 178).

   "The heresy of Apollinaris, etc., has been renewed by Theodore of
   Pharan and confirmed by Honorius, sometime Pope of Old Rome, who also
   contradicted himself.  Also Cyrus, Pyrrhus, Paul, Peter; more
   recently.  Macarius, Stephen, and Polychronius had diffused
   Monothelitism.  He, the Emperor, had therefore convoked this holy and
   Ecumenical Synod, and published the present edict with the confession
   of faith, in order to confirm and establish its decrees.  (There
   follows here an extended confession of faith, with proofs for the
   doctrine of two wills and operations.)  As he recognized the five
   earlier Ecumenical Synods, so he anathematized all heretics from Simon
   Magus, but especially the originator and patrons of the new heresy,
   Theodore and Sergius; also Pope Honorius, who was their adherent and
   patron in everything, and confirmed the heresy (ton kata panta toutois
   sunaireten kai sundromon kai bebaioten tes haireseos, further, Cyrus,
   etc., and ordained that no one henceforth should hold a different
   faith, or venture to teach one will and one energy.  In no other than
   the orthodox faith could men be saved.  Whoever did not obey the
   imperial edict should, if he were a bishop or cleric be deposed; if an
   official, punished with confiscation of property and loss of the girdle
   (zone); if a private person, banished from the residence and all other
   cities."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Canons of the Council in Trullo;

   Often Called

   The Quinisext Council.

   a.d. 692.

   Elenchus.

   Introductory Note.

   The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes.

   Excursus to Canon VI., On the Marriage of the Clergy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introductory Note.

   From the fact that the canons of the Council in Trullo are included in
   this volume of the Decrees and Canons of the Seven Ecumenical Councils
   it must not for an instant be supposed that it is intended thereby to
   affirm that these canons have any ecumenical authority, or that the
   council by which they were adopted can lay any claim to being
   ecumenical either in view of its constitution or of the subsequent
   treatment by the Church of its enactments.

   It is true that it claimed at the time an ecumenical character, and
   styled itself such in several of its canons, it is true that in the
   mind of the Emperor Justinian II., who summoned it, it was intended to
   have been ecumenical.  It is true that the Greeks at first declared it
   to be a continuation of the Sixth Synod and that by this name they
   frequently denominate and quote its canons.  But it is also true that
   the West was not really represented at it at all (as we shall see
   presently); that when the Emperor afterwards sent the canons to the
   Pope to receive his signature, he absolutely refused to have anything
   to do with them; and it is further true that they were never
   practically observed by the West at all, and that even in the East
   their authority was rather theoretical than real.

   (Fleury.  Histoire Ecclesiastique, Livre XL., Chap. xlix.)

   As the two last General Councils (in 553 and in 681) had not made any
   Canons, the Orientals judged it suitable to supply them eleven years
   after the Sixth Council, that is to say, the year 692, fifth
   indiction.  For that purpose the Emperor Justinian convoked a Council,
   at which 211 Bishops attended, of whom the principal were the four
   Patriarchs, Paul of Constantinople, Peter of Alexandria, Anastasius of
   Jerusalem, George of Antioch.  Next in the subscriptions are named John
   of Justinianopolis, Cyriacus of Cesarea in Cappadocia, Basil of Gortyna
   in Crete, who says that he represents the whole Council of the Roman
   Church, as he had said in subscribing the Sixth Council.  But it is
   certain otherwise that in this latter council there were present
   Legates of the Holy See.  This council, like the Sixth, [340] assembled
   in the dome of the palace called in Latin Trullus, which name it has
   kept.  It is also named in Latin Quinisextum, in Greek Penthecton, as
   one might say, the fifth-sixth, to mark that it is only the supplement
   of the two preceding Councils, though properly it is a distinct one.

   The intention was to make a body of discipline to serve thenceforth for
   the whole Church, and it was distributed into 102 Canons.

   To this statement by Fleury some additions must be made.  First, with
   regard to the date of the synod.  This is not so certain as would
   appear at first sight.  At the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the
   patriarch Tarasius of Constantinople asserted that, "four or five years
   after the sixth Ecumenical Council the same bishops, in a new assembly
   under Justinian II. had published the [Trullan] Canons mentioned," and
   this assertion the Seventh Council appears to have accepted as true, if
   we understand the sixth session aright.  Now were this statement true,
   the date would be probably 686, but this is impossible by the words of
   the council itself, where we find mention made of the fifteenth of
   January of the past 4th indiction, or the year of the world, 6109.  To
   make this agree at all, scholars tell us that for iv. must be read
   xiv.  But the rest of the statement is equally erroneous, the bishops
   were not the same, as can readily be seen by comparing the
   subscriptions to the Acts.

   The year of the world 6109 is certainly wrong, and so other scholars
   would read 6199, but here a division takes place, for some reckon by
   the Constantinopolitan era, and so fix the date at 691, and others
   following the Alexandrian era fix it at 706.  But this last is
   certainly wrong, for the canons were sent for signature to Pope
   Sergius, who died as early as 701.  Hefele's conclusion is as follows:

   (Hefele.  Hist. of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 222.)

   The year 6199 of the Constantinopolitan era coincides with the year 691
   after Christ and the IV^th Indiction ran from September 1, 690, to
   August 31, 691.  If then, our Synod, in canon iij., speaks of the 15th
   of January in the past Indiction IV., it means January 691; but it
   belongs itself, to the Vth Indiction, i.e., it was opened after
   September 1, 691, and before September 1, 692.

   As this is not a history of the Councils but a collection of their
   decrees and canons with illustrative notes, the only other point to be
   considered is the reception these canons met with.

   The decrees were signed first by the Emperor, the next place was left
   vacant for the Pope, then followed the subscriptions of the Patriarchs
   of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch, the whole number
   being 211, bishops or representatives of bishops.  It is not quite
   certain whether any of the Patriarchs were present except Paul of
   Constantinople; but taking it all in all the probability is in favour
   of their presence. [341]   Blank places were left for the bishops of
   Thessalonica, Sardinia, Ravenna and Corinth.  The Archbishop of Gortyna
   in Crete added to his signature the phrase "Holding the place of the
   holy Church of Rome in every synod."  He had in the same way signed the
   decrees of III. Constantinople, Crete belonging to the Roman
   Patriarchate; as to whether his delegation on the part of the Roman
   Synod continued or was merely made to continue by his own volition we
   have no information.  The ridiculous blunder of Balsamon must be noted
   here, who asserts that the bishops whose names are missing and for
   which blank places were left, had actually signed.

   Pope Sergius refused to sign the decrees when they were sent to him,
   rejected them as "lacking authority" (invalidi) and described them as
   containing "novel errors."  With the efforts to extort his signature we
   have no concern further than to state that they signally failed.  Later
   on, in the time of Pope Constantine, a middle course seems to have been
   adopted, a course subsequently in the ninth century thus expressed by
   Pope John VIII., "he accepted all those canons which did not contradict
   the true faith, good morals, and the decrees of Rome," a truly notable
   statement!  Nearly a century later Pope Hadrian I. distinctly
   recognizes all the Trullan decrees in his letter to Tenasius of
   Constantinople and attributes them to the Sixth Synod.  "All the holy
   six synods I receive with all their canons, which rightly and divinely
   were promulgated by them, among which is contained that in which
   reference is made to a Lamb being pointed to by the Precursor as being
   found in certain of the venerable images."  Here the reference is
   unmistakably to the Trullan Canon LXXXII.

   Hefele's summing up of the whole matter is as follows:

   (Hefele, Hist. of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 242.)

   That the Seventh Ecumenical Council at Nice ascribed the Trullan canons
   to the Sixth Ecumenical Council, and spoke of them entirely in the
   Greek spirit, cannot astonish us, as it was attended almost solely by
   Greeks.  They specially pronounced the recognition of the canons in
   question in their own first canon; but their own canons have never
   received the ratification of the Holy See.

   Thus far Hefele, but it seems that Gratian's statement on the subject
   in the Decretum should not be omitted here.  (Pars I. Dist. XVI., c.
   v.)

   "Canon V.  The Sixth Synod is confirmed by the authority of Hadrian.

   "I receive the Sixth Synod with all its canons.

   "Gratian.  There is a doubt whether it set forth canons but this is
   easily removed by examining the fourth session of the VII^th [VI^th by
   mistake, vide Roman Correctors' note] Synod.

   "For Peter the Bp. of Nicomedia says:

   "C. VI. The Sixth Synod wrote canons.

   "I have a book containing the canons of the holy Sixth Synod.  The
   Patriarch said:  § 1. Some are scandalized through their ignorance of
   these canons, saying:  Did the Sixth Synod make any canons?  Let them
   know then that the Sixth Holy Synod was gathered together under
   Constantine against those who said there is one operation and one will
   in Christ, in which the holy Fathers anathematized these as heretics
   and explained the orthodox faith.

   "II. Pars § 2. And the synod was dissolved in the XIV^th year of
   Constantine.  After four or five years the same holy Fathers met
   together under Justinian, the son of Constantine, and promulgated the
   aforementioned canons, of which let no one have any doubt.  For they
   who under Constantine were in synod, these same bishops under Justinian
   subscribed to all these canons.  For it was fitting that a Universal
   Synod should promulgate ecclesiastical canons.  Item:  § 3. The Holy
   Sixth Synod after it promulgated its definition against the
   Monothelites, the emperor Constantine who had summoned it, dying soon
   after, and Justinian his son reigning in his stead, the same holy synod
   divinely inspired again met at Constantinople four or five years
   afterwards, and promulgated one hundred and two canons for the
   correction of the Church.

   "Gratian.  From this therefore it may be gathered that the Sixth Synod
   was twice assembled:  the first time under Constantine and then passed
   no canons; the second time under Justinian his son, and promulgated the
   aforesaid canons."

   Upon this passage of Gratian's the Roman Correctors have a long and
   interesting note, with quotations from Anastasius, which should be read
   with care by the student but is too long to cite here.

   I close with some eminently wise remarks by Prof. Michaud.

   (E. Michaud, Discussion sur les Sept Conciles OEcuméniques, p. 272.)

   Upon the canons of this council we must remark:

   1.  That save its acceptance of the dogmatic decisions of the six
   Ecumenical Councils, which is contained in the first canon, this
   council had an exclusively disciplinary character; and consequently if
   it should be admitted by the particular churches, these would always
   remain, on account of their autonomy, judges of the fitness or
   non-suitability of the practical application of these decisions.

   2.  That the Easterns have never pretended to impose this code upon the
   practice of the Western Churches, especially as they themselves do not
   practise everywhere the hundred and two canons mentioned.  All they
   wished to do was to maintain the ancient discipline against the abuses
   and evil innovations of the Roman Church, and to make her pause upon
   the dangerous course in which she was already beginning to enter.

   3.  That if among these canons, some do not apply to the actual present
   state of society, e.g., the 8th, 10th, 11th, etc.; if others, framed in
   a spirit of transition between the then Eastern customs and those of
   Rome, do not appear as logical nor as wise as one might desire, e.g.,
   the 6th, 12th, 48th, etc., nevertheless on the other hand, many of them
   are marked with the most profound sagacity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [340] This statement of Fleury's is contested by those who agree with
   Asseman in thinking that the Sixth Synod was held in Santa Sophia, vide
   Biblioth. Jur., Orient. Tom. v., p. 85.

   [341] Cf. Hefele, l.c., Vol. V., 237.  On the other hand vide Asseman
   (l.c. Tom. V., pp. 30, 69), who thinks Alexandria and Jerusalem were
   vacant at the time!
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Canons of the Council in Trullo.

   (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1135 et seqq.)

   Canon I.

   That order is best of all which makes every word and act begin and end
   in God.  Wherefore that piety may be clearly set forth by us and that
   the Church of which Christ is the foundation may be continually
   increased and advanced, and that it may be exalted above the cedars of
   Lebanon; now therefore we, by divine grace at the beginning of our
   decrees, define that the faith set forth by the God-chosen Apostles who
   themselves had both seen and were ministers of the Word, shall be
   preserved without any innovation, unchanged and inviolate.

   Moreover the faith of the three hundred and eighteen holy and blessed
   fathers who were assembled at Nice under Constantine our Emperor,
   against the impious Arius, and the gentile diversity of deity or rather
   (to speak accurately) multitude of gods taught by him, who by the
   unanimous acknowledgment of the faithful revealed and declared to us
   the consubstantiality of the Three Persons comprehended in the Divine
   Nature, not suffering this faith to lie hidden under the bushel of
   ignorance, but openly teaching the faithful to adore with one worship
   the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, confuting and scattering to
   the winds the opinion of different grades, and demolishing and
   overturning the puerile toyings fabricated out of sand by the heretics
   against orthodoxy.

   Likewise also we confirm that faith which was set forth by the one
   hundred and fifty fathers who in the time of Theodosius the Elder, our
   Emperor, assembled in this imperial city, accepting their decisions
   with regard to the Holy Ghost in assertion of his godhead, and
   expelling the profane Macedonius (together with all previous enemies of
   the truth) as one who dared to judge Him to be a servant who is Lord,
   and who wished to divide, like a robber, the inseparable unity, so that
   there might be no perfect mystery of our faith.

   And together with this odious and detestable contender against the
   truth, we condemn Apollinaris, priest of the same iniquity, who
   impiously belched forth that the Lord assumed a body unendowed with a
   soul, [342] thence also inferring that his salvation wrought for us was
   imperfect.

   Moreover what things were set forth by the two hundred God-bearing
   fathers in the city of Ephesus in the days of Theodosius our Emperor,
   the son of Arcadius; these doctrines we assent to as the unbroken
   strength of piety, teaching that Christ the incarnate Son of God is
   one; and declaring that she who bare him without human seed was the
   immaculate Ever-Virgin, glorifying her as literally and in very truth
   the Mother of God.  We condemn as foreign to the divine scheme the
   absurd division of Nestorius, who teaches that the one Christ consists
   of a man separately and of the Godhead separately and renews the Jewish
   impiety.

   Moreover we confirm that faith which at Chalcedon, the Metropolis, was
   set forth in accordance with orthodoxy by the six hundred and thirty
   God-approved fathers in the time of Marcian, who was our Emperor, which
   handed down with a great and mighty voice, even unto the ends of the
   earth, that the one Christ, the son of God, is of two natures, and must
   be glorified [343] in these two natures, and which cast forth from the
   sacred precincts of the Church as a black pestilence to be avoided,
   Eutyches, babbling stupidly and inanely, and teaching that the great
   mystery of the incarnation (oikonomias) was perfected in thought only.
   And together with him also Nestorius and Dioscorus of whom the former
   was the defender and champion of the division, the latter of the
   confusion [of the two natures in the one Christ], both of whom fell
   away from the divergence of their impiety to a common depth of
   perdition and denial of God.

   Also we recognize as inspired by the Spirit the pious voices of the one
   hundred and sixty-five God-bearing fathers who assembled in this
   imperial city in the time of our Emperor Justinian of blessed memory,
   and we teach them to those who come after us; for these synodically
   anathematized and execrated Theodore of Mopsuestia (the teacher of
   Nestorius), and Origen, and Didymus, and Evagrius, all of whom
   reintroduced feigned Greek myths, and brought back again the circlings
   of certain bodies and souls, and deranged turnings [or transmigrations]
   to the wanderings or dreamings of their minds, and impiously insulting
   the resurrection of the dead.  Moreover [they condemned] what things
   were written by Theodoret against the right faith and against the
   Twelve Chapters of blessed Cyril, and that letter which is said to have
   been written by Ibas.

   Also we agree to guard untouched the faith of the Sixth Holy Synod,
   which first assembled in this imperial city in the time of Constantine,
   our Emperor, of blessed memory, which faith received still greater
   confirmation from the fact that the pious Emperor ratified with his own
   signet that which was written for the security of future generations.
   This council taught that we should openly profess our faith that in the
   incarnation of Jesus Christ, our true God, there are two natural wills
   or volitions and two natural operations; and condemned by a just
   sentence those who adulterated the true doctrine and taught the people
   that in the one Lord Jesus Christ there is but one will and one
   operation; to wit, Theodore of Pharan, Cyrus of Alexandria, Honorius of
   Rome, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter, who were bishops of this
   God-preserved city; Macarius, who was bishop of Antioch; Stephen, who
   was his disciple, and the insane Polychronius, depriving them
   henceforth from the communion of the body of Christ our God.

   And, to say so once for all, we decree that the faith shall stand firm
   and remain unsullied until the end of the world as well as the writings
   divinely handed down and the teachings of all those who have beautified
   and adorned the Church of God and were lights in the world, having
   embraced the word of life.  And we reject and anathematize those whom
   they rejected and anathematized, as being enemies of the truth, and as
   insane ragers against God, and as lifters up of iniquity.

   But if any one at all shall not observe and embrace the aforesaid pious
   decrees, and teach and preach in accordance therewith, but shall
   attempt to set himself in opposition thereto, let him be anathema,
   according to the decree already promulgated by the approved holy and
   blessed Fathers, and let him be cast out and stricken off as an alien
   from the number of Christians.  For our decrees add nothing to the
   things previously defined, nor do they take anything away, nor have we
   any such power.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon I.

   No innovation upon the faith of the Apostles is to be allowed.  The
   faith of the Nicene fathers is perfect, which overthrows through the
   homousion the doctrines of Arius who introduced degrees into the
   Godhead.

   The Synod held under Theodosius the great shall be held inviolate,
   which deposed Macedonius who asserted that the Holy Ghost was a
   servant.

   The two hundred who under Theodosius the Younger assembled at Ephesus
   are to be revered for they expelled Nestorius who asserted that the
   Lord was man and God separately (idikos).

   Those who assembled at Chalcedon in the time of Marcion are to be
   celebrated with eternal remembrance, who deposed Eutyches, who dared to
   say that the great mystery was accomplished only in image, as well as
   Nestorius and Dioscorus, observing equal things in an opposite
   direction.

   One hundred and sixty-five were assembled in the imperial city by
   Justinian, who anathematized Origen, for teaching periods (periodous )
   of bodies and souls, and Theodoret who dared to set himself up to
   oppose the Twelve Chapters of Cyril.

   At Constantinople a Synod was collected under Constantine which
   rejected Honorius of Rome and Sergius, prelate of Constantinople, for
   teaching one will and one operation.

   Aristenus.

   The fifth was held in the time of Justinian the Great at Constantinople
   against the crazy (paraphrons) Origen, Evagrius and Didymus, who
   remodelled the Greek figments, and stupidly said that the same bodies
   they had joined with them would not rise again; and that Paradise was
   not subject to the appreciation of the sense, and that it was not from
   God, and that Adam was not formed in flesh, and that there would be an
   end of punishment, and a restitution of the devils to their pristine
   state, and other innumerable insane blasphemies.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [342] Latin reads "mind or soul."

   [343] Latin, "believed in."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon II.

   It has also seemed good to this holy Council, that the eighty-five
   canons, received and ratified by the holy and blessed Fathers before
   us, and also handed down to us in the name of the holy and glorious
   Apostles should from this time forth remain firm and unshaken for the
   cure of souls and the healing of disorders.  And in these canons we are
   bidden to receive the Constitutions of the Holy Apostles [written] by
   Clement.  But formerly through the agency of those who erred from the
   faith certain adulterous matter was introduced, clean contrary to
   piety, for the polluting of the Church, which obscures the elegance and
   beauty of the divine decrees in their present form.  We therefore
   reject these Constitutions so as the better to make sure of the
   edification and security of the most Christian flock; by no means
   admitting the offspring of heretical error, and cleaving to the pure
   and perfect doctrine of the Apostles.  But we set our seal likewise
   upon all the other holy canons set forth by our holy and blessed
   Fathers, that is, by the 318 holy God-bearing Fathers assembled at
   Nice, and those at Ancyra, further those at Neocæsarea and likewise
   those at Gangra, and besides, those at Antioch in Syria:  those too at
   Laodicea in Phrygia:  and likewise the 150 who assembled in this
   heaven-protected royal city:  and the 200 who assembled the first time
   in the metropolis of the Ephesians, and the 630 holy and blessed
   Fathers at Chalcedon.  In like manner those of Sardica, and those of
   Carthage:  those also who again assembled in this heaven-protected
   royal city under its bishop Nectarius and Theophilus Archbishop of
   Alexandria.  Likewise too the Canons [i.e. the decretal letters] of
   Dionysius, formerly Archbishop of the great city of Alexandria; and of
   Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria and Martyr; of Gregory the
   Wonder-worker, Bishop of Neocæsarea; of Athanasius, Archbishop of
   Alexandria; of Basil, Archbishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia; of Gregory,
   Bishop of Nyssa; of Gregory Theologus; of Amphilochius of Iconium; of
   Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria; of Theophilus, Archbishop of the
   same great city of Alexandria; of Cyril, Archbishop of the same
   Alexandria; of Gennadius, Patriarch of this heaven-protected royal
   city.  Moreover the Canon set forth by Cyprian, Archbishop of the
   country of the Africans and Martyr, and by the Synod under him, which
   has been kept only in the country of the aforesaid Bishops, according
   to the custom delivered down to them.  And that no one be allowed to
   transgress or disregard the aforesaid canons, or to receive others
   beside them, supposititiously set forth by certain who have attempted
   to make a traffic of the truth.  But should any one be convicted of
   innovating upon, or attempting to overturn, any of the afore-mentioned
   canons, he shall be subject to receive the penalty which that canon
   imposes, and to be cured by it of his transgression.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon II.

   Whatever additions have been made through guile by the heterodox in the
   Apostolic Constitutions edited by Clement, shall be cut out.

   This canon defines what canons are to be understood as having received
   the sanction of ecumenical authority, and since these canons of the
   Council in Trullo were received at the Seventh Ecumenical Council in
   its first canon as the canons of the Sixth Ecumenical (of which the
   Quinisext claimed to be a legitimate continuation) there can be no
   doubt that all these canons enumerated in this canon are set forth for
   the guidance of the Church.

   With regard to what councils are intended:  there is difficulty only in
   two particulars, viz., the "Council of Constantinople under Nectarius
   and Theophilus," [344] and the "Council under Cyprian;" the former must
   be the Council of 394, and the latter is usually considered to be the
   III. Synod of Carthage, a.d. 257.

   Fleury.

   (H. E. Liv. xl., chap. xlix.)

   The Council of Constantinople under Nectarius and Theophilus of
   Alexandria must be that held in 394, at the dedication of Ruffinus's
   Church; but we have not its canons...."The canon published by St.
   Cyprian for the African Church alone."  It is difficult to understand
   what canon is referred to unless it is the preface to the council of
   St. Cyprian where he says that no one should pretend to be bishop of
   bishops, or to oblige his colleagues to obey him by tyrannical fear.

   It will be noticed that while the canon is most careful to mention the
   exact number of Apostolic canons it received, thus deciding in favour
   of the larger code, it is equally careful not to assign them an
   Apostolic origin, but merely to say that they had come down to them "in
   the name of" the Apostles.  In the face of this it is strange to find
   Balsamon saying, "Through this canon their mouth is stopped who say
   that 85 canons were not set forth by the holy Apostles;" what the
   council did settle, so far as its authority went, was the number not
   the authorship of the canons.  This, I think, is all that Balsamon
   intended to assert, but his words might easily be quoted as having a
   different meaning.

   This canon is found, in part, in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's
   Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XVI, c. VII.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [344] The Ultramontane Roisselet de Sauclières, in his Histoire
   chronologique et dogmatique des Conciles de la Chrétieté, Tome III., p.
   131, curiously divides this into two councils.  This blunder is also
   made by Ivo, cf. Gratian's Dec., P. I., Dist. xvi., c. vii., note by
   correctors.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon III.

   Since our pious and Christian Emperor has addressed this holy and
   ecumenical council, in order that it might provide for the purity of
   those who are in the list of the clergy, and who transmit divine things
   to others, and that they may be blameless ministrants, and worthy of
   the sacrifice of the great God, who is both Offering and High Priest, a
   sacrifice apprehended by the intelligence:  and that it might cleanse
   away the pollutions wherewith these have been branded by unlawful
   marriages:  now whereas they of the most holy Roman Church purpose to
   keep the rule of exact perfection, but those who are under the throne
   of this heaven-protected and royal city keep that of kindness and
   consideration, so blending both together as our fathers have done, and
   as the love of God requires, that neither gentleness fall into licence,
   nor severity into harshness; especially as the fault of ignorance has
   reached no small number of men, we decree, that those who are involved
   in a second marriage, and have been slaves to sin up to the fifteenth
   of the past month of January, in the past fourth Indiction, the 6109th
   year, and have not resolved to repent of it, be subjected to canonical
   deposition:  but that they who are involved in this disorder of a
   second marriage, but before our decree have acknowledged what is
   fitting, and have cut off their sin, and have put far from them this
   strange and illegitimate connexion, or they whose wives by second
   marriage are already dead, or who have turned to repentance of their
   own accord, having learnt continence, and having quickly forgotten
   their former iniquities, whether they be presbyters or deacons, these
   we have determined should cease from all priestly ministrations or
   exercise, being under punishment for a certain time, but should retain
   the honour of their seat and station, being satisfied with their seat
   before the laity and begging with tears from the Lord that the
   transgression of their ignorance be pardoned them:  for unfitting it
   were that he should bless another who has to tend his own wounds.  But
   those who have been married to one wife, if she was a widow, and
   likewise those who after their ordination have unlawfully entered into
   one marriage that is, presbyters, and deacons, and subdeacons, being
   debarred for some short time from sacred ministration, and censured,
   shall be restored again to their proper rank, never advancing to any
   further rank, their unlawful marriage being openly dissolved.  This we
   decree to hold good only in the case of those that are involved in the
   aforesaid faults up to the fifteenth (as was said) of the month of
   January, of the fourth Indiction, decreeing from the present time, and
   renewing the Canon which declares, that he who has been joined in two
   marriages after his baptism, or has had a concubine, cannot be bishop,
   or presbyter, or deacon, or at all on the sacerdotal list; in like
   manner, that he who has taken a widow, or a divorced person, or a
   harlot, or a servant, or an actress, cannot be bishop, or presbyter, or
   deacon, or at all on the sacerdotal list.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon III.

   Priests who shall have contracted second marriages and will not give
   them up are to be deposed.  But those who leave off the wickedness, let
   them cease for a fixed period.  For he that is himself wounded does not
   bless.  But who are implicated in nefarious marriage and who after
   ordination have contracted marriage, after a definite time they shall
   be restored to their grade, provided they remain without offence,
   having plainly broken off the marriage.  But if after it shall have
   been prohibited by this decree they attempt to do so they shall remain
   deposed.

   Zonaras.

   What things pertain to this third canon are only adapted to the time in
   which the canon was passed; and afterwards are of no force at all.  But
   what things the Fathers wished to be binding on posterity are contained
   in the seventeenth and eighteenth canons of the holy Apostles, which as
   having been neglected during the course of time this synod wished to
   renew.

   Van Espen.

   It is clear from this canon that the Emperor very especially intended
   that the indulgence which the Church of Constantinople extended to its
   presbyters and deacons in allowing them the use of marriage entered
   into before ordination, should not be allowed to go any further, nor to
   be an occasion for the violation of that truly Apostolic canon, "The
   bishop, the presbyter, and the deacon must be the husband of one wife."
   I Tim. iii. 2.

   For never did the Constantinopolitan nor any other Eastern Church allow
   by canon a digamist (or a man successively the husband of many wives)
   to be advanced to the order of presbyter or deacon, or to use any
   second marriage.

   Antonio Pereira.

   (Tentativa Theologica. [Eng. trans.] III. Principle, p. 79.)

   In the same manner a second marriage always, and everywhere,
   incapacitated the clergy for Holy Orders and the Episcopate.  This
   appears from St. Paul, 1 Tim. Chap. iii., and Titus, Chap. i., and it
   was expressly enacted by the sixteenth of the Apostolical Canons,
   renewed by the Popes Siricius, Innocent and Leo the Great, and may be
   gathered from the ancient fathers and councils generally received in
   the Church.

   Nevertheless we know from Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, that many bishops
   remarkable for their learning and sanctity, frequently dispensed with
   this Apostolical law; as Alexander of Antioch, Acacius of Berea,
   Praylius of Jerusalem, Proclus of Constantinople, and others, by whose
   example Theodoret defends his own conduct in the case of Irenæus, in
   ordaining him Archbishop of Tyre, although he had been twice married.
   But what is more surprising in this matter is that, notwithstanding the
   eleventh Decretal of Siricius, and the twelfth of Innocentius the
   First, that they who had either been twice married, or had married
   widows, were incapable of ordination, and ought to be deposed; the
   Council of Toledo, Canon 3, and the First Council of Orange, Canon 25,
   both dispensed with these Pontifical laws.  The first, in order that
   those who had married widows might remain in holy orders; the second,
   that such as had twice married might be promoted to the order of
   subdeacon.  Socrates also observes that although it was a general law
   not to admit catechumens to orders, the bishops of Alexandria were in
   the habit of promoting such to the order of readers and singers.

   Fleury.

   (H. E., Liv. XL., chap. 1.)

   These canons of the Council of Trullo have served ever since to the
   Greeks and to all the Christians of the East as the universal rule with
   regard to clerical continence, and they have been now in full force for
   a thousand years.  That is to say, It is not permitted to men who are
   clerics in Holy Orders to marry after their ordination.  Bishops must
   keep perfect continence, whether before their consecration they are
   married or not.  Priests, deacons, and subdeacons already married can
   keep their wives and live with them, except on the days they are to
   approach the holy mysteries.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon IV.

   If any bishop, presbyter, deacon, sub-deacon, lector, cantor, or
   door-keeper has had intercourse with a woman dedicated to God, let him
   be deposed, as one who has corrupted a spouse of Christ, but if a
   layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.

   A cleric coupled to a spouse of God shall be deposed.  In the case of a
   layman he shall be cut off.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars II., Causa XXVII., Q. I., c. vj.

   A layman ravishing a nun, by secular law was punished by death.
   Balsamon gives the reference thus:  V Cap. primi tit. iiij. lib.
   Basilic. or cxxiij. Novel.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon V.

   Let none of those who are on the priestly list possess any woman or
   maid servant, beyond those who are enumerated in the canon as being
   persons free from suspicion, preserving himself hereby from being
   implicated in any blame.  But if anyone transgresses our decree let him
   be deposed.  And let eunuchs also observe the same rule, that by
   foresight they may be free of censure.  But those who transgress, let
   them be deposed, if indeed they are clerics; but if laymen let them be
   excommunicated.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

   A priest, even if a eunuch, shall not have in his house a maid or other
   woman except those on whom no suspicion can light.

   See Canon III., of First Ecumenical Council at Nice.  This canon adds
   Eunuchs.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VI.

   Since it is declared in the apostolic canons that of those who are
   advanced to the clergy unmarried, only lectors and cantors are able to
   marry; we also, maintaining this, determine that henceforth it is in
   nowise lawful for any subdeacon, deacon or presbyter after his
   ordination to contract matrimony but if he shall have dared to do so,
   let him be deposed.  And if any of those who enter the clergy, wishes
   to be joined to a wife in lawful marriage before he is ordained
   subdeacon, deacon, or presbyter, let it be done.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.

   If any ordained person contracts matrimony, let him be deposed.  If he
   wishes to be married he should become so before his ordination.

   Aristenus points out how this canon annuls the tenth canon of Ancyra,
   which allows a deacon and even a presbyter to marry after ordination
   and continue in his ministry, provided at the time of his ordination he
   had in the presence of witnesses declared his inability to remain
   chaste or his desire to marry.  This present canon follows the XXVI^th
   of the Apostolic canons.

   The last clause of this canon, limited in its application to
   subdeacons, is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars I., Dist. XXXII., c. vi.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Excursus on the Marriage of the Clergy.

   On this subject there is a popular misconception which must first be
   removed.  In the popular mind to-day there is no distinction between "a
   married clergy" being allowed, and "the marriage of the clergy" being
   allowed; even theological writers who have attained some repute have
   confused these two things in the most unfortunate and perplexing
   fashion.  It will suffice to mention as an instance of this Bp. Harold
   Browne in his book on the XXXIX. Articles, in which not only is the
   confusion above spoken of made, but the very blunder is used for
   controversial purposes, to back up and support by the authority of the
   ancient Church in the East (which allowed a married clergy) the
   practice of the Nestorians and of the modern Church of England, both of
   which tolerate the marriage of the clergy, a thing which the ancient
   Church abhorred and punished with deposition.

   I cannot better express the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church
   in the East than by quoting the words of the Rev. John Fulton in the
   Introduction to the Third Edition of his Index Canonum. [345]   He
   says:  "Marriage was no impediment to ordination even as a Bishop; and
   Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, equally with other men, were forbidden
   to put away their wives under pretext of religion.  The case was
   different when a man was unmarried at the time of his ordination.  Then
   he was held to have given himself wholly to God in the office of the
   Holy Ministry, and he was forbidden to take back from his offering that
   measure of his cares and his affections which must necessarily be given
   to the maintenance and nurture of his family.  In short, the married
   man might be ordained, but with a few exceptions no man was allowed to
   marry after ordination."  In his "Digest" sub voce "Celibacy" he gives
   the earliest canon law on the subject as follows:  "None of the clergy,
   except readers and singers may marry after ordination (Ap. Can. xxvi.);
   but deacons may marry, if at their ordination they have declared an
   intention to do so (Ancyra x.).  A priest who marries is to be deposed
   (Neocæsarea i.).  A deaconess who marries is to be anathematized (Chal.
   xv.); a monk or dedicated virgin who marries, is to be excommunicated
   (Chal. xvi.).  Those who break their vows of celibacy are to fulfil the
   penance of digamists (Ancyra xix.)." [346]

   We may then take it for a general principle that in no part of the
   ancient Church was a priest allowed to contract holy matrimony; and in
   no place was he allowed to exercise his priesthood afterwards, if he
   should dare to enter into such a relation with a woman.  As I have so
   often remarked it is not my place to approve or disapprove this law of
   the Church, my duty is the much simpler one of tracing historically
   what the law was and what it is in the East and West to-day.  The
   Reformers considered that in this, as in most other matters, these
   venerable churches had made a mistake, but neither the maintenance nor
   the disproof of this opinion in any way concerns me, so far as this
   volume is concerned.  All that is necessary for me to do is to affirm
   that if a priest were at any time to attempt to marry, he would be
   attempting to do that which from the earliest times of which we have
   any record, no priest has ever been allowed to do, but which always has
   been punished as a gross sin of immorality.

   In tracing the history of this subject, the only time during which any
   real difficulty presents itself is the first three centuries, after
   that all is much clearer, and my duty is simply to lay the undisputed
   facts of the case before the reader.

   We begin then with the debatable ground.  And first with regard to the
   Lord, "the great High Priest of our profession," of course there can be
   no doubt that he set the example, or--if any think that he was not a
   pattern for the priests of his Church to follow--at least lived the
   life, of celibacy.  When we come to the question of what was the
   practice of his first followers in this matter, there would likewise
   seem to be but little if any reasonable doubt.  For while of the
   Apostles we have it recorded only of Peter that he was a married man,
   we have it also expressly recorded that in his case, as in that of all
   the rest who had "forsaken all" to follow him, the Lord himself said,
   "Every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
   father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake
   shall receive an hundred fold and shall inherit eternal life." [347]

   There can be no doubt that St. Paul in his epistles allows and even
   contemplates the probability that those admitted to the ranks of the
   clergy will have been already married, but distinctly says that they
   must have been the "husband of one wife," [348] by which all antiquity
   and every commentator of gravity recognizes that digamists are cut off
   from the possibility of ordination, but there is nothing to imply that
   the marital connexion was to be continued after ordination.  For a
   thorough treatment of this whole subject from the ancient and Patristic
   point of view, the reader is referred to St. Jerome. [349]

   The next stage in our progress is marked by the so-called Apostolical
   Canons.  Now for those who hold that these canons had directly or
   indirectly the Apostles for their author, or that as we have them now
   they are all of even sub-Apostolic date, the matter becomes more
   simple, for while indeed these canons do not expressly set forth the
   law subsequently formulated for the East, they certainly seem to be not
   inconsistent therewith, but rather to look that way, especially Canons
   V. and LI.  But few will be found willing to support so extreme an
   hypothesis, and while indeed many scholars are of opinion that most of
   the canons of the collection we style "Apostolical," are ante-Nicene,
   yet they will not be recognized as of more value than as so many
   mirrors, displaying what was at their date considered pure discipline.
   It is abundantly clear that the fathers in council in Trullo thought
   the discipline they were setting forth to be the original discipline of
   the Church in the matter, and the discipline of the West an innovation,
   but that such was really the case seems far from certain.  Thomassinus
   treats this point with much learning, and I shall cite some of the
   authorities he brings forward.  Of these the most important is
   Epiphanius, who as a Greek would be certain to give the tradition of
   the East, had there been any such tradition known in his time.  I give
   the three great passages.

   "It is evident that those from the priesthood are chiefly taken from
   the order of virgins, or if not from virgins, at least from monks; or
   if not from the order of monks, then they are wont to be made priests
   who keep themselves from their wives, or who are widows after a single
   marriage.  But he that has been entangled by a second marriage is not
   admitted to priesthood in the Church, even if he be continent from his
   wife, or be a widower.  Anyone of this sort is rejected from the grade
   of bishop, presbyter, deacon, or subdeacon.  The order of reader,
   however, can be chosen from all the orders these grades can be chosen
   from, that is to say from virgins, monks, the continent, widowers, and
   they who are bound by honest marriage.  Moreover, if necessity so
   compel, even digamists may be lectors, for such is not a priest, etc.,
   etc." [350]

   "Christ taught us by an example that the priestly work and ornaments
   should be communicated to those who shall have preserved their
   continency after a single marriage, or shall have persevered in
   virginity.  And this the Apostles thereafter honestly and piously
   decreed, through the ecclesiastical canon of the priesthood." [351]

   "Nay, moreover, he that still uses marriage, and begets children, even
   though the husband of but one wife, is by no means admitted by the
   Church to the order of deacon, presbyter, bishop, or subdeacon.  But
   for all this, he who shall have kept himself from the commerce of his
   one wife, or has been deprived of her, may be ordained, and this is
   most usually the case in those places where the ecclesiastical canons
   are most accurately observed." [352]

   Nor is the weight of this evidence lessened, but much increased, by the
   acknowledgment of the same father that in some places in his days the
   celibate life was not observed by such priests as had wives, for he
   explains that such a state of things had come about "not from following
   the authority of the canons, but through the neglect of men, which is
   wont at certain periods to be the case." [353]

   The witness of the Western Fathers although so absolutely and
   indisputably clear is not so conclusive as to the East, and yet one
   passage from St. Jerome should be quoted.  "The Virgin Christ and the
   Virgin Mary dedicated the virginity of both sexes.  The Apostles were
   chosen when either virgins or continent after marriage, and bishops,
   presbyters, and deacons are chosen either when virgins, or widowers, or
   at least continent forever after the priesthood." [354]

   It would be out of place to enter into any detailed argument upon the
   force of these passages, but I shall lay before the reader the summing
   up of the whole matter by a weighty recent writer of the Ultramontane
   Roman School.

   "Is the celibate an Apostolic ordinance?  Bickel affirmed that it is,
   and Funk denied it in 1878.  To-day [1896] canonists commonly admit
   that one cannot prove the existence of any formal precept, either
   divine or apostolic, which imposes the celibate upon the clergy, and
   that all the texts, whether taken out of Holy Scripture or from the
   Fathers, on this subject contain merely a counsel, and not a command."
   "In the Fourth Century a great number of councils forbade bishops,
   priests, and deacons to live in the use of marriage with their lawful
   wives....But there does not appear to have been any disposition to
   declare by law as invalid the marriages of clerics in Holy Orders.  In
   the Fifth and Sixth Centuries the law of the celibate was observed by
   all the Churches of the West, thanks to the Councils and to the
   Popes."  "In the Seventh and down to the end of the Tenth Century,
   [355] as a matter of fact the law of celibacy was little observed in a
   great part of the Western Church, but as a matter of law the Roman
   Pontiffs and the Councils were constant in their proclamation of its
   obligation."  By the canonical practice of the unreformed West, the
   reception of Holy Orders is an impedimentum dirimens matrimonii, which
   renders any marriage subsequently contracted not only illicit but
   absolutely null.  On this diriment impediment the same Roman Catholic
   writer says:  "The diriment impediment of Holy Orders is of
   ecclesiastical obligation and not of divine, and consequently the
   Church can dispense it.  This is the present teaching which is in
   opposition to that of the old schools."

   "There is no question of the nullity of the marriages contracted by
   clerics before 1139.  At the Council of the Lateran of that year,
   Innocent II. declared that these marriages contracted in contempt of
   the ecclesiastical law are not true marriages in his eyes.  His
   successors do not seem to have insisted much upon this new diriment
   impediment, although it was attacked most vigorously by the offending
   clergymen; but the School of Bologna, the authority of which was then
   undisputed, openly declared for the nullity of the marriages contracted
   by clerics in Holy Orders.  Thus it is that this point of law has been
   settled rather by teaching, than by any precise text, or by any law of
   a known date." [356]

   It should not, however, be forgotten that although this is true with
   regard to Pope Innocent II. in 1139, it is also true that in 530 the
   Emperor Justinian declared null and void all marriages contracted by
   clerics in Holy Orders, and the children of such marriages to be
   spurious (spurii).

   The reader will be interested in reading the answer on this point made
   by King Henry VIII. to the letter sent him by the German ambassadors.
   [357]   I can here give but a part translated into English.  "Although
   the Church from the beginning admitted married men, as priests and
   bishops, who were without crime, the husband of one wife, (out of the
   necessity of the times, as sufficient other suitable men could not be
   found as would suffice for the teaching of the world) yet Paul himself
   chose the celibate Timothy; but if anyone came unmarried to the
   priesthood and afterwards took a wife, he was always deposed from the
   priesthood, according to the canon of the Council of Neocæsarea which
   was before that of Nice.  So, too, in the Council of Chalcedon, in the
   first canon of which all former canons are confirmed, it is established
   that a deaconess, if she give herself over to marriage, shall remain
   under anathema, and a virgin who had dedicated herself to God and a
   monk who join themselves in marriage, shall remain excommunicated....No
   Apostolic canon nor the Council of Nice contain anything similar to
   what you assert, viz.:  that priests once ordained can marry
   afterwards.  And with this statement agrees the Sixth Synod, in which
   it was decreed that if any of the clergy should wish to lead a wife, he
   should do so before receiving the Subdiaconate, since afterwards it was
   by no means lawful; nor was there given in the Sixth Synod any liberty
   to priests of leading wives after their priesting, as you assert.
   Therefore from the beginning of the newborn Church it is clearly seen
   that at no time it was permitted to a priest to lead a wife after his
   priesting, and nowhere, where this was attempted, was it done with
   impunity, but the culprit was deposed from his priesthood."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [345] John Fulton, Index Canonum, p. 29 (N.Y., 1892.)

   [346] Ibid., p. 294.

   [347] Matt. xix. 29; Lk. xviii. 29.  In Mark x. 29 is found the same
   incident recorded, but while "wife" is mentioned among the things
   "left," no "wife" is found among the things gained.

   [348] 1 Tim. iii., 2 and 12; Titus i., 6.

   [349] Hieron, Adv. Jovin. Lib. I.  Confer also the In Apolog. pro
   libris Adv. Jovin.

   [350] Epiph. Exposit. Fid. Cath., c. xxi.

   [351] Ibid. Hæresi. 48, n. 7.

   [352] Epiph. Hæresi, 59, n. 4.

   [353] Ibid. ut supra.

   [354] Hieron. Apolog. pro. lib. adv. Jovin.

   [355] It is curious that this is just four centuries, the same length
   of time as from the Reformation.

   [356] L'Ami du Clergé, 6 Août, 1896, pp. 677 and 678.

   [357] This letter is found in full in the Addenda to the Appendix at
   the end of the seventh volume of Burnet's History of the Reformation
   (London.  Orr & Co., 1850, p. cxlviij.).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VII.

   Since we have learned that in some churches deacons hold ecclesiastical
   offices, and that hereby some of them with arrogancy and license sit
   daringly before the presbyters:  we have determined that a deacon, even
   if in an office of dignity, that is to say, in whatever ecclesiastical
   office he may be, is not to have his seat before a presbyter, except he
   is acting as representative of his own patriarch or metropolitan in
   another city under another superior, for then he shall be honoured as
   filling his place.  But if anyone, possessed with a tyrannical
   audacity, shall have dared to do such a thing, let him be ejected from
   his peculiar rank and be last of all of the order in whose list he is
   in his own church; our Lord admonishing us that we are not to delight
   in taking the chief seats, according to the doctrine which is found in
   the holy Evangelist Luke, as put forth by our Lord and God himself.
   For to those who were called he taught this parable:  "When ye are
   bidden by anyone to a marriage sit not down in the highest room lest a
   more honourable man than thou shall have been bidden by him; and he who
   bade thee and him come and say to thee:  Give this man place, and thou
   begin with shame to take the lowest room.  But when thou art bidden,
   sit down in the lowest place, so that when he who bade thee cometh he
   may say to thee, Friend go up higher:  then thou shalt have worship in
   the presence of them that sit with thee.  For whosoever exalteth
   himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be
   exalted."  But the same thing also shall be observed in the remaining
   sacred orders; seeing that we know that spiritual things are to be
   preferred to worldly dignity.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.

   A deacon in the execution of his office, if he shall have occasion to
   sit in the presence of presbyters, shall take the lowest place unless
   he be the representative of the Patriarch or bishop.

   Balsamon, Zonaras, and following them Van Espen point out that this
   canon is a relaxation of the XVIII. Canon of Nice which punishes
   presumptuous deacons not only with loss of rank in their grade, but
   also with expulsion from their ministry.

   Van Espen well remarks that the Fathers of this synod had in mind not
   only the preservation of the distinction between deacons and
   presbyters, but also between those in ecclesiastical orders and those
   enjoying secular dignities with regard to ecclesiastical matters, but
   who were not to gain there from ecclesiastical precedence.  This is
   what is meant by the last clause of the canon.

   Beveridge gives a list of these quasi ecclesiastical dignitaries as
   follows:  Magnus OEconomus, Magno Sacello Præpositus, Magnus Vasorum
   Custos, Chartophylax, Parvo Sacello Præpositus, Primus Defensor.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VIII.

   Since we desire that in every point the things which have been decreed
   by our holy fathers may also be established and confirmed, we hereby
   renew the canon which orders that synods of the bishops of each
   province be held every year where the bishop of the metropolis shall
   deem best.  But since on account of the incursions of barbarians and
   certain other incidental causes, those who preside over the churches
   cannot hold synods twice a year, it seems right that by all means once
   a year--on account of ecclesiastical questions which are likely to
   arise--a synod of the aforesaid bishops should be holden in every
   province, between the holy feast of Easter and October, as has been
   said above, in the place which the Metropolitan shall have deemed most
   fitting.  And let such bishops as do not attend, when they are at home
   in their own cities and are in good health, and free from all
   unavoidable and necessary business, be fraternally reproved.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.

   Whenever it is impossible to hold two synods a year, one at least shall
   be celebrated, between Easter and the month of October.

   This canon under the name of the "Sixth Synod" is referred to in Canon
   VI. of the Seventh Ecumenical Council (II. Nice), and the bishops of
   Quinisext are called "Fathers."

   Van Espen.

   What at first was only allowed on account of necessity, little by
   little passed into general law, and at last was received as law, that
   once a year there was to be a meeting of the provincial synod.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon IX.

   Let no cleric be permitted to keep a "public house."  For if it be not
   permitted to enter a tavern, much more is it forbidden to serve others
   in it and to carry on a trade which is unlawful for him.  But if he
   shall have done any such thing, either let him desist or be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.

   If clerics are forbidden to enter public houses, much more are they
   forbidden to keep them.  Let them either give them up or be deposed.

   Compare with this canon liv. of the Apostolic Canons; xxiv. of
   Laodicea; and xliij. of the Synod of Carthage. [358]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [358] It is curious that Balsamon quotes this canon at xl., i.e., the
   Latin numbering and not the Greek which he himself uses in his scholia.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon X.

   A bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who receives usury, or what is called
   hecatostæ, let him desist or be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon X.

   A bishop, presbyter, or deacon who takes usury shall be deposed unless
   he stops doing so.

   See notes on canon XVI. of Nice, and the Excursus thereto appended.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XI.

   Let no one in the priestly order nor any layman eat the unleavened
   bread of the Jews, nor have any familiar intercourse with them, nor
   summon them in illness, nor receive medicines from them, nor bathe with
   them; but if anyone shall take in hand to do so, if he is a cleric, let
   him be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.

   Jewish unleavened bread is to be refused.  Whoever even calls in Jews
   as physicians or bathes with them is to be deposed.

   Van Espen.

   Theodore Balsamon is of opinion that this canon does not forbid the
   eating of unleavened bread; but that what is intended is the keeping of
   feasts in a Jewish fashion, or in sacrifices to use unleavened bread
   (azymes), and this, says Balsamon, on account of the Latins who
   celebrate their feasts with azymes.

   Canon lxix. [i.e., lxx.] of those commonly called Apostolic forbids the
   observance of festivals with the Jews; and declares it to be unlawful
   to receive manuscula from them, but by this canon all familiar
   intercourse with them is forbidden.

   While there can be no doubt that in all the Trullan canons there is an
   undercurrent of hostility to the West, yet in this canon I can see no
   such spirit, and I think it has been read into it by the greater
   bitterness of later times.  This seems the more certain from the fact
   that there is nothing new whatever in the provision with respect to the
   passover bread, vide canons of Laodicea xxxvij. and xxxviij.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars II., Causa xxviij., can. xiii. [359]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [359] Van Espen says that in his copy of Gratian this canon is assigned
   to the VII^th Synod.  Such is not the case in the edition in Migne's
   Patrologia Latina, where the reference is given as ex VI. Synodo. c.
   II., and Judæorum is found in the text instead of the eorum of which
   Van Espen complains.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XII.

   Moreover this also has come to our knowledge, that in Africa and Libya
   and in other places the most God-beloved bishops in those parts do not
   refuse to live with their wives, even after consecration, thereby
   giving scandal and offence to the people.  Since, therefore, it is our
   particular care that all things tend to the good of the flock placed in
   our hands and committed to us,--it has seemed good that henceforth
   nothing of the kind shall in any way occur.  And we say this, not to
   abolish and overthrow what things were established of old by Apostolic
   authority, but as caring for the health of the people and their advance
   to better things, and lest the ecclesiastical state should suffer any
   reproach.  For the divine Apostle says:  "Do all to the glory of God,
   give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the
   Church of God, even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine
   own profit but the profit of many, that they may be saved.  Be ye
   imitators of me even as I also am of Christ."  But if any shall have
   been observed to do such a thing, let him be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.

   Although it has been decreed that wives are not to be cast forth,
   nevertheless that we may counsel for the better, we give command that
   no one ordained a bishop shall any longer live with his wife.

   Aristenus.

   The fifth Apostolic canon allows neither bishop, presbyter, nor deacon
   to cast forth his wife under pretext of piety; and assigns penalties
   for any that shall do so, and if he will not amend he is to be
   deposed.  But this canon on the other hand does not permit a bishop
   even to live with his wife after his consecration.  But by this change
   no contempt is meant to be poured out upon what had been established by
   Apostolic authority, but it was made through care for the people's
   health and for leading on to better things, and for fear that the
   sacerdotal estate might suffer some wrong.

   Van Espen.

   (In Can. vi. Apost.)

   In the time of this canon [of the Apostles so called] not only
   presbyters and deacons, but bishops also, it is clear, were allowed by
   Eastern custom to have their wives; and Zonaras and Balsamon note that
   even until the Sixth Council, commonly called in Trullo bishops were
   allowed to have their wives.

   (The same on this canon.)

   But not only do they command [in this canon] that bishops after their
   consecration no longer have commerce with their own wives, but further,
   they prohibit them even to presume to live with them.

   Zonaras.

   When the faith first was born and came forth into the world, the
   Apostles treated with greater softness and indulgence those who
   embraced the truth, which as yet was not scattered far and wide, nor
   did they exact from them perfection in all respects, but made great
   allowances for their weakness and for the inveterate force of the
   customs with which they were surrounded, both among the heathen and
   among the Jews.  But now, when far and wide our religion has been
   propagated, more strenuous efforts were made to enforce those things
   which pertain to a higher and holier life, as our angelical worship
   increased day by day, and to insist on by law a life of continence to
   those who were elevated to the episcopate, so that not only they should
   abstain from their wives, but that they should have them no longer as
   bed-fellows; and not only that they no longer admit them as sharers of
   their bed, but they do not allow them even to stop under the same roof
   or in the house.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIII.

   Since we know it to be handed down as a rule of the Roman Church that
   those who are deemed worthy to be advanced to the diaconate or
   presbyterate should promise no longer to cohabit with their wives, we,
   preserving the ancient rule and apostolic perfection and order, will
   that the lawful marriages of men who are in holy orders be from this
   time forward firm, by no means dissolving their union with their wives
   nor depriving them of their mutual intercourse at a convenient time.
   Wherefore, if anyone shall have been found worthy to be ordained
   subdeacon, or deacon, or presbyter, he is by no means to be prohibited
   from admittance to such a rank, even if he shall live with a lawful
   wife.  Nor shall it be demanded of him at the time of his ordination
   that he promise to abstain from lawful intercourse with his wife:  lest
   we should affect injuriously marriage constituted by God and blessed by
   his presence, as the Gospel saith:  "What God hath joined together let
   no man put asunder;" and the Apostle saith, "Marriage is honourable and
   the bed undefiled;" and again, "Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to
   be loosed."  But we know, as they who assembled at Carthage (with a
   care for the honest life of the clergy) said, that subdeacons, who
   handle the Holy Mysteries, and deacons, and presbyters should abstain
   from their consorts according to their own course [of ministration].
   So that what has been handed down through the Apostles and preserved by
   ancient custom, we too likewise maintain, knowing that there is a time
   for all things and especially for fasting and prayer.  For it is meet
   that they who assist at the divine altar should be absolutely continent
   when they are handling holy things, in order that they may be able to
   obtain from God what they ask in sincerity.

   If therefore anyone shall have dared, contrary to the Apostolic Canons,
   to deprive any of those who are in holy orders, presbyter, or deacon,
   or subdeacon of cohabitation and intercourse with his lawful wife, let
   him be deposed.  In like manner also if any presbyter or deacon on
   pretence of piety has dismissed his wife, let him be excluded from
   communion; and if he persevere in this let him be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

   Although the Romans wish that everyone ordained deacon or presbyter
   should put away his wife, we wish the marriages of deacons and
   presbyters to continue valid and firm.

   Fleury.

   (H. E., Livre XL., chap. 1.)

   What is said in this canon, that the council of Carthage orders priests
   to abstain from their wives at prescribed periods, is a
   misunderstanding of the decree, caused either by malice or by
   ignorance.  This canon is one of those adopted by the Fifth Council of
   Carthage held in the year 400, and it is decreed that subdeacons,
   deacons; priests, and bishops shall abstain from their wives, following
   the ancient statutes, and shall be as though they had them not.  The
   Greek version of this canon has rendered the Latin words priora statuta
   by these, idious horous, which may mean "fixed times":  for the
   translator read, following another codex, propria for priora.  Be this
   as it may, the Fathers of the Trullan council supposed that this
   obliged the clergy only to continence at certain fixed times, and were
   not willing to see that it included bishops as well.

   Van Espen.

   Although the Latin Church does not disapprove, [360] as contrary to the
   law of the Gospel the discipline of the Greeks which allows the use of
   marriage to presbyters and deacons, provided it was contracted before
   ordination; yet never has it approved this canon which with too great
   zeal condemns the opposite custom, and rashly assigns great errors to
   the Roman Church.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars I., Dist. XXXI., c. xiij.

   Antonius Augustinus in his proposed emendations of Gratian says (Lib.
   I. dial. de emend. Grat. c. 8.):  "This canon can in no way be
   received; for it is written in opposition to the celibacy of the Latin
   priests, and openly is against the Roman Church."  But to me the note
   which Gratian appends seems much more learned and true:  "This however
   must be understood as of local application; for the Eastern Church, to
   which the VI. Synod prescribed this rule, did not receive a vow of
   chastity from the ministers of the altar."  It may be well to note here
   that by the opinion of most Latin casuists the obligation to chastity
   among the Roman clergy rests upon the vow and not upon any law of the
   Church binding thereto.  This evidently was the opinion of Gratian.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [360] Clement VIII. made a decree in conformity with this canon that a
   Greek presbyter who was married shall abstain from his wife for a week
   or three days before he offered the sacrifice of the mass.  Const. 33,
   in Bull. Rom (cit. Van Espen l. c.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIV.

   Let the canon of our holy God-bearing Fathers be confirmed in this
   particular also; that a presbyter be not ordained before he is thirty
   years of age, even if he be a very worthy man, but let him be kept
   back.  For our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized and began to teach when
   he was thirty.  In like manner let no deacon be ordained before he is
   twenty-five, nor a deaconess before she is forty.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.

   A presbyter thirty years of age, a deacon twenty-five, and a deaconess
   forty.

   Compare Canon XI. of Neocæsarea.

   It may be interesting to note here that by the law of the Roman
   Communion the canonical ages are as follows:

   A subdeacon must have completed his twenty-first year, a deacon his
   twenty-second, a priest his twenty-fourth, and a bishop his thirtieth.
   None of the inferior clergy can hold a simple benefice before he has
   begun his fourteenth year.  Ecclesiastical dignities, such as Cathedral
   canonries, cannot be conferred on any who have not finished the
   twenty-second year.  A benefice to which is attached a cure of souls
   can be given only to one who is over twenty-four, and a diocese only to
   one who has completed his thirtieth year.  (Vide Ferraris, Bibliotheca
   Prompta.)

   In the Anglican Communion the ages are, in England, for a bishop "fully
   thirty years of age," for a priest twenty-four, and for a deacon
   twenty-three: [361]   and in the United States, for a bishop thirty
   years of age, for a priest twenty-four, and for a deacon twenty-one.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [361] A faculty is allowed for earlier ordination, but since 1804 only
   to be granted by the Archbishop of Canterbury.  This limitation is,
   however, only of Parliamentary sanction (44 Geo. III., ch. 43).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XV.

   A subdeacon is not to be ordained under twenty years of age.  And if
   any one in any grade of the priesthood shall have been ordained
   contrary to the prescribed time let him be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.

   Those shall be chosen as Subdeacons who are twenty years of age.

   This age seems first to have been fixed by the Second Council of Toledo
   [362] (circa, a.d. 535) in its first canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [362] It is curious that so learned a scholar as the late Henry
   Bradshaw in his article "Subdeacon" in Smith & Cheetham'sDictionary of
   Christ. Antiq. should give the date of this synod as 447.  Hefele fixes
   it at 527 or 531.  Baronius, Binius, Labbe, and many others at 531.  A
   very ancient ms. assigns it to the year 565 of the Spanish era, i.e.
   527, and this is the date Cardinal de Aguirre adopts, and is also the
   one given to the council by the editors of L'Art de Vérifier les dates.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVI.

   Since the book of the Acts tells us that seven deacons were appointed
   by the Apostles, and the synod of Neocæsarea in the canons which it put
   forth determined that there ought to be canonically only seven deacons,
   even if the city be very large, in accordance with the book of the
   Acts; we, having fitted the mind of the fathers to the Apostles' words,
   find that they spoke not of those men who ministered at the Mysteries
   but in the administration which pertains to the serving of tables.  For
   the book of the Acts reads as follows:  "In those days, when the number
   of the disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring dissension of
   the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected
   in the daily ministrations.  And the Twelve called the multitude of the
   disciples with them and said, It is not meet for us to leave the word
   of God and serve tables.  Look ye out therefore, brethren, from among
   you seven men of good report full of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom, whom
   we may appoint over this business.  But we will give ourselves
   continually unto prayer and unto the ministry of the word.  And the
   saying pleased the whole multitude:  and they chose Stephen a man full
   of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor,
   and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:  whom they
   set before the Apostles."

   John Chrysostom, a Doctor of the Church, interpreting these words,
   proceeds thus:  "It is a remarkable fact that the multitude was not
   divided in its choice of the men, and that the Apostles were not
   rejected by them.  But we must learn what sort of rank they had, and
   what ordination they received.  Was it that of deacons?  But this
   office did not yet exist in the churches.  But was it the dispensation
   of a presbyter?  But there was not as yet any bishop, but only
   Apostles, whence I think it is clear and manifest that neither of
   deacons nor of presbyters was there then the name." [363]

   But on this account therefore we also announce that the aforesaid seven
   deacons are not to be understood as deacons who served at the
   Mysteries, according to the teaching before set forth, but that they
   were those to whom a dispensation was entrusted for the common benefit
   of those that were gathered together, who to us in this also were a
   type of philanthropy and zeal towards those who are in need.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.

   Whoever affirms that the number of deacons should be seven according to
   the saying of the Acts, should know that the reference in that passage
   is not to Deacons of the Mysteries but to such as serve tables.

   Van Espen here reminds us that this is, as Zonaras calls attention to
   in his scholion on this place, a correction rather than an
   interpretation of the XV^th Canon of Neocæsarea, and Balsamon also says
   the same.  The only interest that the matter possesses is that a canon
   which had been received by the Fourth Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon)
   should receive such treatment from such an assembly as the Synod in
   Trullo.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [363] I have not followed the Oxford translation, which seems to me to
   have reversed the point.  In a foot-note to that translation
   (Chrysostom on Acts, Part I., p. 199) will be found a translation of
   this canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVII.

   Since clerics of different churches have left their own churches in
   which they were ordained and betaken themselves to other bishops, and
   without the consent of their own bishop have been settled in other
   churches, and thus they have proved themselves to be insolent and
   disobedient; we decree that from the month of January of the past IV^th
   Indiction no cleric, of whatsoever grade he be, shall have power,
   without letters dimissory of his own bishop, to be registered in the
   clergy list of another church.  Whoever in future shall not have
   observed this rule, but shall have brought disgrace upon himself as
   well as on the bishop who ordained him, let him be deposed together
   with him who also received him.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.

   Whoever receives and ordains a wandering cleric shall be deposed
   together with him thus wickedly ordained.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars II., Causa XXI., Quæst., ii. can. j.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVIII.

   Those clerics who in consequence of a barbaric incursion or on account
   of any other circumstance have gone abroad, we order to return again to
   their churches after the cause has passed away, or when the incursion
   of the barbarians is at an end.  Nor are they to leave them for long
   without cause.  If anyone shall not have returned according to the
   direction of this present canon--let him be cut off until he shall
   return to his own church.  And the same shall be the punishment of the
   bishop who received him.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.

   Whoever has emigrated on account of an invasion of the barbarians,
   shall return to the Church to whose clergy he belongs as soon as the
   incursion ceases.  But if he shall not do so, he shall be cut off
   together with him to whom he has gone.

   Balsamon.

   The Fathers are worthy of great praise.  For having regard to the
   honour of the ecclesiastical order and of each bishop, they have
   decreed that clergymen, who from just and valid causes have gone forth
   without letters dimissory from those who ordained them, should return
   to their own clergy soon as the cause which drove them forth ceases;
   and that they should not be enrolled on the clergy list of any other
   church.  But whosoever cannot be persuaded to return is to be cut off,
   as well as the bishop who detains him.  But someone will say, If a
   bishop who does such a thing is cut off by his Metropolitan; and
   likewise if a Metropolitan spurns this canon he is punished by the
   Patriarch.  But if an autocephalous archbishop or a Patriarch other
   than the Patriarch of Constantinople (for he has a faculty for doing
   so) should be convicted of a breach of this Canon, by whom would he be
   cut off?  I suppose by the Supreme Pontiff [364] (oiomai oun para tou
   meizonos archiereos).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [364] Can this mean the Pope?
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIX.

   It behoves those who preside over the churches, every day but
   especially on Lord's days, to teach all the clergy and people words of
   piety and of right religion, gathering out of holy Scripture
   meditations and determinations of the truth, and not going beyond the
   limits now fixed, nor varying from the tradition of the God-bearing
   fathers.  And if any controversy in regard to Scripture shall have been
   raised, let them not interpret it otherwise than as the lights and
   doctors of the church in their writings have expounded it, and in those
   let them glory rather than in composing things out of their own heads,
   lest through their lack of skill [365] they may have departed from what
   was fitting.  For through the doctrine of the aforesaid fathers, the
   people coming to the knowledge of what is good and desirable, as well
   as what is useless and to be rejected, will remodel their life for the
   better, and not be led by ignorance, but applying their minds to the
   doctrine, they will take heed that no evil befall them and work out
   their salvation in fear of impending punishment.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.

   The prelates of the Church, especially upon Lord's days, shall teach
   doctrine.

   Van Espen.

   How great an obligation of preaching rests upon bishops, the successors
   of the Apostles, is evident from the words of St. Paul, "Christ sent me
   not to baptize but to preach" (1 Cor. i. 17), and his chief adjuration
   to Timothy though Jesus Christ and his coming, was "Preach the Word" (2
   Tim. ii. 4.).  For this reason the fathers formerly called the
   episcopate the preaching-office (officium predicationis), as is evident
   from the profession of Adelbert Morinensis, and the form of profession
   of a future Archbishop.  Both of these will be found in Labbe, appendix
   to Tom. VIII., of his Concilia.

   Council of Trent.

   (Sess. V., c. 2.)

   The preaching of the Gospel is the chief work of bishops.

   Convocation of Canterbury, a.d. 1571.

   (Cardwell.  Synodalia, Vol. I., p. 126.)

   The clergy will be careful to teach nothing in their sermons to be
   religiously held and believed by the people except what is agreeable to
   the doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and what the Catholic
   Fathers and Ancient Bishops have collected out of the same. [366]

   Council of Trent.

   (Sess. IV.)

   No one shall dare to interpret the Holy Scripture contrary to the
   unanimous consent of the fathers.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [365] I have followed the reading apeiros.

   [366] It is not generally known that this evident citation of Canon
   XIX. of the Quinisext Council forms part of the action enforcing the
   XXXIX. Articles of the Church of England.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XX.

   It shall not be lawful for a bishop to teach publicly in any city which
   does not belong to him.  If any shall have been observed doing this,
   let him cease from his episcopate, but let him discharge the office of
   a presbyter.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

   The bishop of one city shall not teach publicly in another.  If he
   shall be shown to have dose so he shall be deprived of the episcopate
   and shall perform the functions of a presbyter.

   The meaning of this canon is most obscure.  Balsamon and Zonaras think
   that the Bishop is not to be deposed from his Episcopate, but only
   shorn of his right of executing the Episcopal functions, so that he
   will virtually be reduced to a presbyter.  Aristenus, on the other
   hand, considers the deposition to be real and that this canon creates
   an exception to Canon XXIX. of Chalcedon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXI.

   Those who have become guilty of crimes against the canons, and on this
   account subject to complete and perpetual deposition, are degraded to
   the condition of layman.  If, however, keeping conversion continually
   before their eyes, they willingly deplore the sin on account of which
   they fell from grace, and made themselves aliens therefrom, they may
   still cut their hair after the manner of clerics.  But if they are not
   willing to submit themselves to this canon, they must wear their hair
   as laymen, as being those who have preferred the communion of the world
   to the celestial life.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.

   Whoever is already deposed and reduced to the lay estate, if he shall
   repent, let him continue deposed but be shorn.  But if otherwise, he
   must let his hair grow.

   Beveridge wishes to read "who have become canonically guilty of
   crimes," substituting kanonikos for kanonikois, in accordance with the
   Bodleian and Amerbachian codices.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXII.

   Those who are ordained for money, whether bishops or of any rank
   whatever, and not by examination and choice of life, we order to be
   deposed as well as those also who ordained them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.

   Whoever is ordained for pay shall be deposed together with his
   ordainer.

   Van Espen.

   The present canon orders to be deposed not only the one simoniacally
   ordained, but also his ordainer, ordering that ordinations should take
   place on account, not of money, but of the excellence of the
   examination stood by the candidate and on account of his uprightness of
   life.  And it evidently takes it for granted that, where money has been
   used, examination, excellence of life, and consideration of merit enter
   but little into the matter, or at least are paid no attention to.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXIII.

   That no one, whether bishop, presbyter, or deacon, when giving the
   immaculate Communion, shall exact from him who communicates fees of any
   kind.  For grace is not to be sold, nor do we give the sanctification
   of the Holy Spirit for money; but to those who are worthy of the gift
   it is to be communicated in all simplicity.  But if any of those
   enrolled among the clergy make demands on those he communicates let him
   be deposed, as an imitator of the error and wickedness of Simon.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.

   Whoever shall demand an obolus or anything else for giving the spotless
   communion shall be deposed.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars. II., Causa I., Quæst. I., can. 100, attributed to the VI. Synod.
   Ivo reads, "From the Sixth Synod, III. Constantinople."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXIV.

   No one who is on the priestly catalogue nor any monk is allowed to take
   part in horse-races or to assist at theatrical representations. But if
   any clergyman be called to a marriage, as soon as the games begin let
   him rise up and go out, for so it is ordered by the doctrine of our
   fathers. And if any one shall be convicted of such an offence let him
   cease therefrom or be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.

   A clergyman or monk shall be deposed who goes to horse-races, or does
   not leave nuptials before the players are brought in.

   Van Espen.

   Scarcely ever were these plays exhibited without the introduction of
   something contrary to honesty and chastity.  As Lupus here notes, the
   word "obscene" has its derivation from these "scenic" representations.

   Rightly therefore has it been forbidden by the sacred canons that the
   clergy should witness any such plays.

   In the second part of this canon by the words "ordered by the doctrine
   of our fathers," the Synod understands the doctrine of the fathers of
   the synod of Laodicea, which in its canon liv. condemned the same
   abuse.

   Compare the canon given in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's
   Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXXIV. can. xix.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXV.

   Moreover we renew the canon which orders that country (agroikikas)
   parishes and those which are in the provinces (enchorious) shall remain
   subject to the bishops who had possession of them; especially if for
   thirty years they had administered them without opposition.  But if
   within thirty years there had been or should be any controversy on the
   point, it is lawful for those who think themselves injured to refer the
   matter to the provincial synod.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.

   Rural and out of town parishes held for thirty years may be retained.
   But within that time there may be a controversy.

   Compare notes on canon XVII. of Chalcedon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXVI.

   If a presbyter has through ignorance contracted an illegal marriage,
   while he still retains the right to his place, as we have defined in
   the sacred canons, yet he must abstain from all sacerdotal work.  For
   it is sufficient if to such an one indulgence is granted.  For he is
   unfit to bless another who needs to take care of his own wounds, for
   blessing is the imparting of sanctification.  But how can he impart
   this to another who does not possess it himself through a sin of
   ignorance?  Neither then in public nor in private can he bless nor
   distribute to others the body of Christ, [nor perform any other
   ministry]; but being content with his seat of honour let him lament to
   the Lord that his sin of ignorance may be remitted.  For it is manifest
   that the nefarious marriage must be dissolved, neither can the man have
   any intercourse with her on account of whom he is deprived of the
   execution of his priesthood.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.

   A priest who has fallen into an illicit marriage and been deposed, may
   still have his seat, but only when he abstains for the future from his
   wickedness.

   Aristenus.

   If any presbyter before his ordination had married a widow, or a
   harlot, or an actress, or any other woman such as are forbidden, in
   ignorance, he shall cease from his priesthood but shall still have his
   place among the presbyters.  But such an illegitimate marriage, on
   account of which he was deprived of the Sacred Ministry, must be
   dissolved.

   Van Espen.

   The sacred canon to which the Synod here refers is number xxvij. of St.
   Basil in his Canonical Epistle to Amphilochius.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXVII.

   None of those who are in the catalogue of the clergy shall wear clothes
   unsuited to them, either while still living in town or when on a
   journey:  but they shall wear such clothes as are assigned to those who
   belong to the clergy.  And if any one shall violate this canon, he
   shall be cut off for one week.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVII.

   A clergyman must not wear an unsuitable dress either when travelling or
   when at home.  Should he do so, he shall be cut off for one week.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXVIII.

   Since we understand that in several churches grapes are brought to the
   altar, according to a custom which has long prevailed, and the
   ministers joined this with the unbloody sacrifice of the oblation, and
   distributed both to the people at the same time, we decree that no
   priest shall do this for the future, but shall administer the oblation
   alone to the people for the quickening of their souls and for the
   remission of their sins.  But with regard to the offering of grapes as
   first fruits, the priests may bless them apart [from the offering of
   the oblation] and distribute them to such as seek them as an act of
   thanksgiving to him who is the Giver of the fruits by which our bodies
   are increased and fed according to his divine decree.  And if any
   cleric shall violate this decree let him be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVIII.

   Grapes are by some joined with the unbloody sacrifice.  It is hereby
   decreed that no one shall for the future dare to do this.

   Van Espen.

   Similar blessings of fruit, and particularly of grapes, are found in
   more recent rituals as well as in the ancient Greek Euchologions and
   the Latin Rituales.  In the Sacramentary of St. Gregory will be found a
   benediction of grapes on the feast of St. Sixtus.

   Cardinal Bona says (De Rob. Liturg., Lib. II., cap. xiv.), that
   immediately before the words Semper bona creas, sanctificas, etc., if
   new fruits or any other things adapted to human use were to be blessed,
   they were wont in former times to be placed before the altar, and there
   to be blessed by the priest; and when the benediction was ended with
   the accustomed words "Through Christ our Lord," there was added the
   following prayer:  "Perquem hæc omnia, etc.," which words are not so
   much to be referred to the body and blood of Christ, as to the things
   to be blessed, which God continually creates by renewing, and we ask
   that they may be sanctified by his benediction to our use.

   But in after ages when the fervour of the faithful had grown cold, that
   the mass might not be too long, they were separated and yet the prayer
   remained which, as said to-day over the consecrated species alone, can
   hardly be understood.

   This canon is found in a shortened form in the Corpus Juris Canonici,
   Pars. III. De Consecrat., Dist. II., can. vj.

   Compare Canon of the Apostles number iv.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXIX.

   A canon of the Synod of Carthage says that the holy mysteries of the
   altar are not to be performed but by men who are fasting, except on one
   day in the year on which the Supper of the Lord is celebrated.  At that
   time, on account perhaps of certain occasions in those places useful to
   the Church, even the holy Fathers themselves made use of this
   dispensation.  But since nothing leads us to abandon exact observance,
   we decree that the Apostolic and Patristic tradition shall be followed;
   and define that it is not right to break the fast on the fifth feria of
   the last week of Lent, and thus to do dishonour to the whole of Lent.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX.

   Some of the Fathers after they had supped on the day of the Divine
   Supper made the offering. [367]   However, it has seemed good to the
   synod that this should not be done, and that the fast should not be
   broken upon the fifth feria [368] of the last week of Lent, and so the
   whole of Lent be dishonoured.

   Zonaras remarks that the "Apostolic and Patristic tradition" is a
   reference to canon lxix. of the Apostolic Canons and to canon l. of
   Laodicea.  See notes on this last canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [367] I.e., of the Mass.

   [368] Maundy Thursday.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXX.

   Willing to do all things for the edification of the Church, we have
   determined to take care even of priests who are in barbarian churches.
   Wherefore if they think that they ought to exceed the Apostolic Canon
   concerning the not putting away of a wife on the pretext of piety and
   religion, and to do beyond that which is commanded, and therefore
   abstain by agreement with their wives from cohabitation, we decree they
   ought no longer to live with them in any way, so that hereby they may
   afford us a perfect demonstration of their promise.  But we have
   conceded this to them on no other ground than their narrowness, and
   foreign and unsettled manners.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX.

   Those priests who are in churches among the barbarians, if with consent
   they have abstained from commerce with their wives shall never
   afterwards have any commerce with them in any way.

   Fleury.

   (Hist. Eccl., Liv. XL., chap. l.)

   "Priests who are among the barbarians," that is to say, it would seem,
   in Italy and in the other countries of the Latin rite.  "Their
   narrowness and foreign and unsettled manners," that is to say that
   according to them it is an imperfection to aspire after perfect
   continence.

   I do not think that this explanation of Fleury's can be sustained, and
   it would seem that Van Espen is more near the truth when he says:
   "Some priests in barbarous countries thought they should abstain after
   the Latin custom even from wives taken before ordination.  And although
   this was contrary to the discipline of the Greeks, and also to Canon V.
   of the Apostles, nevertheless the Fathers thought it might be
   tolerated, provided such priests should also not live any longer with
   their wives."  There seems no reason to introduce anti-Roman bitterness
   where it is not already found.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXI.

   Clerics who in oratories which are in houses offer the Holy Mysteries
   or baptize, we decree ought to do this with the consent of the bishop
   of the place.  Wherefore if any cleric shall not have so done, let him
   be deposed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXI.

   Thou mayest not offer in an oratory in a private house without the
   consent of the bishop.

   On this whole subject the reader is referred to the curious and most
   interesting volume published by Venantius Monaldini of Venice, in
   1765.  I cannot better give its scope than by copying out its title in
   full.

   Commentarius Theologico-canonico-criticus De ecclesiis, earum
   reverentia, et asylo atque concordia sacerdotii, et imperii, auctore
   Josepho Aloysio Assemani.  Accesserunt tractatus cl. virorum D. Josephi
   de Bonis, De Oratoriis Publicis; ac. R.P. Fortunati a Brixia De
   Oratoriis Domesticis, in supplementum celeberrimi operis Joannis
   Baptistæ Gattico De Oratoriis Domesticis, et usu altaris portatilis.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXII.

   Since it has come to our knowledge that in the region of Armenia they
   offer wine only on the Holy Table, those who celebrate the unbloody
   sacrifice not mixing water with it, adducing, as authority thereof,
   John Chrysostom, a doctor of the Church, who says in his interpretation
   of the Gospel according to St. Matthew:

   "And wherefore did he not drink water after he was risen again, but
   wine?  To pluck up by the roots another wicked heresy.  For since there
   are certain who use water in the Mysteries to shew that both when he
   delivered the mysteries he had given wine and that when he had risen
   and was setting before them a mere meal without mysteries, he used
   wine, of the fruit,' saith he, of the vine.'  But a vine produces wine,
   not water." [369]   And from this they think the doctor overthrows the
   admixture of water in the holy sacrifice.  Now, lest on the point from
   this time forward they be held in ignorance, we open out the orthodox
   opinion of the Father.  For since there was an ancient and wicked
   heresy of the Hydroparastatæ (i.e., of those who offered water), who
   instead of wine used water in their sacrifice, this divine, confuting
   the detestable teaching of such a heresy, and showing that it is
   directly opposed to Apostolic tradition, asserted that which has just
   been quoted.  For to his own church, where the pastoral administration
   had been given him, he ordered that water mixed with wine should be
   used at the unbloody sacrifice, so as to shew forth the mingling of the
   blood and water which for the life of the whole world and for the
   redemption of its sins, was poured forth from the precious side of
   Christ our Redeemer; and moreover in every church where spiritual light
   has shined this divinely given order is observed.

   For also James, the brother, according to the flesh, of Christ our God,
   to whom the throne of the church of Jerusalem first was entrusted, and
   Basil, the Archbishop of the Church of Cæsarea, whose glory has spread
   through all the world, when they delivered to us directions for the
   mystical sacrifice in writing, declared that the holy chalice is
   consecrated in the Divine Liturgy with water and wine.  And the holy
   Fathers who assembled at Carthage provided in these express terms:
   "That in the holy Mysteries nothing besides the body and blood of the
   Lord be offered, as the Lord himself laid down, that is bread and wine
   mixed with water."  Therefore if any bishop or presbyter shall not
   perform the holy action according to what has been handed down by the
   Apostles, and shall not offer the sacrifice with wine mixed with water,
   let him be deposed, as imperfectly shewing forth the mystery and
   innovating on the things which have been handed down.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXII.

   Chrysostom, when overthrowing the heresy of the Hydroparastatæ, says:
   "When the Lord suffered and rose again he used wine."  The Armenians,
   laying hold on this, offer wine alone, not understanding that
   Chrysostom himself, and Basil, and James used wine mixed with water;
   and left the tradition that we should so make the offering.  If,
   therefore, any one shall offer wine alone, or water alone, and not the
   mixed [chalice] let him be deposed.

   Van Espen.

   Justin Martyr in his Second Apology, Ambrose, or whoever was the author
   of the books on the Sacraments (Lib. v., cap. i.), Augustine and many
   others make mention of this rite, and above all St. Cyprian, who wrote
   a long epistle on the subject to Cecilius, and seeking the reason of
   the ceremony as a setting forth of the union of the people, represented
   by the water, with Christ, figured by the wine.

   Another signification of this rite St. Augustine indicates in his
   sermon to Neophytes, saying:  "Take this in bread, which hung upon the
   Cross:  Take this in the cup which poured forth from the side," that is
   to say blood and water.

   Cardinal Bona (De Rebus Liturgicis, Lib. II., cap. ix., n. 3 and 4)
   refers to many ancient rituals in which a similar prayer is used to
   that found in the Ambrosian rite, which says as the water is poured
   in:  "Out of the side of Christ there flowed forth blood and water
   together.  In the name of the Father, etc."  Bona further notes that
   "The Greeks twice mingle water with the wine, once cold water, when in
   the prothesis they are preparing the Holy Gifts, and the Priest pierces
   the bread with the holy spear, and says, "One of the soldiers with a
   lance opened his side, and immediately there flowed forth blood and
   water," and the deacon pours in wine and water.  From this it is
   evident that the Greeks agree with St. Augustine's explanation.

   For the second time the Greeks mix "hot water after consecration and
   immediately before communion, the deacon begging from the priest a
   blessing upon the warm water; and he blesses it in these words:
   Blessed be the fervour of thy Saints, now and ever and to the ages of
   ages.  Amen.'  Then the deacon pours the water into the chalice,
   saying:  The fervour of faith, full of the Holy Spirit.'"  So Cardinal
   Bona as above.

   The third reason of this rite is assumed by some from the fact that
   Christ is believed thus to have instituted this sacrament at the last
   supper; and this the synod seems to intimate in the present canon when
   it says "as the Lord himself delivered."

   In this case the Greeks suppose that this rite was also handed down by
   the Apostles, and this is evident from their citing the Liturgy of St.
   James, which they believed to be a genuine work of his.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [369] Chrysos.  In Matt. XXVI. 29--I have taken the Oxford translation,
   "Library of the Fathers."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXIII.

   Since we know that, in the region of the Armenians, only those are
   appointed to the clerical orders who are of priestly descent (following
   in this Jewish customs); and some of those who are even untonsured are
   appointed to succeed cantors and readers of the divine law, we decree
   that henceforth it shall not be lawful for those who wish to bring any
   one into the clergy, to pay regard to the descent of him who is to be
   ordained; but let them examine whether they are worthy (according to
   the decrees set forth in the holy canons) to be placed on the list of
   the clergy, so that they may be ecclesiastically promoted, whether they
   are of priestly descent or not; moreover, let them not permit any one
   at all to read in the ambo, according to the order of those enrolled in
   the clergy, unless such an one have received the priestly tonsure and
   the canonical benediction of his own pastor; but if any one shall have
   been observed to act contrary to these directions, let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIII.

   Whoever is worthy of the priesthood should be ordained whether he is
   sprung of a priestly line or no.  And he that has been blessed
   untonsured shall not read the Holy Scriptures at the ambo.

   Van Espen.

   Here not obscurely does the canon join the clerical tonsure received
   from the bishop with the office of Reader, so much so that he that has
   been tonsured by the bishop is thought to have received at the same
   time the tonsure and the order of lector.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXIV.

   But in future, since the priestly canon openly sets this forth, that
   the crime of conspiracy or secret society is forbidden by external
   laws, but much more ought it to be prohibited in the Church; we also
   hasten to observe that if any clerics or monks are found either
   conspiring or entering secret societies, or devising anything against
   bishops or clergymen, they shall be altogether deprived of their rank.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIV.

   If clerics or monks enter into conspiracies or fraternities, or plots
   against the bishop or their fellow clerics, they shall be cast out of
   their grade.

   This is but a renewal of Canon xviij. of Chalcedon, which see with the
   notes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXV.

   It shall be lawful for no Metropolitan on the death of a bishop of his
   province to appropriate or sell the private property of the deceased,
   or that of the widowed church:  but these are to be in the custody of
   the clergy of the diocese over which he presided until the election of
   another bishop, unless in the said church there are no clergymen left.
   For then the Metropolitan shall protect the property without
   diminution, handing over everything to the bishop when he is appointed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXV.

   When the bishop is dead the clergy shall guard his goods.  If, however,
   no clergyman remains, the Metropolitan shall take charge of them until
   another be ordained.

   Compare Canon xxii. of Chalcedon. This canon extends the prohibition to
   Metropolitans as well.

   Aristenus.

   Neither the clergy nor metropolitan after the death of the bishop are
   allowed to carry off his goods, but all should be guarded by the clergy
   themselves, until another bishop is chosen.  But if by chance no
   clergyman is left in that church, the metropolitan is to keep all the
   possessions undiminished and to return them to the future bishop.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXVI.

   Renewing the enactments by the 150 Fathers assembled at the
   God-protected and imperial city, and those of the 630 who met at
   Chalcedon; we decree that the see of Constantinople shall have equal
   privileges with the see of Old Rome, and shall be highly regarded in
   ecclesiastical matters as that is, and shall be second after it.  After
   Constantinople shall be ranked the See of Alexandria, then that of
   Antioch, and afterwards the See of Jerusalem.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVI.

   Let the throne of Constantinople be next after that of Rome, and enjoy
   equal privileges.  After it Alexandria, then Antioch, and then
   Jerusalem.

   Balsamon.

   The Fathers here speak of the Second and Third canons of the Second
   Synod [i.e. I. Constantinople] and of canon xxviij. of the Fourth Synod
   [i.e. Chalcedon].  And read what we have said on these canons.

   Aristenus.

   We have explained the third canon of the Synod of Constantinople and
   the twenty-eighth canon of the Synod of Chalcedon as meaning, when
   asserting that the bishop of Constantinople should enjoy equal
   privileges after the Roman bishop, that he should be placed second from
   the Roman in point of time.  So here too this preposition "after"
   denotes time but not honour.  For after many years this throne of
   Constantinople obtained equal privileges with the Roman Church; because
   it was honoured by the presence of the Emperor and of the Senate.

   On this opinion of Aristenus's the reader is referred to the notes on
   Canon iij. of I. Constantinople.

   Justinian.

   (Novella CXXXI., Cap. ij.)

   We command that according to the definitions of the Four Councils the
   most holy Pope of Old Rome shall be first of all the priests.  But the
   most blessed Archbishop of Constantinople, which is New Rome, shall
   have the second place after the Holy Apostolic See of Old Rome.

   This canon, in a mutilated form, is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici,
   Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXII., c. vj.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXVII.

   Since at different times there have been invasions of barbarians, and
   therefore very many cities have been subjected to the infidels, so that
   the bishop of a city may not be able, after he has been ordained, to
   take possession of his see, and to be settled in it in sacerdotal
   order, and so to perform and manage for it the ordinations and all
   things which by custom appertain to the bishop:  we, preserving honour
   and veneration for the priesthood, and in no wise wishing to employ the
   Gentile injury to the ruin of ecclesiastical rights, have decreed that
   those who have been ordained thus, and on account of the aforesaid
   cause have not been settled in their sees, without any prejudice from
   this thing may be kept [in good standing] and that they may canonically
   perform the ordination of the different clerics and use the authority
   of their office according to the defined limits, and that whatever
   administration proceeds from them may be valid and legitimate.  For the
   exercise of his office shall not be circumscribed by a season of
   necessity when the exact observance of law is circumscribed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVII.

   A bishop who, on account of the incursions of the barbarians, is not
   set in his throne, shall have his own chair of state, and shall ordain,
   and shall enjoy most firmly all the rights of the priesthood.

   By Canon XVIII. of Antioch the principle of this canon was enunciated,
   that when a bishop did not take possession of his see because he could
   not do so, he was not to be held responsible or to lose any of his
   episcopal rights and powers, in that case the impossibility arose from
   the insubordination of the people, in this from the diocese being in
   the hands of the barbarians.

   It has been commonly thought that the Bishops in partibus infidelium
   had their origin in the state of things calling for this canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXVIII.

   The canon which was made by the Fathers we also observe, which thus
   decreed:  If any city be renewed by imperial authority, or shall have
   been renewed, let the order of things ecclesiastical follow the civil
   and public models.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVIII.

   If any city is or shall be renewed by the Emperor, the ecclesiastical
   order shall follow the political and public example.

   Van Espen.

   The canon of the Fathers which the Synod wishes observed is XVII of
   Chalcedon, the notes on which see.

   Here it must be noted that by "civil and public models" is signified
   the "pragmatic" or imperial letters, by which the emperors granted to
   newly raised up or re-edified towns the privilege of other cities, or
   else annexed them to some Province.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXIX.

   Since our brother and fellow-worker, John, bishop of the island of
   Cyprus, together with his people in the province of the Hellespont,
   both on account of barbarian incursions, and that they may be freed
   from servitude of the heathen, and may be subject alone to the sceptres
   of most Christian rule, have emigrated from the said island, by the
   providence of the philanthropic God, and the labour of our
   Christ-loving and pious Empress; we determine that the privileges which
   were conceded by the divine fathers who first at Ephesus assembled, are
   to be preserved without any innovations, viz.:  that new
   Justinianopolis shall have the rights of Constantinople and whoever is
   constituted the pious and most religious bishop thereof shall take
   precedence of all the bishops of the province of the Hellespont, and be
   elected [?] by his own bishops according to ancient custom.  For the
   customs which obtain in each church our divine Fathers also took pains
   should be maintained, the existing bishop of the city of Cyzicus being
   subject to the metropolitan of the aforesaid Justinianopolis, for the
   imitation of all the rest of the bishops who are under the aforesaid
   beloved of God metropolitan John, by whom, as custom demands, even the
   bishop of the very city of Cyzicus shall be ordained.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIX.

   The new Justinianopolis shall have the rights of Constantinople, and
   its prelate shall rule over all the bishops of the Hellespont to whom
   he has gone, and he shall be ordained by his own bishop:  as the
   fathers of Ephesus decreed.

   Hefele.

   Hitherto the bishop of Cyzicus was metropolitan of the province of the
   Hellespont.  Now he too is to be subject to the bishop of
   New-Justinianopolis.  What, however, is meant by "the right of
   Constantinople"?  It was impossible that the Synod should place the
   bishop of Justinianopolis in equal dignity with the patriarch of
   Constantinople.  But they probably meant to say:  "The rights which the
   bishop of Constantinople has hitherto exercised over the province of
   the Hellespont, as chief metropolitan, fall now to the bishop of
   New-Justinianopolis."  Or perhaps we should read, instead of
   Constantinople Konstantineon poleos, as the Amerbachian ms. has it, and
   translate:  "The same rights which Constantia (the metropolis of
   Cyprus) possessed, New Justinianopolis shall henceforth have."  The
   latter is the more probable.

   Van Espen.

   To understand this canon it must be remembered that the Metropolis of
   Cyprus, which was formerly called Constantia, when restored by the
   Emperor Justinian was called by his name, New Justinianopolis.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XL.

   Since to cleave to God by retiring from the noise and turmoil of life
   is very beneficial, it behoves us not without examination to admit
   before the proper time those who choose the monastic life, but to
   observe respecting them the limit handed down by our fathers, in order
   that we may then admit a profession of the life according to God as for
   ever firm, and the result of knowledge and judgment after years of
   discretion have been reached.  He therefore who is about to submit to
   the yoke of monastic life should not be less than ten years of age, the
   examination of the matter depending on the decision of the bishop,
   whether he considers a longer time more conducive for his entrance and
   establishment in the monastic life.  For although the great Basil in
   his holy canons decreed that she who willingly offers to God and
   embraces virginity, if she has completed her seventeenth year, is to be
   entered in the order of virgins:  nevertheless, having followed the
   example respecting widows and deaconesses, analogy and proportion being
   considered, we have admitted at the said time those who have chosen the
   monastic life.  For it is written in the divine Apostle that a widow is
   to be elected in the church at sixty years old:  but the sacred canons
   have decreed that a deaconess shall be ordained at forty, since they
   saw that the Church by divine grace had gone forth more powerful and
   robust and was advancing still further, and they saw the firmness and
   stability of the faithful in observing the divine commandments.
   Wherefore we also, since we most rightly comprehend the matter, appoint
   the benediction of grace to him who is about to enter the struggle
   according to God, even as impressing speedily a certain seal upon him,
   hereupon introducing him to the not-long-to-be-hesitated-over and
   declined, or rather inciting him even to the choice and determination
   of good.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XL.

   A monk must be ten years old.  Even if the Divine Basil thought the one
   shorn should be over seventeen.  But although the Apostle ordains that
   a widow to be espoused to the Church must be sixty, yet the Fathers say
   a Deaconess is to be ordained at forty, the Church in the meanwhile
   having become stronger; so we place the seal on a monk at an earlier
   age.

   Aristenus.

   The eighteenth canon of Basil the Great orders that she who offers
   herself to the Lord and renounces marriage, ought to be over sixteen or
   even seventeen years of age:  so that her promise may be firm and that
   if she violates it she may suffer the due penalties.  For, says he,
   children's voices are not to be thought of any value in such matters.
   But the present canon admits him who is not less than ten years and
   desires to be a monk, but entrusts the determination of the exact time
   to the judgment of the hegumenos, whether he thinks it more
   advantageous to increase the age-requirement for the entering and being
   established in the married life.  But the canon lessens the time
   defined by Basil the Great, because the Fathers thought that the Church
   by divine grace had grown stronger since then, and was going on more
   and more, and that the faithful seemed firmer and more stable for the
   observance of the divine commandments.  And for the same reason, viz.,
   that the Church was growing better, the sacred canons had lessened the
   age of deaconesses, and fixed it at forty years, although the Apostle
   himself orders that no widow is to be chosen into the Church under
   sixty years of age.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLI.

   Those who in town or in villages wish to go away into cloisters, and
   take heed for themselves apart, before they enter a monastery and
   practise the anchorite's life, [370] should for the space of three
   years in the fear of God submit to the Superior of the house, and
   fulfil obedience in all things, as is right, thus shewing forth their
   choice of this life and that they embrace it willingly and with their
   whole hearts; they are then to be examined by the superior (proedros)
   of the place; and then to bear bravely outside the cloister one year
   more, so that their purpose may be fully manifested.  For by this they
   will shew fully and perfectly that they are not catching at vain glory,
   but that they are pursuing the life of solitude because of its inherent
   beauty and honour.  After the completion of such a period, if they
   remain in the same intention in their choice of the life, they are to
   be enclosed, and no longer is it lawful for them to go out of such a
   house when they so desire, unless they be induced to do so for the
   common advantage, or other pressing necessity urging on to death; and
   then only with the blessing of the bishop of that place.

   And those who, without the above-mentioned causes, venture forth of
   their convents, are first of all to be shut up in the said convent even
   against their wills, and then are to cure themselves with fasting and
   other afflictions, knowing how it is written that "no one who has put
   his hand to the plough and has looked back, is fit for the kingdom of
   heaven."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLI.

   Whoever is about to enter a cloister, let him live for three years in a
   monastery, and before he is shut up let him spend one year more, and so
   let him be shut up.  And he shall not then go forth unless death or the
   common good demands.

   Van Espen.

   This canon, so far as it sets forth the necessity of probation before
   admission to the Anchorite life, synods in after-years frequently
   approved, taught as they were by experience how perilous a matter it is
   to admit without sufficient probation to this solitary life and state
   of separation from the common intercourse with his fellow men.  Vide
   the Synod of Vannes (about a.d. 465) canon vij., of Agde chap.
   lxxviij., of Orleans the First can. xxij., of Frankfort can. xij., of
   Toledo the Seventh can. v., and the Capitular of Charlemagne To monks,
   Chap. ij.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [370] The Latin adds, "That is, separate and remote from others."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLII.

   Those who are called Eremites and are clothed in black robes, and with
   long hair go about cities and associate with the worldly both men and
   women and bring odium upon their profession--we decree that if they
   will receive the habit of other monks and wear their hair cut short,
   they may be shut up in a monastery and numbered among the brothers; but
   if they do not choose to do this, they are to be expelled from the
   cities and forced to live in the desert (eremous) from whence also they
   derive their name.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLII.

   An eremite dressed in black vesture and not having his hair cut, unless
   he has his hair cut shall be expelled the city and be shut up in his
   monastery.

   It may not be irreverent to remark that this species of impostors
   always has been common in the East, and many examples will be found of
   the dervishes in the Arabian Nights and other Eastern tales.  The
   "vagabond" monks of the West also became a great nuisance as well as a
   scandal in the Middle Ages.  The reader will find interesting instances
   of Spanish deceivers of the same sort in "Gil Blas" and other Spanish
   romances.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLIII.

   It is lawful for every Christian to choose the life of religious
   discipline, and setting aside the troublous surgings of the affairs of
   this life to enter a monastery, and to be shaven in the fashion of a
   monk, without regard to what faults he may have previously committed.
   For God our Saviour says:  "Whose cometh to me, I will in no wise cast
   out."

   As therefore the monastic method of life engraves upon us as on a
   tablet the life of penitence, we receive [371] whoever approaches it
   [372] sincerely; nor is any custom to be allowed to hinder him from
   fulfilling his intention.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIII.

   Whoever flees from the surging billows of life and desires to enter a
   monastery, shall be allowed to do so.

   Zonaras.

   The greatness or the number of a man's sins ought not to make him lose
   hope of propitiating the divinity by his penitence, if he turns his
   eyes to the divine mercy.  This is what the canon asserts, and affirms
   that everyone, no matter how wicked and nefarious his life may have
   been, may embrace monastic discipline, which inscribes, as on a tablet,
   [373] to us a life of penitence.  For as a tablet describes to us what
   is inscribed upon it, so the monastic profession writes and inscribes
   upon us penitence, so that it remains for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [371] Latin adds "and favour."

   [372] Latin reads, "germanely and sincerely."

   [373] Beveridge translates stule by columna but I think incorrectly.
   Cf. Liddell and Scott.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLIV.

   A monk convicted of fornication, or who takes a wife for the communion
   of matrimony and for society, is to be subjected to the penalties of
   fornicators, according to the canons.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIV.

   A monk joined in marriage or committing fornication shall pay the
   penalty of a fornicator.

   The punishment here seems too light, so that Balsamon thinks that this
   canon only refers to such monks as freely confess their sin and desist
   from it, remaining in their monasteries; and that the sterner penalties
   assigned to unchaste religious by other synods (notably Chalcedon, can.
   xvj., and Ancyra, can. xix.) are for such as do not confess their
   faults but are after some time convicted of them.

   Aristenus.

   The monk will receive the same punishment whether he be a fornicator or
   has joined himself with a woman for the communion of marriage.

   Van Espen.

   It is very likely from this canon that the Monastic vow at the time of
   this Synod was not yet an impedimentum dirimens of matrimony, for
   nothing is said about the dissolution of the marriage contracted by a
   monk although he had gravely sinned in violating his faith pledged to
   God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLV.

   Whereas we understand that in some monasteries of women those who are
   about to be clothed with the sacred habit are first adorned in silks
   and garments of all kinds, and also with gold and jewels, by those who
   bring them thither, and that they thus approach the altar and are there
   stripped of such a display of wealth, and that immediately thereafter
   the blessing of their habit takes place, and they are clothed with the
   black robe; we decree that henceforth this shall not be done.  For it
   is not lawful for her who has already of her own free will put away
   every delight of life, and has embraced that method of life which is
   according to God, and has confirmed it with strong and stable reasons,
   and so has come to the monastery, to recall to memory the things which
   they had already forgotten, things of this world which perisheth and
   passeth away.  For thus they raise in themselves doubts, and are
   disturbed in their souls, like the tossing waves, turning hither and
   thither.  Moreover, they should not give bodily evidence of heaviness
   of heart by weeping, but if a few tears drop from their eyes, as is
   like enough to be the case, they may be supposed by those who see them
   to have flowed me mallon on account of their affection (diatheseos,
   affectionem) for the ascetic struggle rather than (e) because they are
   quitting the world and worldly things.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLV.

   Parents shall not deck out in silks a daughter who has chosen the
   monastic life, and thus clothe her, for this is a recalling to her mind
   the world she is leaving.

   This canon is at the present day constantly broken at the profession of
   Carmelites.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLVI.

   Those women who choose the ascetic life and are settled in monasteries
   may by no means go forth of them.  If, however, any inexorable
   necessity compels them, let them do so with the blessing and permission
   of her who is mother superior; and even then they must not go forth
   alone, but with some old women who are eminent in the monastery, and at
   the command of the lady superior.  But it is not at all permitted that
   they should stop outside.

   And men also who follow the monastic life let them on urgent necessity
   go forth with the blessing of him to whom the rule is entrusted.

   Wherefore, those who transgress that which is now decreed by us,
   whether they be men or women, are to be subjected to suitable
   punishments.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVI.

   A nun shall not go out of her convent without the consent of her
   superior, nor shall she go alone but with an older one of the order.
   It is in no case permitted to her to spend the night outside.  The same
   is the case with a monk; he cannot go out of the monastery without the
   consent of the superior.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLVII.

   No woman may sleep in a monastery of men, nor any man in a monastery of
   women.  For it behoves the faithful to be without offence and to give
   no scandal, and to order their lives decorously and honestly and
   acceptably to God.  But if any one shall have done this, whether he be
   cleric or layman, let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVII.

   It is not allowed that a woman should sleep in a convent of men, nor a
   man in a monastery of women.

   The ground covered by this canon is also found in Justinian's Code,
   Book xliv., Of Bishops and Clergy.  Vide also Novella cxxxiii., chap.
   v.

   Van Espen.

   From the whole context of Justinian's law it is manifest that Justinian
   here is condemning "double monasteries," in which both men and women
   dwelt.  And he wishes such to be separated, the men from the women, and
   e contra the women from the men, and that each should dwell in separate
   monasteries.

   The reader may be reminded of some curious double religious houses in
   England for men and women, of which sometimes a woman was the superior
   of both.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLVIII.

   The wife of him who is advanced to the Episcopal dignity, shall be
   separated from her husband by their mutual consent, and after his
   ordination and consecration to the episcopate she shall enter a
   monastery situated at a distance from the abode of the bishop, and
   there let her enjoy the bishop's provision.  And if she is deemed
   worthy she may be advanced to the dignity of a deaconess.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVIII.

   She who is separated from one about to be consecrated bishop, shall
   enter a monastery after his ordination, situated at a distance from the
   See city, and she shall be provided for by the bishop.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLIX.

   Renewing also the holy canon, we decree that the monasteries which have
   been once consecrated by the Episcopal will, are always to remain
   monasteries, and the things which belong to them are to be preserved to
   the monastery, and they cannot any more be secular abodes nor be given
   by any one to seculars.  But if anything of this kind has been done
   already, we declare it to be null; and those who hereafter attempt to
   do so are to be subjected to canonical penalties.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIX.

   Monasteries built with the consent of the bishop shall not afterwards
   be turned into secular houses, nor shall they pass into the hands of
   seculars.

   Van Espen.

   This canon renews canon xxiv. of Chalcedon.  And here it may be
   observed that the canons even of Ecumenical Synods fall into desuetude
   little by little, unless the care of bishops and pastors keeps them
   alive, and from the example of this synod it may be seen how often they
   need calling back again into observance.

   Nor can there be any doubt that frequently it would be more
   advantageous to renew the canons already set forth by the Fathers,
   rather than to frame new ones.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon L.

   No one at all, whether cleric or layman, is from this time forward to
   play at dice.  And if any one hereafter shall be found doing so, if he
   be a cleric he is to be deposed, if a layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon L.

   A layman should not play at dice.

   This renews canons xlii. and xliij. of the Apostolic canons.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LI.

   This holy and ecumenical synod altogether forbids those who are called
   "players," and their "spectacles," as well as the exhibition of hunts,
   and the theatrical dances.  If any one despises the present canon, and
   gives himself to any of the things which are forbidden, if he be a
   cleric he shall be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LI.

   Whose shall play as an actor or shall attend theatrical representations
   or hunts shall be cut off.  Should he be a cleric he shall be deposed.

   Balsamon.

   Some one will enquire why canon xxiiij. decrees that those in holy
   orders and monks, who are constantly attending horse-races, and scenic
   plays, are to cease or be deposed:  but the present canon says without
   discrimination, that those who give themselves over to such things if
   clergymen are to be deposed, and if laymen to be cut off.  The solution
   is this.  It is one thing and more easily to be endured, that a man
   should be present at a horse-race, or be convicted of going to see a
   play; and another thing, and one that cannot be pardoned, that he
   should give himself over to such things, and to exercise this
   continually as his business.  Wherefore those who have once sinned
   deliberately, are admonished to cease.  If they are not willing to
   obey, they are to be deposed.  But those who are constantly engaged in
   this wickedness, if they are clerics, they must be deposed from their
   clerical place, if laymen they must be cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LII.

   On all days of the holy fast of Lent, except on the Sabbath, the Lord's
   day and the holy day of the Annunciation, the Liturgy of the
   Presanctified is to be said.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LII.

   Throughout the whole of Lent except upon the Lord's day, the Sabbath,
   and upon the day of the Annunciation, the presanctified gifts shall be
   offered.

   Balsamon.

   We do not call the service of the Presanctified the unbloody sacrifice,
   but the offering of the previously offered, and of the perfected
   sacrifice, and of the completed priestly act.

   Van Espen.

   The Greeks therefore confess that the bread once offered and
   consecrated, is not to be consecrated anew on another day; but a new
   offering is made of what was before consecrated and presanctified:
   just as in the Latin Church the consecrated or presanctified bread of
   Maundy Thursday is offered on Good Friday.

   The Patriarch Michael of Constantinople is quoted by Leo Allatius as
   saying that "none of the mystic consecratory prayers are said over the
   presanctified gifts, but the priest only recites the prayer that he may
   be a worthy communicant."

   Some among the later Greeks have been of opinion that the unconsecrated
   wine was consecrated by the commixture with the consecrated bread, and
   (without any words of consecration) was transmuted into the sacred
   blood, [374] and with this seems to agree the already quoted Michael,
   Patriarch of Constantinople, who is cited by Leo Allatius in his
   treatise on the rite of the presanctified.  "The presanctified is put
   into the mystic chalice, and so the wine which was then in it, is
   changed into the holy blood of the Lord."  And with this agrees Simeon,
   Archbishop of Thessalonica, in his answer to Gabriel of Pentapolis,
   when he writes:  "In the mass of the Presanctified no consecration of
   what is in the chalice is made by the invocation of the Holy Spirit and
   of his sign, but by the participation and union of the life-giving
   bread, which is truly the body of Christ."

   From this opinion, which was held by some of the Greeks, it gradually
   became the practice at Constantinople not to dip the bread in the
   Sacred Blood, as Michael the patriarch of this very church testifies.
   But in the ordinary Euchologion of the Greeks it is expressly set forth
   that the presanctified bread before it is reserved, should be dipped in
   the sacred blood, and for this a rite is provided.

   Leo Allatius's Dissertatio de Missa Præsanctificatorum should be read;
   an outline of the service as found in the Euchologion, and as reprinted
   by Renaudotius is as follows.

   First of all vespers is said.  After some lessons and prayers,
   including the "Great Ectenia" and that for the Catechumens, these are
   dismissed.

   After the Catechumens have departed there follows the Ectenia of the
   Faithful.  After which, "Now the heavenly Powers invisibly minister
   with us; for, behold, the King of Glory is borne in.  Behold the mystic
   sacrifice having been perfected is borne aloft by angels.

   "Let us draw near with faith and love, that we may become partakers of
   life eternal.  Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

   "Deacon.  Let us accomplish our evening prayer to the Lord.

   "For the precious and presanctified gifts that are offered, let us pray
   to the Lord.  "That our man-loving God, etc." as in the ordinary
   liturgy past the Lord's prayer, and down to the Sancta Sanctis, which
   reads as follows:

   Priest.  Holy things presanctified for holy persons.

   Choir.  One holy, one Lord Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the
   Father--Amen.

   Then the Communion Hymn and the Communion, and the rest as in the
   ordinary liturgy, except "this whole evening," is said for "this whole
   day," and another prayer is provided in the room of that beginning
   "Lord, who blessest them, etc." [375]

   It is curious to note that on Good Friday, the only day on which the
   Mass of the Presanctified is celebrated in the West, its use has died
   out in the East, and now it is used "on the Wednesdays and Fridays of
   the first six weeks of the Great Quadragesima, on the Thursday of the
   fifth week, and on the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday of Holy Passion
   Week.  It may also be said, excepting on Saturdays and Sundays, and on
   the Festival of the Annunciation, on other days during the Fast, to
   wit, on those of festivals and their Vigils, and on the Commemoration
   of the Dedication of the Church."

   Symeon, who was bishop of Thessalonica, and flourished in the early
   part of the XV^th Century, complains of the general neglect of the Mass
   of the Presanctified on Good Friday in his time, and says that his
   church was the only one in the Exarchate that then retained it.  He
   ascribes the disuse to the example of the Church of Jerusalem.  See the
   matter treated at length in his Quæstiones, lv.-lix. Migne's Pat. Græc.

   Cf. J. M. Neale Essays on Liturgiology, p. 109.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [374] Gerbert makes it quite evident that from about 850 until 1200,
   that is from Amalarius until Durand, the same view was held in the
   West.  Vide Gerbertus.  Vetus Liturgia Allomanica, p. 855 et. seqq.

   [375] The English reader is referred to G. V. Shann, Euchology, and The
   Book of Needs, for excellent translations of the Greek offices; J. M.
   Neale's Introduction to the History of the Holy Orthodox Eastern Church
   will, of course, be consulted.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LIII.

   Whereas the spiritual relationship is greater than fleshly affinity;
   and since it has come to our knowledge that in some places certain
   persons who become sponsors to children in holy salvation-bearing
   baptism, afterwards contract matrimony with their mothers (being
   widows), we decree that for the future nothing of this sort is to be
   done.  But if any, after the present canon, shall be observed to do
   this, they must, in the first place, desist from this unlawful
   marriage, and then be subjected to the penalties of fornicators.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LIII.

   Godfathers cannot be permitted to be married with the mother of their
   godchildren.  If any one is so joined, let him do penance after
   separation.

   Johnson.

   (Clergyman's Vade Mecum.)

   The imperial law forbade the adopter parent to marry his or her adopted
   son or daughter; for the godchild was thought a sort of an adopted
   child.  See Justin., Institut., Lib. I., Tit. x.

   Van Espen however refers, and to my mind with greater truth, to
   Justinian's law (xxvj of the Cod. de Nuptiis) which forbids the
   marriage of a man with his nurse or with whoever received him from the
   font, "because," says the law, "nothing can so incite to parental
   affection, and therefore induce a just prohibition of marriage, than a
   bond of this sort by which, through God's meditation, their souls are
   bound together."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LIV.

   The divine scriptures plainly teach us as follows, "Thou shalt not
   approach to any that is near of kin to thee to uncover their
   nakedness."  Basil, the bearer-of-God, has enumerated in his canons
   some marriages which are prohibited and has passed over the greater
   part in silence, and in both these ways has done us good service.  For
   by avoiding a number of disgraceful names (lest by such words he should
   pollute his discourse) he included impurities under general terms, by
   which course he shewed to us in a general way the marriages which are
   forbidden.  But since by such silence, and because of the difficulty of
   understanding what marriages are prohibited, the matter has become
   confused; it seemed good to us to set it forth a little more clearly,
   decreeing that from this time forth he who shall marry with the
   daughter of his father; or a father or son with a mother and daughter;
   or a father and son with two girls who are sisters; or a mother and
   daughter with two brothers; or two brothers with two sisters, fall
   under the canon of seven years, provided they openly separate from this
   unlawful union.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV.

   Thou shalt not permit the marriage of a son of a brother to the
   daughter of a brother; nor with a daughter and her mother shall there
   be the marriage of a son and his father; neither a mother and a
   daughter with two brothers; nor brothers with two sisters.  But should
   anything of this sort have been done, together with separation, penance
   shall be done for seven years.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LV.

   Since we understand that in the city of the Romans, in the holy fast of
   Lent they fast on the Saturdays, contrary to the ecclesiastical
   observance which is traditional, it seemed good to the holy synod that
   also in the Church of the Romans the canon shall immovably stands fast
   which says:  "If any cleric shall be found to fast on a Sunday or
   Saturday (except on one occasion only) he is to be deposed; and if he
   is a layman he shall be cut off."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LV.

   The Romans fast the Sabbaths of Lent.  Therefore this Synod admonishes
   that upon these days the Apostolical canon is of force.

   The canon quoted is LXVI. of the Apostolic Canons.

   Van Espen.

   The Fathers of this Synod thought that this canon of the Apostles was
   edited by the Apostles themselves, and therefore they seem to have
   reprobated the custom of the Roman Church of fasting on the Sabbath
   more bitterly than was right.  Whence it happens this is one of those
   canons which the Roman Church never received.

   Zonaras.

   The synod took in hand to correct this failing (sphalma) of the Latins;
   but until this time they have arrogantly remained in their pertinacity,
   and so remain to-day.  Nor do they heed the ancient canons which forbid
   fasting on the Sabbath except that one, to wit the great Sabbath, nor
   are they affected by the authority of this canon.  Moreover the clerics
   have no regard for the threatened deposition, nor the laymen for their
   being cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LVI.

   We have likewise learned that in the regions of Armenia and in other
   places certain people eat eggs and cheese on the Sabbaths and Lord's
   days of the holy lent.  It seems good therefore that the whole Church
   of God which is in all the world should follow one rule and keep the
   fast perfectly, and as they abstain from everything which is killed, so
   also should they from eggs and cheese, which are the fruit and produce
   of those animals from which we abstain.  But if any shall not observe
   this law, if they be clerics, let them be deposed; but if laymen, let
   them be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LVI.

   Armenians eat eggs and cheese on the Sabbaths in Lent.  It is
   determined that the whole world should abstain from these.  If not let
   the offender be cast out.

   Van Espen.

   This canon shows that the ancient Greeks, although they did not fast on
   the Sabbaths and Lord's days of Lent, nevertheless they abstained on
   them from flesh food; and it was believed by them that abstinence from
   flesh food involved also necessarily abstinence from all those things
   which have their origin from flesh.  This also formerly was observed by
   the Latins in Lent, and in certain regions is known still to be the
   usage.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LVII.

   It is not right to offer honey and milk on the altar.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LVII.

   No one should offer honey or milk at the altar.

   See canon iij. of the Apostles, canon xxviij. of the African code, also
   canon xxviij. of this synod.  The Greeks apparently do not recognize
   the exception specified in the canon of the African Code.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LVIII.

   None of those who are in the order of laymen may distribute the Divine
   Mysteries to himself if a bishop, presbyter, or deacon be present.  But
   whoso shall dare to do such a thing, as acting contrary to what has
   been determined shall be cut off for a week and thenceforth let him
   learn not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LVIII.

   A layman shall not communicate himself.  Should he do so, let him be
   cut off for a week.

   Van Espen.

   It is well known that in the first centuries it was customary that the
   Holy Eucharist should be taken back by the faithful to their houses;
   and that at home they received it at their own hands.  It is evident
   that this was what was done by the Anchorites and monks who lived in
   the deserts, as may be seen proved by Cardinal Bona.  (De Rebus
   Liturg., Lib. II., cap. xvij.).  From this domestic communion it is
   easily seen how the abuse arose which is condemned in this canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LIX.

   Baptism is by no means to be administered in an oratory which is within
   a house; but they who are about to be held worthy of the spotless
   illumination are to go to a Catholic Church and there to enjoy this
   gift.  But if any one shall be convicted of not observing what we have
   determined, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, if a layman let him
   be cut off.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LIX.

   In oratories built in houses they shall not celebrate baptism.  Whoever
   shall not observe this, if a cleric he shall be deposed, if a layman he
   shall be cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LX.

   Since the Apostle exclaims that he who cleaves to the Lord is one
   spirit, it is clear that he who is intimate with his [i.e. the Lord's]
   enemy becomes one by his affinity with him.  Therefore, those who
   pretend they are possessed by a devil and by their depravity of manners
   feign to manifest their form and appearance; it seems good by all means
   that they should be punished and that they should be subjected to
   afflictions and hardships of the same kind as those to which they who
   are truly demoniacally possessed are justly subjected with the intent
   of delivering them from the [work or rather] energy of the devil.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LX.

   Whoever shall pretend to be possessed by a devil, shall endure the
   penance of demoniacs.

   Zonaras says in his scholion that even in his day people made the same
   claim to diabolical possession.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXI.

   Those who give themselves up to soothsayers or to those who are called
   hecatontarchs or to any such, in order that they may learn from them
   what things [376] they wish to have revealed to them, let all such,
   according to the decrees lately made by the Fathers concerning them, be
   subjected to the canon of six years.  And to this [penalty] they also
   should be subjected who carry about [377] she-bears or animals of the
   kind for the diversion and injury of the simple; as well as those who
   tell fortunes and fates, and genealogy, and a multitude of words of
   this kind from the nonsense of deceit and imposture.  Also those who
   are called expellers of clouds, enchanters, amulet-givers, and
   soothsayers.

   And those who persist in these things, and do not turn away and flee
   from pernicious and Greek pursuits of this kind, we declare are to be
   thrust out of the Church, as also the sacred canons say.  "For what
   fellowship hath light with darkness?" as saith the Apostle, "or what
   agreement is there between the temple of God and idols? or what part
   hath he that believeth with an infidel?  And what concord hath Christ
   with Belial?"

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXI.

   Whoever shall deliver himself over to a hecatontarch or to devils, so
   as to learn some secret, he shall be put under penance for six years.
   So too those who take around a bear, who join themselves with those who
   seek incantations and drive away the clouds, and have faith in fortune
   and fate, shall be cast out of the assembly of the Church.

   Hefele.

   According to Balsamon (in Beveridge, Synod., Tom. I., p. 228) old
   people who had the reputation of special knowledge [were called
   "hecatontarchs"].  They sold the hair [of these she bears and other
   animals] as medicine or for an amulet.  Cf. Balsamon and Zonaras ut
   supra.

   St. Chrysostom in his Homilies on the Statutes explains, in answer to
   certain who defended them on this ground, that if these incantations
   are made in the name of Christ they are so much the worse.  The Saint
   says, "Moreover I think that she is to be hated all the more who abuses
   the name of God for this purpose, because while professing to be a
   Christian, she shows by her actions that she is a heathen."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [376] Bev. reads hoti.

   [377] Bev. reads epipheromenous.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXII.

   The so-called Calends, and what are called Bota and Brumalia, and the
   full assembly which takes place on the first of March, we wish to be
   abolished from the life of the faithful.  And also the public dances of
   women, which may do much harm and mischief.  Moreover we drive away
   from the life of Christians the dances given in the names of those
   falsely called gods by the Greeks whether of men or women, and which
   are performed after an ancient and un-Christian fashion; decreeing that
   no man from this time forth shall be dressed as a woman, nor any woman
   in the garb suitable to men.  Nor shall he assume comic, satyric, or
   tragic masks; nor may men invoke the name of the execrable Bacchus when
   they squeeze out the wine in the presses; nor when pouring out wine
   into jars [to cause a laugh [378] ], practising in ignorance and vanity
   the things which proceed from the deceit of insanity.  Therefore those
   who in the future attempt any of these things which are written, having
   obtained a knowledge of them, if they be clerics we order them to be
   deposed, and if laymen to be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXII.

   Let these be taken away from the lives of the faithful, viz.:  the
   Bota, and the Calends, and the Brumalia, and salutations in honour of
   the gods, and comic, satyric and tragic masks, and the invocation of
   Bacchus at the wine press, and the laughing at the wine jars.  Whoever
   shall persist in these after this canon shall be liable to give an
   account.

   On the Calends see Du Cange (Glossarium in loc.).  The Bota were feasts
   in honour of Pan, the Brumalia feasts in honour of Bacchus.  Many
   particulars with regard to these superstitions will be found in
   Balsamon's scholion, to which the curious reader is referred.  Van
   Espen also has some valuable notes on the Kalends of January.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [378] Not found in Mansi.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXIII.

   We forbid to be publicly read in Church, histories of the martyrs which
   have been falsely put together by the enemies of the truth, in order to
   dishonour the martyrs of Christ and induce unbelief among those who
   hear them, but we order that such books be given to the flames.  But
   those who accept them or apply their mind to them as true we
   anathematize.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIII.

   Martyrologies made up by the ethnics (Elle nion) shall not be published
   in church.

   What is condemned is false histories of true martyrs, not (as Johnson
   erroneously supposes) "false legends of pretended martyrs."  There have
   been martyrs, both royal and plebeian, in much later times whose lives
   have been made ridiculous and whose memory has been rendered hateful to
   the ignorant people by so-called "histories" which might well have
   received the treatment ordered by the canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXIV.

   It does not befit a layman to dispute or teach publicly, thus claiming
   for himself authority to teach, but he should yield to the order
   appointed by the Lord, and to open his ears to those who have received
   the grace to teach, and be taught by them divine things; for in one
   Church God has made "different members," according to the word of the
   Apostle:  and Gregory the Theologian, wisely interpreting this passage,
   commends the order in vogue with them saying: [379]   "This order
   brethren we revere, this we guard.  Let this one be the ear; that one
   the tongue, the hand or any other member.  Let this one teach, but let
   that one learn."  And a little further on:  "Learning in docility and
   abounding in cheerfulness, and ministering with alacrity, we shall not
   all be the tongue which is the more active member, not all of us
   Apostles, not all prophets, nor shall we all interpret."  And again:
   "Why dost thou make thyself a shepherd when thou art a sheep?  Why
   become the head when thou art a foot?  Why dost thou try to be a
   commander when thou art enrolled in the number of the soldiers?"  And
   elsewhere:  "Wisdom orders, Be not swift in words; nor compare thyself
   with the rich, being poor; nor seek to be wiser than the wise."  But if
   any one be found weakening the present canon, he is to be cut off for
   forty days.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIV.

   A layman shall not teach, for all are not prophets, nor all apostles.

   Zonaras points out that this canon refers only to public instruction
   and not to private.  Van Espen further notes that in the West this
   restriction is limited to the solemn and public preaching and
   announcing of the Word of God, which is restricted to bishops, and only
   by special and express license given to the other clergy, and refers to
   his own treatment of the subject In jure Eccles., Tom I., part 1, tit.
   xvj., cap. viij.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [379] legon in Beveridge's text.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXV.

   The fires which are lighted on the new moons by some before their shops
   and houses, upon which (according to a certain ancient custom) they are
   wont foolishly and crazily to leap, we order henceforth to cease.
   Therefore, whosoever shall do such a thing, if he be a cleric, let him
   be deposed; but if he be a layman, let him be cut off.  For it is
   written in the Fourth Book of the Kings "And Manasses built an altar to
   the whole host of heaven, in the two courts of the Lord, and made his
   sons to pass through the fire, he used lots and augurs and divinations
   by birds and made ventriloquists [or pythons [380] ] and multiplied
   diviners, that he might do evil before the Lord and provoke him to
   anger." [381]

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXV.

   The fires which were made upon the new moons at the workshops are
   condemned and those who leaped upon them.

   Lupin remarks that the fires kindled on certain Saints' days are almost
   certainly remains of this heathen practice.  These fires are often
   accompanied with leaping, drinking, and the wrestling of young men.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [380] Only in the Latin.

   [381] II. Kgs. xxi. 5 & 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXVI.

   From the holy day of the Resurrection of Christ our God until the next
   Lord's day, for a whole week, in the holy churches the faithful ought
   to be free from labour, rejoicing in Christ with psalms and hymns and
   spiritual songs; and celebrating the feast, and applying their minds to
   the reading of the holy Scriptures, and delighting in the Holy
   Mysteries; for thus shall we be exalted with Christ and together with
   him be raised up.  Therefore, on the aforesaid days there must not be
   any horse races or any public spectacle.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVI.

   The faithful shall every one of them go to church during the whole week
   after Easter.

   Van Espen.

   It is certain that the whole of Easter week was kept as a feast by the
   whole Church both East and West; and this Synod did not introduce this
   custom by its canon, but adopted this canon to ensure its continuance.

   Here we have clearly set forth the Christian manner of passing a
   feast-day, viz., that the faithful on those days did give themselves up
   to "Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs," from which the divine office
   which we call today canonical [i.e., chiefly Mattins and Vespers] are
   made up; and hence we understand that all the faithful ought to attend
   the choir-offices, which was indeed observed for many centuries, as I
   have shewn in my Dissertation on the Canonical Hours, cap. III., § 1,
   and therefore it was called "public" [or common] prayer.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXVII.

   The divine Scripture commands us to abstain from blood, from things
   strangled, and from fornication.  Those therefore who on account of a
   dainty stomach prepare by any art for food the blood of any animal, and
   so eat it, we punish suitably.  If anyone henceforth venture to eat in
   any way the blood of an animal, if he be a clergyman, let him be
   deposed; if a layman, let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVII.

   A cleric eating blood shall be deposed, but a layman shall be cut off.

   Van Espen.

   The apostolic precept of abstaining "from blood and from things
   strangled" for some ages, not only among the Greeks but also among the
   Latins, was observed in many churches, but little by little and step by
   step it died out in the whole Church, at least in the Latin Church,
   altogether.

   In this the Latin Church followed the opinion of St. Augustine, Contra
   Faustum Manichæum, Lib. XXXII., cap. xiij., where he teaches at great
   length that the precept was given to Christians only while the Gentile
   Church was not yet settled.  This passage of Augustine also proves that
   at that time Africa did not observe this precept of the Apostles.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXVIII.

   It is unlawful for anyone to corrupt or cut up a book of the Old or New
   Testament or of our holy and approved preachers and teachers, or to
   give them up to the traders in books or to those who are called
   perfumers, or to hand it over for destruction to any other like
   persons:  unless to be sure it has been rendered useless either by
   bookworms, or by water, or in some other way.  He who henceforth shall
   be observed to do such a thing shall be cut off for one year.  Likewise
   also he who buys such books (unless he keeps them for his own use, or
   gives them to another for his benefit to be preserved) and has
   attempted to corrupt them, let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVIII.

   Thou shalt not destroy nor hand over copies of the Divine Scriptures to
   be destroyed unless they are absolutely useless.

   Van Espen.

   (Foot-note.)

   I think that this canon was directed against certain Nestorian and
   Eutychian heretics, who, that they might find some patronage of their
   errors from the Holy Scriptures, dared in the sixth century most
   infamously to corrupt certain passages of the New Testament.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXIX.

   It is not permitted to a layman to enter the sanctuary (Holy Altar,
   Gk.), though, in accordance with a certain ancient tradition, the
   imperial power and authority is by no means prohibited from this when
   he wishes to offer his gifts to the Creator.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIX.

   No layman except the Emperor shall go up to the altar.

   Van Espen.

   That in the Latin Church as well as in the Greek for many centuries it
   was the constant custom, ratified by various councils, that lay-men are
   to be excluded from the sanctuary and from the place marked off for the
   priests who are celebrating the divine mysteries, is so notorious as to
   need no proof, and the present canon shows that among the Greeks the
   laity were not admitted to the sacrarium even to make offerings.

   The Synod makes but one exception, to wit, the Emperor, who can enter
   the rails of the holy altar by its permission "when he wishes to offer
   his gifts to the Creator, according to ancient custom."

   Not without foundation does the Synod claim "ancient custom" for this;
   for long before, it is evident, it was the case from the words of the
   Emperor Theodosius the Younger.  See also Theodoret (H. E., lib. v.,
   cap. xvij.).

   In the Latin Church, not only to emperors, kings, and great princes but
   also to patrons of churches, to toparchs of places, and even to
   magistrates, seats have been wont to be assigned honoris causâ within
   the sanctuary or choir, and it has been contended that these are
   properly due to such persons.

   It is evident from Balsamon's note that the later Greeks at least
   looked upon the Emperor as being (like the kings of England and France)
   a persona mixta, sharing in some degree the sacerdotal character, as
   being anointed not merely with oil, but with the sacred chrism.  Vide
   in this connexion J. Wickham Legg, The Sacring of the English Kings, in
   "The Archæological Journal," March, 1894.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXX.

   Women are not permitted to speak at the time of the Divine Liturgy;
   but, according to the word of Paul the Apostle, "let them be silent.
   For it is not permitted to them to speak, but to be in subjection, as
   the law also saith.  But if they wish to learn anything let them ask
   their own husbands at home."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXX.

   Women are not permitted to speak in church.

   "Let your women keep silence in the churches; for it is not permitted
   unto them to speak," is the passage referred to.  1 Cor. xiv. 34.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXI.

   Those who are taught the civil laws must not adopt the customs of the
   Gentiles, nor be induced to go to the theatre, nor to keep what are
   called Cylestras, nor to wear clothing contrary to the general custom;
   and this holds good when they begin their training, when they reach its
   end, and, in short, all the time of its duration.  If any one from this
   time shall dare to do contrary to this canon he is to be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXI.

   Whoever devotes himself to the study of law, uses the manner of the
   Gentiles, going to the theatre, and rolling in the dust, or dressing
   differently to custom, shall be cut off.

   Liddell and Scott identify kalistra with kalindethra , which they
   define as "a place for horses to roll after exercise," and note that it
   is a synonym of alindethra.  But it is interesting to note that
   alinesis is "a rolling in the dust, an exercise in which wrestlers
   rolled on the ground."

   Hefele says that Balsamon and Zonaras have not been able rightly to
   explain what we are to understand by the forbidden "Cylestras," but I
   think Johnson is not far out of the way when he translates "nor to
   meddle with athletic exercises."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXII.

   An orthodox man is not permitted to marry an heretical woman, nor an
   orthodox woman to be joined to an heretical man.  But if anything of
   this kind appear to have been done by any [we require them] to consider
   the marriage null, and that the marriage be dissolved.  For it is not
   fitting to mingle together what should not be mingled, nor is it right
   that the sheep be joined with the wolf, nor the lot of sinners with the
   portion of Christ.  But if any one shall transgress the things which we
   have decreed let him be cut off.  But if any who up to this time are
   unbelievers and are not yet numbered in the flock of the orthodox have
   contracted lawful marriage between themselves, and if then, one
   choosing the right and coming to the light of truth and the other
   remaining still detained by the bond of error and not willing to behold
   with steady eye the divine rays, the unbelieving woman is pleased to
   cohabit with the believing man, or the unbelieving man with the
   believing woman, let them not be separated, according to the divine
   Apostle, "for the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
   the unbelieving wife by her husband."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXII.

   A marriage contracted with heretics is void.  But if they have made the
   contract before [conversion] let them remain [united] if they so
   desire.

   Perhaps none of the canons of this synod present greater and more
   insolvable difficulties than the present.  It has been for long
   centuries the tradition of the Church that the marriage of a baptized
   Christian with an unbaptized person is null, but this canon seems to
   say that the same is the case if the one party be a heretic even though
   baptized.  If this is what the canon means it elevates heresy into an
   impedimentum dirimens.  Such is not and never has been the law of the
   West, and such is not to-day the practice of the Eastern church, which
   allows the marriage of its people with Lutherans and with Roman
   Catholics and never questions the validity of their marriages.  Van
   Espen thinks "the Greek commentators seem" to think that the heretics
   referred to are unbaptized; I do not know exactly why he thinks so.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXIII.

   Since the life-giving cross has shewn to us Salvation, we should be
   careful that we render due honour to that by which we were saved from
   the ancient fall.  Wherefore, in mind, in word, in feeling giving
   veneration (proskunesin) to it, we command that the figure of the
   cross, which some have placed on the floor, be entirely removed
   therefrom, lest the trophy of the victory won for us be desecrated by
   the trampling under foot of those who walk over it.  Therefore those
   who from this present represent on the pavement the sign of the cross,
   we decree are to be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIII.

   If there is a cross upon a pavement it must be removed.

   This canon defines that to the image of the cross is to be "given
   veneration (proskunesis) of the intellect, of the words, and of the
   sense," i.e., the cross is to be venerated with the interior cultus of
   the soul, is to be venerated with the exterior culture of praise, and
   also with sensible acts, such as kissings, bowings, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXIV.

   It is not permitted to hold what are called Agapæ, that is love-feasts,
   in the Lord's houses or churches, nor to eat within the house, nor to
   spread couches.  If any dare to do so let him cease therefrom or be cut
   off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIV.

   Agapæ are not to be held in the churches, nor shall beds be put up.
   Whoso refuse to give up these, let them be cut off.

   This is a renewal of canon xxviij., of Laodicea, on which canon see the
   notes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXV.

   We will that those whose office it is to sing in the churches do not
   use undisciplined vociferations, nor force nature to shouting, nor
   adopt any of those modes which are incongruous and unsuitable for the
   church:  but that they offer the psalmody to God, who is the observer
   of secrets, with great attention and compunction.  For the Sacred
   Oracle taught that the Sons of Israel were to be pious. [382]

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXV.

   Inordinate vociferation of the psalms is not allowed, nor he that
   adopts things unsuited to the churches.

   This question of the character of church-music was one early discussed
   among Christians, and (long before the time of this synod), St.
   Augustine, in debating as to whether the chanting or the reading of the
   psalter was the more edifying, concludes, "when the psalms are chanted
   with a voice and most suitable modulation (liquida voce et
   convenientissima modulatione), I recognize that there is great utility
   in the practice," and further on he adds that singing is to be the
   rather approved, because "by the delight given to the ears the infirm
   soul is worked up to pious aspirations."  (Confess. Lib. x., cap.
   xxxiij.).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [382] The Latin adds, "and holy."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXVI.

   It is not right that those who are responsible for reverence to
   churches should place within the sacred bounds an eating place, nor
   offer food there, nor make other sales.  For God our Saviour teaching
   us when he was tabernacling in the flesh commanded not to make his
   Father's house a house of merchandize.  He also poured out the small
   coins of the money-changers, and drave out all those who made common
   the temple.  If, therefore, anyone shall be taken in the aforesaid
   fault let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVI.

   A public house should not be established within the sacred precincts;
   and it is wrong to sell food there; and whosoever shall do so shall be
   cut off.

   Both Balsamon and Zonaras remark that this canon refers to the
   vestibule of the church and to the rest of the sacred inclosure, and
   not to the interior of the church proper, for there no one would ever
   think of having a shop.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXVII.

   It is not right that those who are dedicated to religion, whether
   clerics or ascetics, [383] should wash in the bath with women, nor
   should any Christian man or layman do so.  For this is severely
   condemned by the heathens.  But if any one is caught in this thing, if
   he is a cleric let him be deposed; if a layman, let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVII.

   A Christian man shall not bathe with women.  Should a cleric do so he
   is to be deposed, and a layman cut off.

   This is a renewal of the XXX^th canon of Laodicea.  It will be noted,
   as Zonaras remarks, that the monks must be counted among the laymen who
   are to be cut off, since they have no clerical character or tonsure.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [383] The Latin adds "that is to say Exercisers,' (Exercitatores) or
   monks."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXVIII.

   It behoves those who are illuminated to learn the Creed by heart and to
   recite it to the bishop or presbyters on the Fifth Feria of the Week.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVIII.

   He that is illuminated is to recite (apangelleto ) the faith on the
   fifth feria of the week.

   This is a renewal of canon xlvi. of Laodicea.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXIX.

   As we confess the divine birth of the Virgin to be without any
   childbed, since it came to pass without seed, and as we preach this to
   the entire flock, so we subject to correction those who through
   ignorance do anything which is inconsistent therewith.  Wherefore since
   some on the day after the holy Nativity of Christ our God are seen
   cooking semidalin , and distributing it to each other, on pretext of
   doing honour to the puerperia of the spotless Virgin Maternity, we
   decree that henceforth nothing of the kind be done by the faithful.
   For this is not honouring the Virgin (who above thought and speech bare
   in the flesh the incomprehensible Word) when we define [384] and
   describe, from ordinary things and from such as occur with ourselves,
   her ineffable parturition.  If therefore anyone henceforth be
   discovered doing any such thing, if he be a cleric let him be deposed,
   but if a layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIX.

   Whoever after the feast of the Mother of God shall prepare semidilin
   (semilam) or anything else on account of what is called puerperia, let
   him be cut off.

   As the Catholic Church has always taught the Virgin-birth as well as
   the Virgin-conception of our Blessed Lord, and has affirmed that Mary
   was ever-virgin, even after she had brought forth the incarnate Son, so
   it follows necessarily that there could be no childbed nor puerperal
   flux.  It need hardly be remarked here that besides other texts that of
   the prophet is considered as teaching thus much, "Behold the Virgin (ha
   alma) shall conceive and bear a son," she that "bare" as well as she
   that "conceived" being a virgin.  Some commentators have taken
   epilocheia for the afterbirth, but Christian Lupus, as Van Espen notes,
   has pointed out that the early fathers seem to have recognized that the
   Virgin did have the "afterbirth," and this St. Jerome expressly teaches
   in his book, Contra Helvidium.

   The Greeks, however, understood it as I have translated, and the
   witness of Zonaras will be sufficient.  The words lochos, lochaios and
   the like all signify "lying in," "a place of lying in," and Liddell and
   Scott say that the latter word is used of "bearing down like heavy ears
   of corn," which would well express the labour pains.

   Zonaras.

   This canon teaches that the parturition of the holy Virgin was without
   any childbed.  For childbed (puerperium) is the emission of the foetus
   accompanied by pain and a flux of blood:  but none of us ever believed
   that the Mother of God was subjected to sufferings of this sort, for
   these are the consequents of natural conception, but her conception was
   supernatural; and by the Holy Spirit it was brought to pass that she
   was not subjected to those evils which rightly are attached to natural
   parturition.

   On this canon should be read the extensive treatment of Asseman (Bib.
   Juris Orient., Tom. v., pp. 193 et seqq.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [384] The Latin adds "and measure."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXX.

   If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or any of those who are
   enumerated in the list of the clergy, or a layman, has no very grave
   necessity nor difficult business so as to keep him from church for a
   very long time, but being in town does not go to church on three
   consecutive Sundays--three weeks--if he is a cleric let him be deposed,
   but if a layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXX.

   If anyone without the constraint of necessity leaves his church for
   three Lord's days, he shall be deprived of communion.

   This is a renewal of canon xi. of Sardica (xiv. according to the
   numbering of Dionysius Exiguus.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXI.

   Whereas we have heard that in some places in the hymn Trisagion there
   is added after "Holy and Immortal," "Who was crucified for us, have
   mercy upon us," and since this as being alien to piety was by the
   ancient and holy Fathers cast out of the hymn, as also the violent
   heretics who inserted these new words were cast out of the Church; we
   also, confirming the things which were formerly piously established by
   our holy Fathers, anathematize those who after this present decree
   allow in church this or any other addition to the most sacred hymn; but
   if indeed he who has transgressed is of the sacerdotal order, we
   command that he be deprived of his priestly dignity, but if he be a
   layman or monk let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXI.

   Whoever adds to the hymn Trisagion these words "Who wast crucified"
   shall be deemed heterodox.

   The addition of the phrase condemned by this canon was probably made
   first by Peter Fullo, and although indeed it was capable of a good
   meaning, if the whole hymn was understood as being addressed to Christ,
   and although this was admitted by very many of the orthodox, yet as it
   was chiefly used by the Monophysites and with an undoubtedly heretical
   intention, it was finally ousted from this position and its adherents
   were styled Theopaschites.  From all this it came about that by 518 it
   was a source of disagreement among the Catholics, some affirming the
   expression, as looked at by itself, to be a touchstone of orthodoxy.
   The Emperor Justinian tried to have it approved by Pope Hormisdas, but
   unsuccessfully, the pontiff only declaring that it was unnecessary, and
   even dangerous.  Fulgentius of Ruspe and Dionysius Exiguus had declared
   it orthodox.  Pope John II. almost came to the point of approving the
   phrase "one of the Trinity suffered," nor did his successor Agapetus I.
   speak any more definitely on the point, but the Fifth Ecumenical
   Council directly approved the formula.

   But this, of course, did not touch the point of its introduction into
   the Trisagion or, more accurately, of the introduction of the words
   "who was crucified for us."

   It should have been noted that at a Home Synod in 478, Peter Fullo had
   been deposed for the insertion of this clause, because he intended to
   imply that the true God had suffered death upon the cross.  This
   sentence was a confirmation of one already pronounced against him by a
   synod held at Antioch which had raised a man, Stephen by name, to its
   episcopal throne.

   Such is the history of a matter which, while it seemed at first as of
   little moment, yet for many years was a source of trouble in the
   Church.  (Vide Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. III., pp. 454,
   457; Vol. IV., p. 26.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXII.

   In some pictures of the venerable icons, a lamb is painted to which the
   Precursor points his finger, which is received as a type of grace,
   indicating beforehand through the Law, our true Lamb, Christ our God.
   Embracing therefore the ancient types and shadows as symbols of the
   truth, and patterns given to the Church, we prefer "grace and truth,"
   receiving it as the fulfilment of the Law.  In order therefore that
   "that which is perfect" may be delineated to the eyes of all, at least
   in coloured expression, we decree that the figure in human form of the
   Lamb who taketh away the sin of the world, Christ our God, be
   henceforth exhibited in images, instead of the ancient lamb, so that
   all may understand by means of it the depths of the humiliation of the
   Word of God, and that we may recall to our memory his conversation in
   the flesh, his passion and salutary death, and his redemption which was
   wrought for the whole world.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXII.

   Thou shalt not paint a lamb for the type of Christ, but himself.

   As from this canon, a century earlier than the iconoclastic
   controversy, the prevalence of pictures is evident, so from the canon
   of the same synod with regard to the veneration due to the image of the
   cross (number lxxiii.), we learn that the teaching of the Church with
   regard to relative worship was the same as was subsequently set forth,
   so that the charge of innovating, sometimes rashly brought against the
   Seventh Ecumenical Council, has no foundation in fact whatever.

   This canon is further interesting as being the one cited by more than
   one Pope and Western Authority as belonging to "the Sixth Synod."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXIII.

   No one may give the Eucharist to the bodies of the dead; for it is
   written "Take and eat."  But the bodies of the dead can neither "take"
   nor "eat."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIII.

   The Sacraments must not be given to a dead body.

   This is canon iv. of the Council of Hippo, in the year 393.  (Vide
   Hefele, Vol. II., p. 397.)  The earlier canon includes baptism also, in
   its prohibition.  This is canons xviii. and xx. of the African code,
   according to the Greek numbering.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXIV.

   Following the canonical laws of the Fathers, we decree concerning
   infants, as often as they are found without trusty witnesses who say
   that they are undoubtedly baptized; and as often as they are themselves
   unable on account of their age to answer satisfactorily in respect to
   the initiatory mystery given to them; that they ought without any
   offence to be baptized, lest such a doubt might deprive them of the
   sanctification of such a purification.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIV.

   Whoever do not know nor can prove by documents that they have been
   baptized, let them be christened.

   This is canon VII., of the Sixth Council of Carthage, (Vide Hefele,
   Hist. of the Councils, Vol. II., p. 424); and Canon lxxv., of the
   African code (to which Balsam on attributes this canon), by the Greek
   numbering, (lxxii. by the Latin).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXV.

   We have received from the Scriptures that in the mouth of two or three
   witnesses every word shall be established.  Therefore we decree that
   slaves who are manumitted by their masters in the presence of three
   witnesses shall enjoy that honour; for they being present at the time
   will add strength and stability to the liberty given, and they will
   bring it to pass that faith will be kept in those things which they now
   witness were done in their presence.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXV.

   A slave manumitted by his master before two witnesses shall be free.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXVI.

   Those who to the destruction of their own souls procure and bring up
   harlots, if they be clerics, they are to be [cut off and] deposed, if
   laymen to be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVI.

   Whoever gathers together harlots to the ruin of souls, shall be cut
   off.

   The brackets enclose the reading of Hervetus.  But Zonaras had this
   same text, and therefore it may be safely followed instead of that of
   Balsamon, as edited by Beveridge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXVII.

   She who has left her husband is an adulteress if she has come to
   another, according to the holy and divine Basil, who has gathered this
   most excellently from the prophet Jeremiah:  "If a woman has become
   another man's, her husband shall not return to her, but being defiled
   she shall remain defiled;" and again, "He who has an adulteress is
   senseless and impious."  If therefore she appears to have departed from
   her husband without reason, he is deserving of pardon and she of
   punishment.  And pardon shall be given to him that he may be in
   communion with the Church.  But he who leaves the wife lawfully given
   him, and shall take another is guilty of adultery by the sentence of
   the Lord.  And it has been decreed by our Fathers that they who are
   such must be "weepers" for a year, "hearers" for two years,
   "prostrators" for three years, and in the seventh year to stand with
   the faithful and thus be counted worthy of the Oblation [if with tears
   they do penance].

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVII.

   She who goes from her husband to another man is an adulteress.  And he
   who from his wife goes to another woman is an adulterer according to
   the word of the Lord.

   Compare with this canon lviij. of St. Basil.

   The words in brackets are found in Beveridge, but were lacking in
   Hervetus's text.

   Johnson.

   Here discipline is relaxed; formerly an adulteress did fifteen years'
   penance.  See Can. Bas., 58.  No wonder if in 200 years' time from St.
   Basil, the severity of discipline was abated.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXVIII.

   No one may drive any beast into a church except perchance a traveller,
   urged thereto by the greatest necessity, in default of a shed or
   resting-place, may have turned aside into said church.  For unless the
   beast had been taken inside, it would have perished, and he, by the
   loss of his beast of burden, and thus without means of continuing his
   journey, would be in peril of death.  And we are taught that the
   Sabbath was made for man:  wherefore also the safety and comfort of man
   are by all means to be placed first.  But should anyone be detected
   without any necessity such as we have just mentioned, leading his beast
   into a church, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, and if a layman
   let him be cut off.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVIII.

   Cattle shall not be led into the holy halls, unless the greatest
   necessity compels it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXIX.

   The faithful spending the days of the Salutatory Passion in fasting,
   praying and compunction of heart, ought to fast until the midnight of
   the Great Sabbath:  since the divine Evangelists, Matthew and Luke,
   have shewn us how late at night it was [that the resurrection took
   place], the one by using the words oPse sabbaton, and the other by the
   words orthrou batheos.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIX.

   On the Great Sabbath the fast must be continued until midnight.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XC.

   We have received from our divine Fathers the canon law that in honour
   of Christ's resurrection, we are not to kneel on Sundays.  Lest
   therefore we should ignore the fulness of this observance we make it
   plain to the faithful that after the priests have gone to the Altar for
   Vespers on Saturdays (according to the prevailing custom) no one shall
   kneel in prayer until the evening of Sunday, at which time after the
   entrance for compline, again with bended knees we offer our prayers to
   the Lord.  For taking the night after the Sabbath, which was the
   forerunner of our Lord's resurrection, we begin from it to sing in the
   spirit hymns to God, leading our feast out of darkness into light, and
   thus during an entire day and night, we celebrate the Resurrection.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XC.

   From the evening entrance of the Sabbath until the evening entrance of
   the Lord's day there must be no kneeling.

   Van Espen.

   No doubt the synod by the words "we have received from the divine
   Fathers," referred to canon xx. of the Council of Nice.

   For many centuries this custom was preserved even in the Latin Church;
   and the custom of keeping feasts and whole days generally from evening
   to evening is believed to have been an Apostolic tradition, received by
   them from the Jews.  At the end of the VIII^th Century the Synod of
   Frankfort declared in its xxj. canon, that "the Lord's day should be
   kept from evening to evening." [385]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [385] "The evening and the morning were the first day."--Gen. i. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCI.

   Those who give drugs for procuring abortion, and those who receive
   poisons to kill the foetus, are subjected to the penalty of murder.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCI.

   Whoever gives or receives medicine to produce abortion is a homicide.

   See Canon XXI. of Ancyra, and Canon II. of St. Basil; to wit, "She who
   purposely destroys the foetus, shall suffer the punishment of murder.
   And we pay no attention to the subtile distinction as to whether the
   foetus was formed or unformed.  And by this not only is justice
   satisfied for the child that should have been born, but also for her
   who prepared for herself the snares, since the women very often die who
   make such experiments."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCII.

   The holy synod decrees that those who in the name of marriage carry off
   women and those who in any way assist the ravishers, if they be
   clerics, they shall lose their rank, but if they be laymen they shall
   be anathematized.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCII.

   Those who run away with women, and those who assist and give a hand, if
   they be clerics they shall be deposed, if laymen they shall be
   anathamatized.

   Van Espen.

   This canon simply renews and confirms Canon xxvij of Chalcedon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCIII.

   If the wife of a man who has gone away and does not appear, cohabit
   with another before she is assured of the death of the first, she is an
   adulteress.  The wives of soldiers who have married husbands who do not
   appear are in the same case; as are also they who on account of the
   wanderings of their husbands do not wait for their return.  But the
   circumstance here has some excuse, in that the suspicion of his death
   becomes very great.  But she who in ignorance has married a man who at
   the time was deserted by his wife, and then is dismissed because his
   first wife returns to him, has indeed committed fornication, but
   through ignorance; therefore she is not prevented from marrying, but it
   is better if she remain as she is.  If a soldier shall return after a
   long time, and find his wife on account of his long absence has been
   united to another man, if he so wishes, he may receive his own wife
   [back again], pardon being extended in consideration of their ignorance
   both to her and to the man who took her home in second marriage.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIII.

   A woman who when her husband does not turn up, before she is certain he
   is dead, takes another commits adultery.  But when the man returns he
   may receive her again, if he so elects.

   Compare in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II.,
   Causa xxxiv., Quæst. I. and II.  Epistle of St. Leo to Nicetas.  Also
   compare of St. Basil's canon's xxxj., xxxvj., and xlvj.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCIV.

   The canon subjects to penalties those who take heathen oaths, and we
   decree to them excommunication.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIV.

   Whoever uses Gentile oaths, is worthy of punishment, for he is cut off.

   The reference is to canon lxxxj. of St. Basil's canons.

   Van Espen.

   Tertullian (De Idolatria, cap. xx.) supposes that to swear by the false
   gods of the Gentiles, contains in itself some idolatry, an opinion
   shared by St. Basil, comparing those using such oaths with them who
   betrayed Christ, and who are partakers of the talk of devils.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCV.

   Those who from the heretics come over to orthodoxy, and to the number
   of those who should be saved, we receive according to the following
   order and custom.  Arians, Macedonians, Novatians, who call themselves
   Cathari, Aristeri, and Testareskaidecatitæ, or Tetraditæ, and
   Apollinarians, we receive on their presentation of certificates and on
   their anathematizing every heresy which does not hold as does the holy
   Apostolic Church of God:  then first of all we anoint them with the
   holy chrism on their foreheads, eyes, nostrils, mouth and ears; and as
   we seal them we say--"The seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost."

   But concerning the Paulianists it has been determined by the Catholic
   Church that they shall by all means be rebaptized.  The Eunomeans also,
   who baptize with one immersion; and the Montanists, who here are called
   Phrygians; and the Sabellians, who consider the Son to be the same as
   the Father, and are guilty in certain other grave matters, and all the
   other heresies--for there are many heretics here, especially those who
   come from the region of the Galatians--all of their number who are
   desirous of coming to the Orthodox faith, we receive as Gentiles.  And
   on the first day we make them Christians, on the second Catechumens,
   then on the third day we exorcise them, at the same time also breathing
   thrice upon their faces and ears; and thus we initiate them, and we
   make them spend time in church and hear the Scriptures; and then we
   baptize them.

   And the Manichæans, and Valentinians and Marcionites and all of similar
   heresies must give certificates and anathematize each his own heresy,
   and also Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, Severus, and the other chiefs
   of such heresies, and those who think with them, and all the aforesaid
   heresies; and so they become partakers of the holy Communion.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCV.

   Thus we admit those converted from the heretics.  We anoint with the
   holy chrism, upon the brow, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears, Arians,
   Macedonians, Novatians (who are called Cathari), Aristerians (who are
   called Quartadecimans or Tetraditæ), and Apollinarians when they
   anathematize every heresy; and sign them with the cross as we say, "The
   Seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost.  Amen."

   Compare with this Canon vij. of Laodicea, and the so-called vij^th.
   canon of the First Council of Constantinople.

   The text I have translated is that ordinarily given, I now present to
   the reader Hefele's argument for its worthlessness.

   Hefele.

   This text is undoubtedly false, for (a) the baptism of the Gnostics
   was, according to the recognized ecclesiastical principle, invalid, and
   a Gnostic coming into the Church was required to be baptized anew; (b)
   besides, it would have us first to require of a Gnostic an anathema on
   Nestorius, Eutyches, etc.  More accurate, therefore, is the text, as it
   is given by Beveridge, and as Balsamon had it, to the effect that:  "In
   the same way (as the preceding) are the Manichæans, Valentinians,
   Marcionites, and similar heretics to be treated (i.e., to be baptized
   anew); but the Nestorians must (merely) present certificates, and
   anathematize their heresy, Nestorius, Eutyches, etc."  Here we have
   only this mistake, that the Nestorians must anathematize, among others,
   also Eutyches, which they would certainly have done very willingly.  At
   the best, we must suppose that there is a gap in the text, and that
   after, "all of similar heresies," we must add "the later heretics must
   present certificates and anathematize Nestorius, Eutyches, etc."

   There seems but little doubt that whatever may be the truth in the
   matter, the early theologians and fathers held that even though the
   external rite of Holy Baptism might be validly performed by schismatics
   and heretics, yet that by it the person so baptized did not receive the
   Holy Ghost, and this opinion was not confined to the East, but was also
   prevalent in the West.  Vide Rupertus, De Divinis Officiis, Lib. X.,
   Cap. xxv.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCVI.

   Those who by baptism have put on Christ have professed that they will
   copy his manner of life which he led in the flesh.  Those therefore who
   adorn and arrange their hair to the detriment of those who see them,
   that is by cunningly devised intertwinings, and by this means put a
   bait in the way of unstable souls, we take in hand to cure paternally
   with a suitable punishment:  training them and teaching them to live
   soberly, in order that having laid aside the deceit and vanity of
   material things, they may give their minds continually to a life which
   is blessed and free from mischief, and have their conversation in fear,
   pure, [and holy [386] ]; and thus come as near as possible to God
   through their purity of life; and adorn the inner man rather than the
   outer, and that with virtues, and good and blameless manners, so that
   they leave in themselves no remains of the left-handedness of the
   adversary.  But if any shall act contrary to the present canon let him
   be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVI.

   Whoever twist up their hair into artistic plaits for the destruction of
   the beholders are to be cut off.

   For the intricate manner of dressing the hair used in the East, and for
   a description of the golden dye, see the scholion of Zonaras.  Van
   Espen remarks that the curious care for somebody else's hair in the
   form of wigs, so prevalent with many laymen and ecclesiastics of his
   day, is the same vice condemned by the canon in another shape. [387]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [386] These words only in the Latin.

   [387] It is curious to note that so great was the care of the clergy
   for their wigs that the very shape of the vestments was changed so as
   not to disturb them, and the surplices were slit all the way down the
   front, as they continue in some places even down to our own days, after
   the original cause had long passed away.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCVII.

   Those who have commerce with a wife or in any other manner without
   regard thereto make sacred places common, and treat them with contempt
   and thus remain in them, we order all such to be expelled, even from
   the dwellings of the catechumens which are in the venerable temples.
   And if any one shall not observe these directions, if he be a cleric
   let him be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVII.

   Whoever in a temple has commerce with his wife and remains there out of
   contempt, shall be expelled even from the Catechumens.  If any one
   shall not observe this he shall be deposed or cut off.

   Zonaras.

   In the name of holy places, not the church itself but the adjoining and
   dependent buildings are intended such as those which are called the
   "Catechumena."  For no one would be audacious enough to wish to cohabit
   with his wife in the very temple itself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCVIII.

   He who brings to the intercourse of marriage a woman who is betrothed
   to another man who is still alive, is to lie under the charge of
   adultery.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVIII.

   He is an adulterer who takes one espoused to some one else.

   Aristenus's commentary on this canon is Saphes.  A more extraordinary
   estimate of it could hardly be made.  So far from the meaning being
   "perspicuous," as the Latin translation has it, the meaning seems to be
   past finding out; for, as Van Espen remarks, a man who sins with a
   betrothed woman is certainly not an "adulterer."  He tries therefore to
   introduce the idea that though he is not an adulterer, yet he is to be
   punished as if he were.  But the Greek hardly seems patient of this
   meaning, and the Ancient Epitome says in so many words that he is an
   adulterer.

   On account of this difficulty some have supposed that the espousals
   here mentioned were not de futuro but de proesenti, and that therefore
   it was the case of stealing a real wife of another man.  But this
   explanation also is involved in many difficulties.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCIX.

   We have further learned that, in the regions of the Armenians, certain
   persons boil joints of meat within the sanctuary and offer portions to
   the priests, distributing it after the Jewish fashion.  Wherefore, that
   we may keep the church undefiled, we decree that it is not lawful for
   any priest to seize the separate portions of flesh meat from those who
   offer them, but they are to be content with what he that offers pleases
   to give them; and further we decree that such offering be made outside
   the church.  And if any one does not thus, let him be cut off.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIX.

   There are some who like the Jews cook meat in the holy places.  Whoever
   permits this, or receives aught from them, is not fit to be priest.
   But if any one should of his own free choice offer it, then he might
   receive as much as the offerer chose to give him, provided the offer
   were made outside the church.

   A similar Judaizing superstitious custom was also found in the West, of
   which Walafrid Strabo gives an account in the IX. Century (De Rebus
   Ecclesiasticis, cap. xviii.).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon C.

   "Let thine eyes behold the thing which is right," orders Wisdom, "and
   keep thine heart with all care."  For the bodily senses easily bring
   their own impressions into the soul.  Therefore we order that
   henceforth there shall in no way be made pictures, whether they are in
   paintings or in what way so ever, which attract the eye and corrupt the
   mind, and incite it to the enkindling of base pleasures.  And if any
   one shall attempt to do this he is to be cut off.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon C.

   Pictures which induce impurity are not to be painted.  Whoso shall
   transgress shall be cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CI.

   The great and divine Apostle Paul with loud voice calls man created in
   the image of God, the body and temple of Christ.  Excelling, therefore,
   every sensible creature, he who by the saving Passion has attained to
   the celestial dignity, eating and drinking Christ, is fitted in all
   respects for eternal life, sanctifying his soul and body by the
   participation of divine grace.  Wherefore, if any one wishes to be a
   participator of the immaculate Body in the time of the Synaxis, and to
   offer himself for the communion, let him draw near, arranging his hands
   in the form of a cross, and so let him receive the communion of grace.
   But such as, instead of their hands, make vessels of gold or other
   materials for the reception of the divine gift, and by these receive
   the immaculate communion, we by no means allow to come, as preferring
   inanimate and inferior matter to the image of God.  But if any one
   shall be found imparting the immaculate Communion to those who bring
   vessels of this kind, let him be cut off as well as the one who brings
   them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CI.

   Whoever comes to receive the Eucharist holds his hands in the form of a
   cross, and takes it with his mouth; whoever shall prepare a receptacle
   of gold or of any other material instead of his hand, shall be cut off.

   Balsamon.

   At first, perchance, this was invented from pious feelings, because the
   hand which came in contact with base and unworthy things was not worthy
   to receive the Lord's body, but, as time went on, piety was turned to
   the injury of the soul, so that those who did this when they came to
   receive with an arrogant and insolent bearing, were preferred to the
   poor.

   St. Cyril of Jerusalem.

   (Cateches. Mystagog. v. [388] )

   When thou goest to receive communion go not with thy wrists extended,
   nor with thy fingers separated, but placing thy left hand as a throne
   for thy right, which is to receive so great a King, and in the hollow
   of the palm receive the body of Christ, saying, Amen.

   Vide also St. John Damascene, De Fide Orthodoxa, lib. iv., cap. xiv.
   On the whole matter cf. Card. Bona, De Rebus Lit., lib. ii., cap.
   xvij., n. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [388] Oxford Translation, p. 279.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CII.

   It behoves those who have received from God the power to loose and
   bind, to consider the quality of the sin and the readiness of the
   sinner for conversion, and to apply medicine suitable for the disease,
   lest if he is injudicious in each of these respects he should fail in
   regard to the healing of the sick man.  For the disease of sin is not
   simple, but various and multiform, and it germinates many mischievous
   offshoots, from which much evil is diffused, and it proceeds further
   until it is checked by the power of the physician.  Wherefore he who
   professes the science of spiritual medicine ought first of all to
   consider the disposition of him who has sinned, and to see whether he
   tends to health or (on the contrary) provokes to himself disease by his
   own behaviour, and to look how he can care for his manner of life
   during the interval.  And if he does not resist the physician, and if
   the ulcer of the soul is increased by the application of the imposed
   medicaments, then let him mete out mercy to him according as he is
   worthy of it.  For the whole account is between God and him to whom the
   pastoral rule has been delivered, to lead back the wandering sheep and
   to cure that which is wounded by the serpent; and that he may neither
   cast them down into the precipices of despair, nor loosen the bridle
   towards dissolution or contempt of life; but in some way or other,
   either by means of sternness and astringency, or by greater softness
   and mild medicines, to resist this sickness and exert himself for the
   healing of the ulcer, now examining the fruits of his repentance and
   wisely managing the man who is called to higher illumination.  For we
   ought to know two things, to wit, the things which belong to strictness
   and those which belong to custom, and to follow the traditional form in
   the case of those who are not fitted for the highest things, as holy
   Basil teaches us.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CII.

   The character of a sin must be considered from all points and
   conversion expected.  And so let mercy be meted out.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Canons of the Synods of Sardica, Carthage, Constantinople, and
   Carthage

   Under St. Cyprian,

   Which Canons Were Received by the Council in Trullo and Ratified by II.
   Nice.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introductory Note.

   I have placed the canons of Sardica and those of Carthage and those of
   the Council held at Constantinople under Nectarius and Theophilus, and
   that of the Council of Carthage under St. Cyprian, immediately after
   the Council in Trullo, because in the second canon of that synod they
   are for the first time mentioned by name as being accepted by the
   Universal Church.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Council of Sardica.

   a.d. 343 or 344.

   Emperors.--Constantius and Constans.

   Pope.--Julius I.

   Elenchus.

   Introduction on the date of the synod.

   Note on the text of the canons.

   The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes.

   Other Acts of the Synod.

   Excursus as to this synod's claim to ecumenical character.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introduction on the Date of the Council.

   (Hefele, Hist. Councils, Vol. II., pp. 86 et seqq.)

   Our inquiries concerning the Synod of Sardica must begin with a
   chronological examination of the date of this assembly.  Socrates and
   Sozomen place it expressly in the year 347 a.d., with the more precise
   statement that it was held under the Consuls Rufinus and Eusebius in
   the eleventh year after the death of Constantine the Great, therefore
   after the 22d of May, 347, according to our way of reckoning.

   This was the most general view until, rather more than a hundred years
   ago, the learned Scipio Maffei discovered at Verona, the fragment of a
   Latin translation of an old Alexandrian chronicle (the Historia
   Acephala), and edited it in the third volume of the Osservazioni
   Litterarii in 1738.  This fragment contains the information that on the
   24th Phaophi (October 21), under the Consuls Constantius IV. and
   Constans II., in the year 346, Athanasius had returned to Alexandria
   from his second exile.  As it is universally allowed, however, as we
   shall presently show more clearly, that this return certainly only took
   place about two years after the Synod of Sardica, Mansi hence saw the
   necessity of dating this synod as early as the year 344.  In this he is
   confirmed by St. Jerome, in the continuation of the Eusebian chronicle,
   who, in accordance with the Historia Acephala, has assigned the return
   of St. Athanasius to the tenth year of the reign of the Emperor
   Constantius, in 346.

   Many learned men now followed Mansi, the greater number blindly;
   others, again, sought to contradict him, at first the learned
   Dominican, Mamachi; then Dr. Wetzer (Professor at Freiburg); and
   latterly, we ourselves in a treatise, "Controversen über die Synode von
   Sardika," in the Tübinger Theol. Quartalschrift, 1852.  Soon after
   there was a fresh discovery.  Some of the Paschal Letters of St.
   Athanasius, which until then were supposed to be lost, were discovered
   in an Egyptian monastery, with a very ancient preface translated into
   Syriac, and were published in that language by Cureton in London, and
   in the year 1852 in German by Professor Larsow, at the Grey Friars
   Convent, in Berlin.

   Among these Festal Letters, the nineteenth, intended for Easter 347,
   and therefore composed in the beginning of that year, had been
   rewritten in Alexandria, as the introduction expressly states.  This
   confirms the statement of the Historia Acephala, that Athanasius was
   already returned to Alexandria in October, 346, and confirms the chief
   points of Mansi's hypothesis; while, on the other hand, it unanswerably
   refutes, by Athanasius' own testimony, the statements of Socrates and
   Sozomen (which, from their dependence on each other, only count as
   one), with reference to the date 347.

   As we said, Mansi placed this Synod in the year 344; but the old
   preface to the Festal Letters of St. Athanasius dates it in the year
   343, and in fact we can now only hesitate between the dates 343 and
   344.  If the preface were as ancient and as powerfully convincing as
   the Festal Letters themselves, then the question concerning the date of
   the Council of Sardica would be most accurately decided.  As, however,
   this preface contains mistakes in several places, especially
   chronological errors--for instance, regarding the death of Constantine
   the Great--we cannot unconditionally accept its statement as to the
   date 344, but can only do so when it corresponds with other dates
   concerning that time.

   Let us, at all events, assume that Athanasius came to Rome about
   Easter, 340.  As is known, he was there for three whole years, and in
   the beginning of the fourth year was summoned to the Emperor Constans
   at Milan.  This points to the summer of 343.  From thence he went
   through Gaul to Sardica, and thus it is quite possible that that Synod
   might have begun in the autumn of 343.  It probably lasted, however,
   until the spring; for when the two envoys, Euphrates of Cologne, and
   Vincent of Capua, who were sent by the Synod to the Emperor Constans,
   arrived in Antioch, it was already Easter 344.  Stephen, the bishop of
   the latter city, treated them in a truly diabolical manner; but his
   wickedness soon became notorious, and a synod was established, which
   deposed him after Easter 344.  Its members were Eusebians, who
   therefore appointed Leontius Castratus as Stephen's successor, and it
   is indeed no other than this assembly which Athanasius has in mind,
   when he says it took place three years after the Synod in Encæniis, and
   drew up a very explicit Eusebian confession of faith, the makrostichos.

   The disgraceful behaviour of Bishop Stephen of Antioch for some time
   inclined the Emperor to place less confidence in the Arian party, and
   to allow Athanasius's exiled clergy to return home in the summer of
   344.  Ten months later, the pseudo-bishop, Gregory of Alexandria, died
   (in June, 345), and Constantius did not permit any fresh appointment to
   the see of Alexandria, but recalled St. Athanasius by three letters,
   and waited for him more than a year.  Thus the see of Alexandria
   remained unoccupied for more than a year, until the last six months of
   346.  At length, in October, 346, Athanasius returned to his bishopric.

   We see then that by accepting the distinct statements of the Paschal
   Letters of St. Athanasius and the preface, we obtain a satisfactory
   chronological system in which the separate details cohere well
   together, and which thus recommends itself.  One great objection which
   we formerly raised ourselves against the date 344 can now be solved.
   It is certainly true that in 353 or 354 Pope Librius wrote thus:
   "Eight years ago the Eusebian deputies, Eudoxius and Martyrius (who
   came to the West with the formula makrostikos), refused to anathematize
   the Arian doctrine at Milan."  But the Synod of Milan here alluded to,
   and placed about the year 345, was not, as we before erroneously
   supposed, held before the Synod of Sardica, but after it.  We are
   somewhat less fortunate as regards another difficulty.  The Eusebians
   assembled at Philippopolis (the pseudo-synod of Sardica) say, in their
   synodal letter:  "Bishop Asclepas of Gaza was deposed from his
   bishopric seventeen years ago."  This deposition occurred at an
   Antiochian synod.  If we identified this synod with the well-known one
   of 330, by which Eustathius of Antioch also was overthrown, we should,
   reckoning the seventeen years, have the year 346 or 347, in which to
   place the writing of the Synodal Letter of Philippopolis, and therefore
   the Synod of Sardica.  There are, however, two ways of avoiding this
   conclusion, either we must suppose that Asclepas has been already
   deposed a year or so before the Antiochian Synod of 330; or that the
   statement as to the number seventeen in the Latin translation of the
   Synodal Letter of Philippopolis (for we no longer possess the original
   text) is an error or slip of the pen.  But in no case can this Synodal
   Letter alter the fact that Athanasius was again in Alexandria when he
   composed his Paschal Letter for the year 347, and that the Synod of
   Sardica must therefore have been held several years before.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Note on the Text of the Canons.

   The Canons of Sardica have come down to us both in Greek and Latin, and
   some writers such as Richer (Histoire Conc. Générale, Tom. i., p. 98),
   have been of opinion that the Latin text alone was the original, while
   others, such as Walch (Gesch. der Kirchenvers., p. 179), have arrived
   at a directly opposite conclusion.  Now, however, chiefly owing to the
   investigations of the Ballerini and of Spittler, the unanimous opinion
   of scholars--so says Hefele--is that the canons were originally drawn
   up in both languages, intended as they were for both Latins and
   Greeks.  I may perhaps remind the reader that in many Western
   collections of canons the canons of Sardica immediately follow those of
   Nice without any break, or note that they were not enacted at that
   council.  It will also be well to bear in mind that they were received
   by the Greeks as of Ecumenical authority by the Council in Trullo, and
   as such are contained in the body of the Greek Canon Law.

   I have provided the reader with a very accurate translation of each
   text.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Canons of the Council of Sardica.

   The holy synod assembled in Sardica from various provinces decreed as
   follows.

   (Found in Greek in John of Constantinople's collection of the sixth
   century and several other mss.  Found also in the works of the Greek
   scholiasts.  Found in Latin in the Prisca, in Dionysius Exiguus, and in
   Isidore, genuine and false.)

   Canon I.

   (Greek.)

   Hosius, bishop of the city of Corduba, said:  A prevalent evil, or
   rather most mischievous corruption must be done away with from its very
   foundations.  Let no bishop be allowed to remove from a small city to a
   different one:  as there is an obvious reason for this fault,
   accounting for such attempts; since no bishop could ever yet be found
   who endeavoured to be translated from a larger city to a smaller one.
   It is therefore evident that such persons are inflamed with excessive
   covetousness and are only serving ambition in order to have the repute
   of possessing greater authority.  Is it then the pleasure of all that
   so grave an abuse be punished with great severity?  For I think that
   men of this sort should not be admitted even to lay communion.  All the
   bishops said:  It is the pleasure of all.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  A prevalent evil and mischievous corruption must
   be done away with from its foundation.  Let no bishop be allowed to
   remove from his own city to another.  For the reason of such attempts
   is manifest, since in this matter no bishop has been found who would
   remove from a larger city to a smaller one.  It is therefore evident
   that these men are inflamed with excess of covetousness, and are
   serving ambition and aiming at the possession of power.  If it be the
   pleasure of all, let so great an evil be punished right harshly and
   sternly, so that he who is such shall not even be admitted to lay
   communion.  All with one accord answered:  Such is our pleasure.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon I.

   No bishop is to be found passing from a smaller to a greater city.  If
   anyone should move from an humble to a more important see, he shall be
   excommunicated through his whole life as proud and grasping.

   Van Espen.

   (Dissert. in Synod. Sard., § II. [389] )

   What Peter de Marca says (De Concordia Sacerdotii et Imp., Lib. V.,
   cap. iv.), "Hosius presided over" this council as legate of the Roman
   bishop, rests upon no solid foundation, and no trace of any such
   legation is found in Athanasius or in any of the other writers who
   treated of this synod.  Moreover such a thing is contrary to the form
   of subscription used.  For of those who signed the first is Hosius, and
   Athanasius designates him simply as "from Spain," without any addition;
   and then next he mentions "Julius of Rome, by Archidamus and
   Philoxenus, his presbyters," etc.  What is clearer than that, by the
   testimony of Athanasius, Julius was present by these two presbyters
   only, and that they only were his legates or vicars, who in his room
   were present at this synod?

   The first part of this canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici;
   Raymund's Decretales, De Clericis non residentibus, Cap. ii.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [389] The whole of this Dissertation is worthy of careful study.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon II.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  But if any such person should be found so mad or
   audacious as to think to advance by way of excuse an affirmation that
   he had brought letters from the people [laity], it is plain that some
   few persons, corrupted by bribes and rewards, could have got up an
   uproar in the church, demanding, forsooth, the said man for bishop.  I
   think then that practices and devices of such sort absolutely must be
   punished, so that a man of this kind be deemed unworthy even of lay
   communion in extremis.  Do ye therefore make answer whether this
   sentence is approved by you.  They [the bishops] answered:  What has
   been said is approved of.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Even if any such person should show himself so
   rash as perhaps to allege as an excuse and affirm that he has received
   letters from the people, inasmuch as it is evident that a few persons
   could have been corrupted by rewards and bribes--[namely] persons who
   do not hold the pure faith--to raise an uproar in the church, and seem
   to ask for the said man as bishop; I judge that these frauds must be
   condemned, so that such an one should not receive even lay communion at
   the last.  If ye all approve, do ye decree it.  The synod answered:  We
   approve.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon II.

   If anyone shall pass from one city to another, and shall raise up
   seditions, tickling the people and be assisted by them in raising a
   disturbance, he shall not be allowed communion even when dying.

   Van Espen.

   To understand this canon aright it must be remembered that in the first
   ages of the Church the people were accustomed to have a share in the
   election of their bishop; and he whom the people demanded was usually
   ordained their bishop.

   Aristenus.

   This [penalty] is something unheard of and horrible, that he should not
   be deemed worthy of communion even at the hour of death; for it is a
   provision found nowhere else imposed by any canon, nor inflicted upon
   any sin.

   Van Espen.

   The Greek author Aristenus [in the above remarks] probably has not
   erred from the truth when he asserts that to no crime was this penalty
   attached, if he refers to the Eastern Churches; for Morinus himself (in
   the xix^th chapter of the ix^th book, De Penitentia), confesses that
   this penalty was never attached to any crime among the Easterns:
   nevertheless in some Churches in the first ages the three crimes of
   idolatry, murder, and adultery were thus punished:  that is, that to
   those who admitted any one of these, reconciliation was denied even at
   his death, "and this," says Morinus, "I think no one can deny, who is
   at all versed in the testimony of the ancients on this point."

   Hefele.

   The addition in the Latin text, qui sinceram fidem non habent, is found
   both in Dionysius Exiguus and in Isidore and the Prisca, and its
   meaning is as follows:  "In a town, some few, especially those who have
   not the true faith, can be easily bribed to demand this or that person
   as bishop."  The Fathers of Sardica plainly had here in view the Arians
   and their adherents, who, through such like machinations, when they had
   gained over, if only a small party in a town, sought to press into the
   bishoprics.  The Synod of Antioch moreover, in 341, although the
   Eusebians, properly speaking, were dominant there, had laid down in the
   twenty-first canon a similar, only less severe, rule.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Raymond's Decretales,
   cap. ii, De electione, but with the noteworthy addition "unless he
   shall have repented."  These words do not occur in the other Latin
   versions, and Hefele thinks them to have been added by Raymond of
   Pennaforte.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon III.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also it is necessary to add,--that no bishop
   pass from his own province to another province in which there are
   bishops, unless indeed he be called by his brethren, that we seem not
   to close the gates of charity.

   And this case likewise is to be provided for, that if in any province a
   bishop has some matter against his brother and fellow-bishop, neither
   of the two should call in as arbiters bishops from another province.

   But if perchance sentence be given against a bishop in any matter and
   he supposes his case to be not unsound but good, in order that the
   question may be reopened, let us, if it seem good to your charity,
   honour the memory of Peter the Apostle, and let those who gave judgment
   write to Julius, the bishop of Rome, so that, if necessary, the case
   may be retried by the bishops of the neighbouring provinces and let him
   appoint arbiters; but if it cannot be shown that his case is of such a
   sort as to need a new trial, let the judgment once given not be
   annulled, but stand good as before.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also it is necessary to add,--that bishops
   shall not pass from their own province to another province in which
   there are bishops, unless perchance upon invitation from their
   brethren, that we seem not to close the door of charity.

   But if in any province a bishop have a matter in dispute against his
   brother bishop, one of the two shall not call in as judge a bishop from
   another province.

   But if judgment have gone against a bishop in any cause, and he think
   that he has a good case, in order that the question may be reopened,
   let us, if it be your pleasure, honour the memory of St. Peter the
   Apostle, and let those who tried the case write to Julius, the bishop
   of Rome, and if he shall judge that the case should be retried, let
   that be done, and let him appoint judges; but if he shall find that the
   case is of such a sort that the former decision need not be disturbed,
   what he has decreed shall be confirmed.  Is this the pleasure of all?
   The synod answered, It is our pleasure.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon

   No bishop, unless called thereto, shall pass to another city.  Moreover
   a bishop of the province who is engaged in any litigation shall not
   appeal to outside bishops.  But if Rome hears the cause, even outsiders
   may be present.

   Van Espen.

   According to the reading of Dionysius and Isidore, as well as of the
   Greeks, Balsamon, Zonaras and Aristenus, as also of Hervetus the
   provision is that bishops of one province shall not pass to another in
   which there are not bishops.

   Zonaras.

   Not only are bishops prohibited from changing their cities, and passing
   from a smaller to a larger one, but also from passing from one province
   to another in which there are bishops, for the sake of doing any
   ecclesiastical work there unless they are called by the bishops of that
   province.

   On the phrase "if it pleases you" the following from St. Athanasius is
   much to the point (cit. by Pusey, Councils, p. 143).  "They [i.e., the
   Council of Nice] wrote concerning Easter, It seemed good' as follows:
   for it did then seem good, that there should be a general compliance;
   but about the faith they wrote not It seemed good,' but Thus believes
   the Catholic Church'; and thereupon they confessed how the faith lay,
   in order to shew that their sentiments were not novel, but apostolic."

   Tillemont.

   This form is very strong to shew that it was a right which the Pope had
   not had hitherto.

   Van Espen.

   Peter de Marca (De Concordia Sacerdotii et Imperii, Lib. VII., Cap.
   iij., § 8) says that Hosius here proposed to the fathers to honour the
   memory of St. Peter that he might the more easily lead them to consent
   to this new privilege; for, as De Marca has proved, the right here
   bestowed upon the Roman Pontiff was clearly unknown before.

   It has been urged that the mention of the pope by name, intimates
   clearly that the provision of these canons of an appeal to Rome was of
   a purely temporary character; and some famous authors such as Edmund
   Richer, of the Sorbonne, have written in defence of this view, but
   Hefele quotes with great force the words of the learned Protestant,
   Spittler (Critical Examination of the Sardican Decisions, Spittler,
   Sämmtlichen Werken, P. viij., p. 129 sq.).

   Spittler.

   It is said that these Sardican decisions were simply provisional, and
   intended for the present necessity; because Athanasius, so hardly
   pressed by the Arians, could only be rescued by authorizing an appeal
   to the Bishop of Rome for a final judgment.  Richer, in his History of
   the General Councils, has elaborately defended this opinion, and Horix
   also has declared in its favour.  But would not all secure use of the
   canons of the councils be done away with if this distinction between
   provisional and permanent synodal decisions were admitted?  Is there
   any sure criterion for distinguishing those canons which were only to
   be provisional, from the others which were made for all future
   centuries?  The Fathers of the Synod of Sardica express themselves
   quite generally; is it not therefore most arbitrary on our part to
   insert limitations?  It is beyond question that these decisions were
   occasioned by the very critical state of the affairs of Athanasius; but
   is everything only provisional that is occasioned by the circumstances
   of individuals?  In this way the most important of the ancient canons
   might be set aside.

   Hefele.

   According to the Greek text, and that of Dionysius, those who had
   pronounced the first judgment were to write to Rome; and Fuchs rightly
   adds, that they were to do this at the desire of the condemned.  But,
   according to Isidore and the Prisca, the right or the duty of bringing
   the affair before Rome, also belonged to the neighbouring bishops.  I
   believe that the last interpretation has only arisen through a mistake,
   from a comment belonging to the next sentence being inserted in the
   wrong place.  It only remains to be remarked here, that Isidore and the
   Prisca have not the name Julio,...But Hardouin's conjecture, that
   instead of Julio, perhaps illi may be read, is entirely gratuitous,
   contrary to the Greek text, and plainly only a stratagem against the
   Gallicans.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   Pars II., Causa VI., Quæst. iv., Canon j. 7, in Isidore's version.
   Dionysius's version is quite wrong as given by Justellus and in the
   Munich edition, changing the negative into the affirmative in the
   phrase ne unus de duobus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon IV.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Gaudentius said:  If it seems good to you, it is necessary to
   add to this decision full of sincere charity which thou hast
   pronounced, that [390] if any bishop be deposed by the sentence of
   these neighbouring bishops, and assert that he has fresh matter in
   defence, a new bishop be not settled in his see, unless the bishop of
   Rome judge and render a decision as to this.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Gaudentius said:  It ought to be added, if it be your pleasure,
   to this sentence full of sanctity which thou hast pronounced,
   that--when any bishop has been deposed by the judgment of those bishops
   who have sees in neighbouring places, and he [the bishop deposed] shall
   announce that his case is to be examined in the city of Rome--that no
   other bishop shall in any wise be ordained to his see, after the appeal
   of him who is apparently deposed, unless the case shall have been
   determined in the judgment of the Roman bishop.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.

   If a bishop has been deposed and affirms that he has an excuse to urge,
   unless Rome has judged the case, no bishop shall be appointed in his
   room.  For he might treat the decree with scorn either through his
   nuncios or by his letters.

   There are two distinct understandings of this canon.  The one view is
   that the "neighbours" of this canon are the same as the "neighbours" of
   the preceding canon (number iij.) and that the meaning of this canon
   therefore is--If the court of second instance, correlating of the
   bishops of the neighbouring province, has pronounced the accused
   guilty, he still has one more appeal to a third court, viz., Rome.
   This is the view taken by the Greeks, Zonaras and Balsamon, by the
   Ballerini, Van Espen, Palma, Walter, Natalis Alexander and many others.

   In direct opposition to this is the view that there is no third but
   only a second appeal mentioned by the canon.  The supporters of this
   interpretation are Peter de Marca, Tillemont, Dupin, Fleury, Remi
   Ceillier, Neander, Stolberg, Echhorn, Kober, and with these Hefele
   sides and states his reasons for doing so.

   Hefele.

   There must be added to the reasons of the connexion of this canon with
   the preceding, the course of events, etc.:

   1.  That it certainly would be very curious if in the third canon
   mention was made of the appeal to Rome as following the judgment of the
   court of first instance; in the fourth, after that of the court of
   second instance; and again in the fifth, after the judgment of the
   court of first instance.

   2.  That if the Synod had really intended to institute a court of third
   instance, it would have done so in clearer and more express terms, and
   not only have, as it were, smuggled in the whole point with the
   secondary question, as to "what was to be done with the bishop's see."

   3.  Farther, that it is quite devoid of proof that the expression
   "neighbouring bishops" is identical with "Bishops in the neighbourhood
   of the said Province," that, indeed this identification is throughout
   unwarrantable and wrong, and it is far more natural to understand by
   the neighbouring bishops, the comprovincials, therefore the court of
   first instance.

   4.  That by this interpretation we obtain clearness, consistency, and
   harmony in all three canons.

   5.  That the word palin in the fourth canon presents no difficulty; for
   even one who has only been heard in the court of first instance may say
   he desires again to defend himself, because he has already made his
   first defence in the court of first instance.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [390] At this point begins the Greek text as given in Bev.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon V.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Decreed, that if any bishop is accused, and the
   bishops of the same region assemble and depose him from his office, and
   he appealing, so to speak, takes refuge with the most blessed bishop of
   the Roman church, and he be willing to give him a hearing, and think it
   right to renew the examination of his case, let him be pleased to write
   to those fellow-bishops who are nearest the province that they may
   examine the particulars with care and accuracy and give their votes on
   the matter in accordance with the word of truth.  And if any one
   require that his case be heard yet again, and at his request it seem
   good to move the bishop of Rome to send presbyters a latere, let it be
   in the power of that bishop, according as he judges it to be good and
   decides it to be right--that some be sent to be judges with the bishops
   and invested with his authority by whom they were sent.  And be this
   also ordained.  But if he think that the bishops are sufficient for the
   examination and decision of the matter let him do what shall seem good
   in his most prudent judgment.

   The bishops answered:  What has been said is approved.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Further decreed, that if a bishop is accused, and
   the bishops of that region assemble and depose him from his office, if
   he who has been deposed shall appeal and take refuge with the bishop of
   the Roman church and wishes to be given a hearing, if he think it right
   that the trial or examination of his case be renewed, let him be
   pleased to write to those bishops who are in an adjacent and
   neighbouring province, that they may diligently inquire into all the
   particulars and decide according to the word of truth.  But if he who
   asks to have his case reheard, shall by his entreaty move the Bishop of
   Rome to send a presbyter a latere it shall be in the power of that
   bishop to do what he shall resolve and determine upon; and if he shall
   decide that some be sent, who shall be present and be judges with the
   bishops invested with his authority by whom they were appointed, it
   shall be as he shall choose.  But if he believe that the bishops
   suffice to give a final decision, he shall do what he shall determine
   upon in his most wise judgment.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

   [Lacking.]

   This Canon is vij. of Isidore's collection.

   Van Espen.

   Mere there is properly speaking no provision for "appeal," which
   entirely suspends [i.e. by the canon law] the execution and effect of
   the first sentence; but rather for a revision of judgment....; those
   who were sent by the Roman bishop from his side (a latere) or the
   bishops who were appointed, ought, together with the bishops of the
   province who had given the former sentence, to give a fresh judgment
   and declare their sentence.  And this Hincmar of Rheims was the first
   to notice in his letters in the name of Charles the Bald sent to John
   VIII.

   This view is supported with his accustomed learning and acumen by Du
   Pin, De Antiqua Eccl. Disciplina, Diss. II., Cap. I., Sec. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VI.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  If it happen that in a province in which there are
   very many bishops one bishop should stay away and by some negligence
   should not come to the council and assent to the appointment made by
   the bishops, but the people assemble and pray that the ordination of
   the bishop desired by them take place--it is necessary that the bishop
   who stayed away should first be reminded by letters from the exarch of
   the province (I mean, of course, the bishop of the metropolis), that
   the people demand a pastor to be given them.  I think that it is well
   to await his [the absent bishop's] arrival also.  But if after summons
   by letter he does not come, nor even write in reply, the wish of the
   people ought to be complied with.

   The bishops from the neighbouring provinces also should be invited to
   the ordination of the bishop of the metropolis.

   It is positively not permitted to ordain a bishop in a village or petty
   town, for which even one single presbyter is sufficient (for there is
   no necessity to ordain a bishop there) lest the name and authority of
   bishop should be made of small account, but the bishops of the province
   ought, as before said, to ordain bishops in those cities in which there
   were bishops previously; and if a city should be found with a
   population so large as to be thought worthy of an episcopal see, let it
   receive one.

   Is this the pleasure of all?  All answered:  It is our pleasure.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  If it shall have happened, that in a province in
   which there have been very many bishops, one [i.e., but one] bishop
   remains, but that he by negligence has not chosen [to ordain] a bishop,
   and the people have made application, the bishops of the neighbouring
   province ought first to address [by letter] the bishop who resides in
   that province, and show that the people seek a ruler [i.e., pastor] for
   themselves and that this is right, so that they also may come and with
   him ordain a bishop.  But if he refuses to acknowledge their written
   communication, and leaves it unnoticed, and writes no reply, the
   people's request should be satisfied, so that bishops should come from
   the neighbouring province and ordain a bishop.

   But permission is not to be given to ordain a bishop either in any
   village, or in an unimportant city, for which one presbyter suffices,
   lest the name and authority of bishop grow cheap.  Those [bishops] who
   are invited from another province ought not to ordain a bishop unless
   in the cities which have [previously] had bishops, or in a city which
   is so important or so populous as to be entitled to have a bishop.

   Is this the pleasure of all?  The synod replied:  It is our pleasure.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.

   If the bishops were present when the people were seeking for a bishop,
   and one was away, let that one be called.  But if he is willing to
   answer the call neither by letter nor in person, let him be ordained
   whom they desire.

   When a Metropolitan is appointed the neighbouring bishops are to be
   sent for.

   In a little city and town, for which one presbyter suffices, a bishop
   is not to be appointed.  But if the city be very populous, it is not
   unfitting to do so.

   The second portion of this canon is entirely lacking in the Latin.  The
   Greek scholiasts, Zonaras, Balsamon, and Aristenus, understand this to
   mean "that at the appointment of a metropolitan the bishops of the
   neighbouring provinces shall also be invited,' probably to give greater
   solemnity to the act," so says Hefele.  And to this agree Van Espen,
   Tillemont, and Herbst.

   The first part in the Greek and Latin have different meanings; the
   Greek text contemplating the case of one bishop stopping away from a
   meeting of bishops for an election to fill a vacancy; the Latin text
   the case of there being only one bishop left in a province (after war,
   pestilence, or the like).  This second meaning is accepted by Van
   Espen, Christian Lupus and others.  Moreover, it would seem from
   Flodoard's History of the Church of Rheims (Geschichte der Rheimser
   Kirche, Lib. III., c. 20 [a book I have never seen]) that the Gallican
   Church acted upon this understanding of this canon.  It is that also of
   Gratian.

   Between the Latin and the Greek text stands the interpretation of
   Zonaras, which is that if a province once having many bishops has by
   any contingency only one left besides the Metropolitan, and he neglects
   to be present at the consecration of the new bishops, he is to be
   summoned by letter of the Metropolitan, and if he does not then come,
   the consecrations are to go on without him.  With this explanation
   Harmenopulus also agrees, adding further that the Metropolitan might
   alone consecrate the bishops, resting his argument on the words to
   hikauon k.t l.

   Some scholars have supposed that neither the present Greek nor the
   present Latin text represent the original, but that the Greek text is
   nearest to it, but must be corrected by an ancient Latin version found
   by Maffei in a codex at Verona.  The Ballerini have devoted careful
   attention to this point in their notes to the Works of St. Leo the
   Great (Tom. iii., p. xxxij. 4).  It would seem that this might be the
   canon quoted by the fathers of Constantinople in 382, and if so, it
   would seem that they had a Greek text like that from which the Verona
   version was made.

   Van Espen.

   The fathers of Sardica [in the second part of this canon, which is
   Canon VII. by the Latin computation] decreed two things:  first, that
   where the people justly asked for a Pastor to be ordained for them,
   their demand should be complied with; but where the people insisted
   upon having a bishop ordained for a village or little city, for which
   one presbyter was all that was needed, no attention should be paid to
   their demands, lest the name and authority of a bishop should become
   despicable.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   P. I., Distinc. lxv., c. ix.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VII.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Our importunity and great pertinacity and unjust
   petitions have brought it about that we do not have as much favour and
   confidence as we ought to enjoy.  For many of the bishops do not
   intermit resorting to the imperial Court, especially the Africans, who,
   as we have learned from our beloved brother and fellow-bishop, Gratus,
   do not accept salutary counsels, but so despise them that one man
   carries to the Court petitions many and diverse and of no possible
   benefit to the Church, and does not (as ought to be done and as is
   fitting) assist and help the poor and the laity or the widows, but is
   intriguing to obtain worldly dignities and offices for certain
   persons.  This evil then causes enfeeblement [better, murmuring (read
   tonthrusmon or tonthorusmon)], not without some scandal and blame to
   us.  But I account it quite proper for a bishop to give assistance to
   one oppressed by some one, or to a widow suffering injustice, or,
   again, an orphan robbed of his estate, always provided that these
   persons have a just cause of petition.

   If, then, beloved brethren, this seems good to all, do ye decree that
   no bishop shall go to the imperial Court except those whom our most
   pious emperor may summon by his own letters.  Yet since it often
   happens that persons condemned for their offences to deportation or
   banishment to an island, or who have received some sentence or other,
   beg for mercy and seek refuge with the Church [i.e., take sanctuary],
   such persons are not to be refused assistance, but pardon should be
   asked for them without delay and without hesitation.  If this, then, is
   also your pleasure, do ye all vote assent.

   All gave answer:  Be this also decreed.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Importunities and excessive pertinacity and unjust
   petitions have caused us to have too little favour or confidence, while
   certain bishops cease not to go to the Court, especially the Africans,
   who (as we have learned) spurn and contemn the salutary counsels of our
   most holy brother and fellow-bishop, Gratus, so that they not only
   bring to the Court many and diverse petitions (not for the good of the
   Church nor, as is usual and right, to succour the poor or widows or
   orphans), but even seek to obtain worldly dignities and offices for
   certain persons.  This evil therefore stirs up at times not only
   murmurings, but even scandals.  But it is proper that bishops should
   intercede for persons suffering from violence and oppression, afflicted
   widows and defrauded orphans, provided, nevertheless, that these
   persons have a just cause or petition.

   If, then, brethren dearly beloved, such be your pleasure, do we decree
   that no bishops go to the Court except those who may have been invited
   or summoned by letters of the God-fearing emperor.  But since it often
   happens that those who are suffering from injustice or who are
   condemned for their offences to deportation or banishment to an island,
   or, in short, have received some sentence or other, seek refuge with
   the mercy of the Church, such persons should be succoured and pardon be
   begged for them without hesitation.  Decree this, therefore, if it be
   your pleasure.

   All said:  It is our pleasure and be it decreed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.

   When an orphan, widow, and other desolate persons are oppressed by
   force let the bishop give them succour and approach the Emperor; but
   through a pretext of this kind let him not be a hanger on of the camp,
   but rather let him send a deacon.

   Van Espen.

   The "salutary counsels" (salutaria consilia) here seem to be synodical
   admonitions, as Zonaras notes; and these might well be ascribed to
   Gratus, the bishop of Carthage, because many of the African synods were
   held under his presidency and direction.

   *          *          *          *          *          *
   *          *          *          *

   Nothing is more noteworthy than how from the first princes summoned
   bishops in counsel with regard to affairs touching either the estate of
   the Church or of the Realm; and called them to their presence in urgent
   and momentous cases, and kept them with them.

   Justinian, the emperor, in his Novels (Chapter II.) defines that no one
   of the God-beloved bishops shall dare to be absent any more from his
   diocese for a whole year, and adds this exception, "unless he does so
   on account of an imperial jussio; in this case alone he shall be held
   to be without blame."

   On this whole matter of bishops interceding for culprits, and
   especially for those condemned to death, see St. Augustine (Epist. 153
   ad Macedonium).

   With this canon may be compared Canon VII. of the Council of Rheims in
   a.d. 630.

   This canon is found in part in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's
   Decretum, P. II., Causa xxiij., Quæst. viij., c. xxviij.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VIII.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also let your sagacity determine, that [391]
   --inasmuch as this was decreed in order that a bishop might not fall
   under censure by going to the Court--that if any have such petitions as
   we mentioned above, they should send these by one of their deacons.
   For the person of a subordinate does not excite jealousy, and what
   shall be granted [by the Emperor] can thus be reported more quickly.

   All answered:  Be this also decreed.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also your forethought should provide
   for--inasmuch as ye have made this decree in order that the audacity of
   bishops might not labour [or, be observed] to go to Court.  Whosoever
   therefore shall have or receive petitions such as we have mentioned
   above, let them send these [each] by a deacon of his, because the
   person of a minister is not an object of jealousy, and he will be able
   to report more quickly what he has obtained.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.

   [Lacking.]

   Van Espen.

   This decree is threefold.  First, that the bishop in going to Court
   should not fall under suspicion either at Court or of his own people
   that he was approaching the Prince to obtain some cause of his own.
   Second, according to the interpretation of Zonaras, "that no one should
   be angry with the Minister or Deacon who tarried in camp, as the bishop
   had departed thence."  And third, that the Minister could carry away
   what he had asked for, that is (according to Zonaras), the letters of
   the Emperor pardoning the fault, or such like other matters.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [391] Here the Greek text begins as given by Bev.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon IX.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also, I think, follows, that, [392] if in any
   province whatever, bishops send petitions to one of their brothers and
   fellow-bishops, he that is in the largest city, that is, the
   metropolis, should himself send his deacon and the petitions, providing
   him also with letters commendatory, writing also of course in
   succession to our brethren and fellow-bishops, if any of them should be
   staying at that time in the places or cities in which the most pious
   Emperor is administering public affairs.

   But if any of the bishops should have friends at the Court and should
   wish to make requests of them as to some proper object, let him not be
   forbidden to make such requests through his deacon and move these
   [friends] to give their kind assistance as his desire.

   But those who come to Rome ought, as I said before, to deliver to our
   beloved brother and fellow-bishop, Julius, the petitions which they
   have to give, in order that he may first examine them, lest some of
   them should be improper, and so, giving them his own advocacy and care,
   shall send them to the Court.

   All the Bishops made answer that such was their pleasure and that the
   regulation was most proper.

   (Latin.)

   This also seems to follow, that from whatever province bishops shall
   send petitions to that brother and fellow-bishop of ours who has his
   see in the metropolis, he [the metropolitan] should dispatch his deacon
   with the petitions, providing him with commendatory letters of like
   tenour to our brethren and fellow-bishops at that time resident in
   those regions and cities in which the fortunate and blessed Emperor is
   ruling the State.

   If however a bishop who seeks to obtain some petition (a worthy one,
   that is) has friends in the palace, he is not forbidden to make his
   request through his deacon and to advise those who, he knows, can
   kindly intercede for him in his absence.

   X.  But let those who come to Rome, deliver, as before said, to our
   most holy brother and fellow-bishop, the bishop of the Roman church,
   the petitions which they bear, that he also may examine whether they
   are worthy and just, and let him give diligence and care that they be
   forwarded to the Court.

   All said that such was their pleasure and that the regulation was
   proper.

   Bishop Alypius said:  If they have incurred the discomforts of travel
   for the sake of orphans and widows or any in distress and having cases
   that are not unjust, they will have some good reason [for their
   journey]; but now since they chiefly make requests which cannot be
   granted without envy and reproach, it is not necessary for them to go
   to Court.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.

   If one brother sends to another, let the Metropolitan fortify the
   nuncio with letters; and let him write to the bishops, who have the
   matter in hand, to protect the nuncio.

   Here the Latin is not only a translation but an interpretation of the
   Greek text, for it distinctly says that every bishop shall send the
   petition he intends to present at court first to his Metropolitan, who
   shall send it in.  This is not clearly in the Greek, and yet the Greek
   Commentators find it there.

   Christian Lupus.

   The authority of the bishop alone is not sufficient to send a deacon to
   Court, there must be added the judgment of the Metropolitan who shall
   examine the petition, prove, sign, and commend it, not only to the
   Prince, but also to the bishop in whose diocese he may happen to be.

   Hefele.

   Zonaras, Balsamon, and Aristenus explained this canon somewhat
   differently, thus:  "If a bishop desires to send his petitions
   addressed to the Emperor to the bishop of the town where the Emperor is
   staying, he shall first send them to the Metropolitan of that province
   (according to Aristenus, his own Metropolitan) and the latter shall
   send his own deacon with letters of recommendation to the bishop or
   bishops who may be at court."  This difference rests upon the various
   meanings of "to the brother and fellow-bishop" in the beginning of the
   canon.  We understand by this his own Metropolitan, and treat the
   words:  ho en te meizoni k.t.l., as a more exact definition of
   "fellow-bishop," and the participle tunchanon as equivalent to
   tunchanei, and make the principal clause begin at autos kai ton
   diakonon.  Beveridge translated the canon in the same way.  Zonaras and
   others, on the contrary, understood by "fellow-bishop," the bishop of
   the Emperor's residence for the time being, and regarded the words ho
   en te meizoe k.t l. not as a clearer definition of what had gone
   before, but as the principal clause, in the sense of "then the
   Metropolitan shall," etc.  According to this interpretation, the words
   conveying the idea that the bishop must have recourse to the
   Metropolitan are entirely wanting in the canon.

   The first part of this Canon is the last part of Canon IX. of the
   Latin.  The last part is Canon X. of the Latin, but the personal part
   about Alypius is omitted from the Greek.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [392] Here the Greek text in Bev. begins.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon X.

   (Greeks.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also I think necessary. [393]   Ye should
   consider with all thoroughness and care, that if some rich man or
   professional advocate be desired for bishop, he be not ordained until
   he have fulfilled the ministry of reader, deacon, and presbyter, in
   order that, passing by promotion through the several grades, he may
   advance (if, that is, he be found worthy) to the height of the
   episcopate.  And he shall remain in each order assuredly for no brief
   time, that so his faith, his reputable life, his steadfastness of
   character and considerateness of demeanour may be well-known, and that
   he, being deemed worthy of the divine sacerdotal office [sacerdotium,
   i.e., the episcopate] may enjoy the highest honour.  For it is not
   fitting, nor does discipline or good conversation allow to proceed to
   this act rashly or lightly, so as to ordain a bishop or presbyter or
   deacon hastily; as thus he would rightly be accounted a novice,
   especially since also the most blessed Apostle, he who was the teacher
   of the Gentiles, is seen to have forbidden hasty ordinations; for the
   test of [even] the longest period will not unreasonably be required to
   exemplify the conversation and character of each [candidate].

   All said that this was their pleasure and that it must be absolutely
   irreversible.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also I think it necessary for you to consider
   most carefully, that if perchance some rich man or professional
   advocate or ex-official be desired for bishop, he be not ordained until
   he have fulfilled the ministry of a reader and the office of deacon and
   presbyter, and so ascend, if he have shown himself worthy, through the
   several grades to the height of the episcopate.  For by these
   promotions which in any case take a considerable length of time can be
   tested his faith, his discretion, his gravity and modesty.  And if he
   be found worthy, let him be honoured with the divine sacerdotal office
   [i.e. the episcopate].  For it is not fitting, nor does order or
   discipline allow, that one be rashly or lightly ordained bishop,
   presbyter or deacon, who is a novice, especially since also the blessed
   Apostle, the teacher of the Gentiles, is seen to have expressly
   forbidden it.  But those [should be ordained] whose life has been
   tested and their merit approved by length of time.

   All said that this was their pleasure.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon X.

   No lawyer, teacher, or gentleman (plousios) shall be made a bishop
   without passing through the holy orders.  Nor shall the space of time
   between the orders be made too brief, that there may be a better proof
   of his faith and good conversation.  For otherwise he is a neophyte.

   This is Canon XIII. of Dionysius, Isidore, and the Prisca.

   Van Espen.

   By Scholasticus de foro ["professional advocate"] must be understood an
   eloquent pleader of difficult causes, who being bound up in forensic
   disputes and strifes, may be presumed to be little fitted for the
   priesthood, and therefore to need a more strict examination.

   The Synodal approbation is lacking in Dionysius as given by Justellus,
   as well as in that of the Roman Code, but is found in Labbe's reprint
   of Dionysius and Isidore.

   This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   P. I., Dist. lxj., c. x.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [393] Here the Greek begins (reading aei for ina and exetazesthai for
   exetazoito) according to Beveridge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XI.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also we ought to decree, that [394] when a
   bishop comes from one city to another city, or from one province to
   another province, to indulge boastfulness, ministering to his own
   praises rather than serving religious devotion, and wishes to prolong
   his stay [in a city], and the bishop of that city is not skilled in
   teaching, let him [the visiting bishop] not do despite to the bishop of
   the place and attempt by frequent discourses to disparage him and
   lessen his repute (for this device is wont to cause tumults), and
   strive by such arts to solicit and wrest to himself another's throne,
   not scrupling to abandon the church committed to him and to procure
   translation to another.  A definite limit of time should therefore be
   set in such a case, especially since not to receive a bishop is
   accounted the part of rude and discourteous persons.  Ye remember that
   in former times our fathers decreed that if a layman were staying in a
   city and should not come to divine worship for three [successive]
   Sundays [that is], for three [full] weeks, he should be repelled from
   communion.  If then this has been decreed in the case of laymen, it is
   neither needful, nor fitting, nor yet even expedient that a bishop,
   unless he has some grave necessity or difficult business, should be
   very long absent from his own church and distress the people committed
   to him.

   All the bishops said:  We decide that this decree also is most proper.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also ye ought to determine.  If a bishop
   comes from one city to another city, or from his own province to
   another province, and serving ambition rather than devotion, wishes to
   remain resident for a long time in a strange city, and then (as it
   perchance happens that the bishop of the place is not so practised or
   so learned as himself) he, the stranger, should begin to do him despite
   and deliver frequent discourses to disparage him and lessen his repute,
   not hesitating by this device to leave the church assigned him and
   remove to that which is another's--do ye then [in such a case] set a
   limit of time [for his stay in the city], because on the one hand to
   refuse to receive a bishop is discourteous, and on the other his too
   long stay is mischievous.  Provision must be made against this.  I
   remember that in a former council our brethren decreed that if any
   layman did not attend divine service in a city in which he was staying
   three Sundays, that is, for three weeks, he should be deprived of
   communion.  If then this has been decreed in the case of laymen, it is
   far less lawful and fitting that a bishop, if there be no grave
   necessity detaining him, should be absent from his church longer than
   the time above written.

   All said that such was their pleasure.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.

   A bishop when called in by another bishop, if he that called him is
   unskilled, must not be too assiduous in preaching, for this would be
   indecorous to the unlearned bishop, and an attack upon his bishopric.
   And both improper.  Without grave necessity it is undesirable for a
   bishop to be absent from his church.

   This is Canon XIV. of the Latin.

   Van Espen.

   To understand this canon it must be again remembered that in the first
   ages of the Church bishops were wont to be appointed at the demand of
   the people; wherefore whoever were going around after the episcopate,
   were accustomed to solicit the hearts of the people, and to make it
   their study to win their affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [394] Here begins the Greek text, according to Bev.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XII.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Since no case should be left unprovided for, let
   this also be decreed. [395]   Some of our brethren and fellow-bishops
   are known to possess very little private property in the cities in
   which they are placed as bishops, but have great possessions in other
   places, with which they are, moreover, able to help the poor.  I think
   then permission should be given them, if they are to visit their
   estates and attend to the gathering of the harvest, to pass three
   Sundays, that is, to stay for three weeks, on their estates, and to
   assist at divine worship and celebrate the liturgy in the nearest
   church in which a presbyter holds service, in order that they may not
   be seen to be absent from worship, and in order that they may not come
   too frequently to the city in which there is a bishop.  In this way
   their private affairs will suffer no loss from their absence and they
   will be seen to be clear from the charge of ambition and arrogance.

   All the bishops said:  This decree also is approved by us.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Since no case should be left unprovided for [let
   this also be decreed].  There are some of our brother-bishops, who do
   not reside in the city in which they are appointed bishops, either
   because they have but little property there, while they are known to
   have considerable estates elsewhere, or, it may be, through affection
   for kith and kin and in complaisance to these.  Let this much be
   permitted them, to go to their estates to superintend and dispose of
   their harvest, and [for this purpose] to remain over three Sundays,
   that is, for three weeks, if it be necessary, on their estates; or
   else, if there is a neighbouring city in which there is a presbyter, in
   order that they may not be seen to pass Sunday without church, let them
   go thither, so that [in this way] neither will their private affairs
   suffer loss from their absence, nor will they, by frequent going to the
   city in which a bishop is resident, incur the suspicion of ambition and
   place-seeking.  All said that this was approved by them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.

   If a bishop has possessions outside his diocese, and visits them, let
   him be careful not to remain there more than three Lord's days.  For
   thus his own flock will be enriched by him, and he himself will avoid
   the charge of arrogance.

   This is Canon XV. of the Latin.

   Van Espen.

   As Balsamon notes, this canon is an appendix to that which goes before,
   and the context of the canon indicates this clearly enough; for while
   the last canon decrees that no bishop is to be absent from his diocese
   for more than three Lord's days, without grave necessity, in this canon
   a certain modification is introduced with regard to certain bishops.

   Hefele.

   According to the Latin text of Dionysius, it is:  "Some bishops do not
   reside in their Cathedral town, etc."  Isidore and the Prisca, however,
   are nearer the Greek text, as instead of resident they more rightly
   read possident.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [395] Here begins the Greek text according to Bev.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIII.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Be this also the pleasure of all.  If any deacon
   or presbyter or any of the clergy be excommunicated and take refuge
   with another bishop who knows him and who is aware that he has been
   removed from communion by his own bishop, [that other bishop] must not
   offend against his brother bishop by admitting him to communion. [396]
     And if any dare to do this, let him know that he must present himself
   before an assembly of bishops and give account.

   All the bishops said:  This decision will assure peace at all times and
   preserve the concord of all.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  Be this also the pleasure of all.  If a deacon or
   presbyter or any of the clergy be refused communion by his own bishop
   and go to another bishop, and he with whom he has taken refuge shall
   know that he has been repelled by his own bishop, then must he not
   grant him communion.  But if he shall do so, let him know that he must
   give account before an assembly of bishops.

   All said:  This decision will preserve peace and maintain concord.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

   Whoso knowingly admits to communion one excommunicated by his own
   bishop is not without blame.

   This is Canon XVI. of the Latin.

   Van Espen.

   The present canon agrees with Canon V. of Nice and with Canon IV. of
   Antioch, on which canons see the notes.  The Synod's approbation of
   this canon is found in Dionysius, Isidore, and in the Roman Codex apud
   Hervetus; but it is lacking from Balsamon and Zonaras.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [396] Here begins the Greek text according to Bev., and ends at the
   asterisk.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIV.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  I must not fail to speak of a matter which
   constantly urgeth me. [397]   If a bishop be found quick to anger
   (which ought not to sway such a man), and he, suddenly moved against a
   presbyter or deacon, be minded to cast him out of the Church, provision
   must be made that such a one be not condemned too hastily [or read
   athoon, if innocent] and deprived of communion.

   All said:  Let him that is cast out be authorized to take refuge with
   the bishop of the metropolis of the same province.  And if the bishop
   of the metropolis is absent, let him hasten to the bishop that is
   nearest, and ask to have his case carefully examined.  For a hearing
   ought not to be denied those who ask it.

   And that bishop who cast out such a one, justly or unjustly, ought not
   to take it ill that examination of the case be made, and his decision
   confirmed or revised.  But, until all the particulars have been
   examined with care and fidelity, he who is excluded from communion
   ought not to demand communion in advance of the decision of his case.
   And if any of the clergy who have met [to hear the case] clearly
   discern arrogance and pretentiousness in him, inasmuch as it is not
   fitting to suffer insolence or unjust censure, they ought to correct
   such an one with somewhat harsh and grievous language, that men may
   submit to and obey commands that are proper and right.  For as the
   bishop ought to manifest sincere love and regard to his subordinates,
   so those who are subject to him ought in like manner to perform the
   duties of their ministry in sincerity towards their bishops.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  I must not fail to speak of a matter which further
   moveth me.  If some bishop is perchance quick to anger (which ought not
   to be the case) and, moved hastily and violently against one of his
   presbyters or deacons, be minded to cast him out of the Church,
   provision must be made that an innocent man be not condemned or
   deprived of communion.

   Therefore let him that is cast out be authorized to appeal to the
   neighbouring bishops and let his case be heard and examined into more
   diligently.  For a hearing ought not to be denied one who asks it.

   And let that bishop who cast him out, justly or unjustly, take it
   patiently that the matter is discussed, so that his sentence may either
   be approved by a number [of judges] or else revised.  Nevertheless,
   until all the particulars shall be examined with care and fidelity, no
   one else ought to presume to admit to communion him who was excluded
   therefrom in advance of the decision of his case.  If, however, those
   who meet to hear it observe arrogance and pride in [such] clergy,
   inasmuch as it surely is not fitting for a bishop to suffer wrong or
   insult, let them correct them with some severity of language, that they
   may obey a bishop whose commands are proper and right.  For as he [the
   bishop] ought to manifest sincere love and charity to his clergy, so
   his ministers ought for their part to render unfeigned obedience to
   their bishop.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.

   One condemned out of anger, if he asks for assistance, should be
   heard.  But until [he shall have asked for [398] ] the assistance let
   him remain excommunicated.

   This is Canon XVII. of the Latin version.

   Van Espen.

   This canon is intended especially to aid presbyters, deacons, and other
   clerics, who have been excommunicated precipitately and without just
   cause, or suspended by their own bishop in his anger and fury....The
   canon, moreover, admonishes that the bishop with regard to whose
   sentence the dispute has arisen shall patiently consent to the
   discussion of the matter de novo, whether his decision be sustained by
   the majority or emended.

   And let bishops and other prelates who have spiritual jurisdiction over
   the clergy note this, who cannot bear with equanimity that a word
   should be said against their decisions, but exact a kind of blind
   obedience, even frequently with great conscientious suffering to their
   very best ecclesiastics; and in such cases as do not promptly and
   blindly obey them, the clergy are traduced as rebels and even a patient
   hearing is refused to them.

   This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
   P. II., Causa XI., Q. iij., c. iv.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [397] The Greek text of Bev. begins here.

   [398] This is the understanding of Beveridge's Latin.  I should have
   supposed the words to be supplied were "the reception of."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [After Canon XIV.]

   Canon XVIII.  (Of the Latin.)

   Bishop Januarius said:  Let your holiness also decree this, that no
   bishop be allowed to try to gain for himself a minister in the church
   of a bishop of another city and ordain him to one of his own parishes.

   All said:  Such is our pleasure, inasmuch as discord is apt to spring
   from contentions in this matter, and therefore the sentence of us all
   forbids anyone to presume to do

   Note.

   Van Espen.

   It is manifest that these two canons [xviii. of the Latin and xv. of
   the Greek], contain the resolution of the same case, and therefore it
   is that the Greeks keep only the former which contains the decree of
   the synod, made on Hosius's motion, the suggestion having been made by
   Januarius the bishop:  which suggestion makes the first of these
   canons.  [I.e. Latin canon xviij.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XV.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  And let us all decree this also, that [399] if any
   bishop should ordain to any order the minister of another from another
   diocese without the consent of his own bishop, such an ordination
   should be accounted invalid and not confirmed.  And if any take upon
   themselves to do this they ought to be admonished and corrected by our
   brethren and fellow-bishops.

   All said:  Let this decree also stand unalterable.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This also we all decree, that if any [bishop]
   should ordain the minister of another from another diocese without the
   consent and will of his own bishop, his ordination be not ratified.
   And whoever shall have taken upon himself to do this ought to be
   admonished and corrected by our brethren and fellow-bishops.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.

   If one places a foreign minister without the knowledge of his own
   bishop in any grade (embathmon, in aliquo gradu), he has indeed made
   the appointment, but it is without force.

   This is Canon XIX. in the Latin.

   Hefele.

   Fuchs, in his Bibliothek der Kirchenversammlungen (Pt. II., p. 123,
   note 125) [400] , thinks he has discovered a difference between this
   canon and the exclusively Latin one preceding it, in that the latter
   supposes the case of a bishop ordaining a foreign cleric, over whom he
   has no jurisdiction, to a higher grade, with the view of retaining him
   for his own diocese; while the other--fifteenth or nineteenth
   canon--treats of a case where such an ordination takes place without
   the ordaining bishop intending to keep the person ordained for his own
   diocese.  Van Espen is of another opinion, and maintains that both
   canons obviously refer to one and the same case, for which reason the
   Greek text has only inserted one of them.  It is certain that the text
   of both canons, as we have it, does not clearly indicate the difference
   conjectured by Fuchs, but that it may easily be found there.

   Van Espen.

   If the reading of all the Latins and Greeks is decisive, this canon
   only treats of the ordination of those already ministers or clerics,
   and so the Greek commentators Balsamon, Zonaras, and Aristenus
   understood it, as is evident from their annotations.  But Gratus,
   Bishop of Carthage, and Primate of Africa, in the First Synod of
   Carthage testified that in this canon it was decreed, that without the
   licence of his own bishop, a layman of another diocese was not to be
   ordained, and this interpretation or rather extension of the Canon, was
   received everywhere, as is demonstrated by the fifty-sixth of the
   African Code.

   This together with Canon XIX. of the Latin text are found as one in the
   Corpus Juris Canonici (Gratian's Decretum, P. I., Dist. lxxj.), c. j.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [399] The Greek text of Bev. begins here.

   [400] The reference is given incorrectly in the English Hefele.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVI.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Aëtius said:  Ye are not ignorant how important and how large is
   the metropolitan city of Thessalonica.  Accordingly presbyters and
   deacons often come to it from other provinces and, not content with
   staying a short time, remain and make it their permanent place of
   residence, or are compelled with difficulty and after a very long delay
   to return to their own churches.  A decree should be made bearing on
   this matter.

   Bishop Hosius said:  Let those decrees which have been made in the case
   of bishops, be observed as to these persons also.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Aëtius said:  Ye are not ignorant how large and important is the
   city of Thessalonica.  Presbyters and deacons often come to it from
   other regions, and are not content to remain a short time, but either
   make their residence there or at least are with difficulty compelled to
   return after a long interval to their own place.

   All said:  Those limits of time which have been decreed in the case of
   bishops ought to be observed as to these persons also.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.

   What things have been decreed for bishops with regard to the length of
   their absence, applies also to presbyters and deacons.

   Van Espen.

   This canon needs no explanation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVII.

   (Greek.)

   At the suggestion moreover of our brother Olympius, [401] we are
   pleased to decree this also:  That if a bishop suffer violence and is
   unjustly cast out either on account of his discipline or for his
   confession of [the faith of] the Catholic Church or for his defence of
   the truth, and, fleeing from danger, although innocent and devout [or,
   innocent and being under charge of high treason], comes to another
   city, let him not be forbidden to stay there until he is restored or
   until deliverance can be found from the violence and injustice that
   have been done him.  For it would be harsh indeed and most oppressive
   that one who has suffered unjust expulsion should not be harboured by
   us; as such a man ought to be received with the greatest consideration
   and cordiality.*

   All said:  This also is our pleasure.

   (Latin.)

   At the suggestion of our brother Olympius, we are pleased to decree
   this also:  That if any suffer violence and is unjustly cast out on
   account of his discipline and his Catholic confession or for his
   defence of the truth, and, fleeing from dangers, although innocent and
   devout, comes to another city, let him not be forbidden to stay there
   until he can return or his wrong has been redressed.  For it is harsh
   and unfeeling that he who is suffering persecution should not be
   received; indeed, great cordiality and abundant consideration should be
   shown him.

   All the synod said:  All that has been decreed the Catholic Church
   spread abroad throughout all the world will preserve and maintain.

   And all the bishops of the various provinces who had assembled
   subscribed thus:

   I, N., bishop of the city of N. and the province of N., so believe as
   above is written.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.

   If a bishop goes into another province after he has been unjustly
   expelled from his own, he should be received, until he has been
   delivered from his injury.

   This is Canon XXI. of the Latin and the last.

   Van Espen.

   St. Gregory seems to have had this canon in mind when he wrote to the
   bishops of Illyria (Lib. III., Epist. xliij.), who had been cast out by
   the hostility of the barbarians.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [401] The Greek text of Bev. begins here and ends at the asterisk.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVIII.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Gaudentius said:  Thou knowest, brother Aëtius, that since thou
   wast made bishop, peace hath continued to rule [in thy diocese].  In
   order that no remnants of discord concerning ecclesiastics remain, it
   seems good that those who were ordained by Musæus and by Eutychianus,
   provided no fault be found in them, should all be received.

   (This canon is wanting in the Latin.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIX.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  This is the sentence of my mediocrity [i.e.,
   unworthiness]--that, since we ought to be gentle and patient and to be
   constant in compassion towards all, those who were once advanced to
   clerical office in the Church by certain of our brethren, if they are
   not willing to return to the churches to which they were nominated [or,
   espoused], should for the future not be received, and that neither
   Eutychianus should continue to vindicate to himself the name of bishop,
   nor yet that Musæus be accounted a bishop; but that if they should seek
   for lay communion, it should not be denied them.

   All said:  Such is our pleasure.

   (This canon is wanting in the Latin.)

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canons XVIII. and XIX.

   A clergyman who does not live in the Church among whose clergy he is
   enrolled should not be received.  Eutychian and Musæus shall not have
   the name of bishops.  But let them be admitted to communion with the
   laity, if they wish.

   Both of these canons are lacking in the Latin.

   Hefele.

   It is clear that the reason why these two canons do not exist in the
   Latin text is that they did not apply to the Latin Church and only
   contained a special rule for Thessalonica.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XX.

   (Greek.)

   Bishop Gaudentius said:  These things wholesomely, duly, and fitly
   decreed, in the estimation of us the bishops [ton hiereon] such as are
   pleasing both to God and to man will not be able to obtain due force
   and validity, unless fear [of a penalty] be added to the decrees
   proclaimed.  For we ourselves know that through the shamelessness of a
   few, the divine and right reverend title of bishop [of the tes
   hierosunes] hath often come into condemnation.  If therefore any one,
   moved by arrogance and ambition rather than seeking to please God,
   should have the hardihood to pursue a different course of action,
   contrary to the decree of all, let him know beforehand that he must
   give account and defend himself on this charge, and lose the honour and
   dignity of the episcopate.

   All answered:  This sentence is proper and right, and such is our
   pleasure. [402]

   And this decree will be most widely known and best carried into effect,
   if each of those bishops among us who have sees on the thoroughfares or
   highway, on seeing a bishop [pass by] shall inquire into the cause of
   his passage and his place of destination.  And if at his departure he
   shall find that he is going to the Court, he will direct his inquiries
   with reference to the objects [of a resort to the Court] above
   mentioned.  And if he come by invitation let no obstacle be put in the
   way of his departure.  But if he is trying to go to the Court out of
   ostentation, as hath afore been said by your charity, or to urge the
   petitions of certain persons, let neither his letters be signed nor let
   such an one be received to communion.

   All said:  Be this also decreed.

   (Latin.)

   Bishop Gaudentius said:  These things which you have wholesomely and
   suitably provided [in your decrees] pleasing in [or, to] the estimation
   of all both [or, and] to God and to men, can obtain force and validity
   only in case fear [of a penalty] be added to this your action.  For we
   ourselves know that through the shamelessness of a few the sacred and
   venerable sacerdotal [--episcopal] name hath been many times and oft
   brought to blame.  If therefore anyone attempts to oppose the judgment
   of all and seeks to serve ambition rather than please God, he must be
   given to know that he will have to render an account and lose office
   and rank.

   This can be carried into effect only provided each of us whose see is
   on the highway shall, if he sees a bishop pass, inquire into the cause
   of his journey, ascertain his destination, and if he finds that he is
   on his way to the Court, satisfy himself as to what is contained above
   [i.e., as to his objects at Court], lest perhaps he has come by
   invitation, that permission may be given him to proceed.  If, however,
   as your holiness mentioned above, he is going to Court to urge
   petitions and applications for office, let neither his letters be
   signed nor let him be received to communion.

   All said that this was proper and right and that this regulation was
   approved by them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XX. [the last part of which in Beveridge,
   Synod., is numbered xxj.]

   If any bishop tries out of pride to do away with what has been decreed
   admirably, and in a manner pleasing to God, he shall lose his
   episcopate.  A bishop who shall see a bishop on his way to the camp, if
   he shall know that he goes there for any of the before-mentioned
   causes, let him not trouble him, but if otherwise let him pronounce
   excommunication against him.

   This is Canon XI. of the Latin.

   Van Espen.

   After the words ["honour and dignity"] according to Balsamon and
   Zonaras, as also Gentian Hervetus, there follows the approbation of the
   synod in these words:  "All answered, This opinion is becoming and
   well-pleasing to us," which indicate this to be the end of the canon;
   and therefore the Greeks make of this two distinct canons.

   Dionysius and Isidore make but one canon,...and this appears to be more
   congruous on account of the subject-matter of the first part, and will
   be manifest by connecting the two parts together.

   Van Espen follows Zonaras and Balsamon in understanding "Bishops in
   Canali," as such as were set on the public roads and public highways,
   or rather "in cities which are on the public highways, or Canals,' by
   which they that pass go without labour, as in a canal or aqueduct the
   water flows, for aqueduct and canal are the same thing in the Roman
   tongue."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [402] Here begins the Canon xxj., according to the Greek text of Bev.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [After Canon XX.]

   Canon XII.  (Of the Latin Texts.)

   Bishop Hosius said:  But some discretion is here requisite, brethren
   dearly beloved, in case some should come to those cities which are on
   the highway still ignorant of what has been decreed in the council.
   The bishop of such a city ought therefore to admonish him [a bishop so
   arriving], and instruct him to send his deacon from that place.  Upon
   this admonition he must, however, himself return to his diocese.

   Notes.

   Van Espen.

   This proposition of Hosius in the Roman Codex is joined as an appendix
   to the preceding canon.  The Greeks omit it altogether, very likely
   either because it seemed to be a proposition of Hosius's rather than a
   synodal canon, for no adoption by the synod is recorded:  or else
   because, even if it were a decree, it was only of temporary character,
   that is to say, until the canons had been sufficiently promulgated, and
   therefore some on the ground of ignorance might be exempt from the
   threatened penalties.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Excursus on the Other Acts of the Council.

   As only the Canons have any real connexion with the Ecumenical Synods,
   they alone have properly a place in this volume, and yet it may not be
   amiss to give a brief account of the other acts of the council, so far
   as we know them.

   (a)  The Rule for Keeping Easter.--The Anglican Scholar, the Rev.
   William Cureton, of the British Museum, first edited the then recently
   discovered Preface to the Paschal Letters of St. Athanasius, together
   with the Letters themselves.  The ms. which he then published was in
   Syriac and was discovered in Egypt.  In the preface just referred to,
   it is expressly stated that "a plan was agreed upon at Sardica with
   regard to the feast of Easter."  But this new plan, which was only
   expected to hold good for fifty years, failed, and although in a.d. 346
   Easter should have fallen on March 23d, yet the Council (so says St.
   Athanasius) agreed to observe it on March 30th.  Another divergence
   fell in a.d. 349.  Easter, by the Alexandrian calculation, would have
   been April 23d.  But by Roman count, the origin of which was attributed
   to St. Peter, Easter was never to be later than April 21st, and for the
   sake of peace the Alexandrians yielded to the Romans and kept Easter on
   March 26th; but in 350, 360, and 368 the Alexandrian and Roman methods
   again disagreed, and even the fifty years which Sardica had thought to
   ensure uniformity were marked by diverse usages.

   (b)  The Encyclical Letter.--The Council addressed a long Encyclical
   letter to all the bishops of the world; it is found in St. Athanasius
   [403] in Greek, in St. Hilary of Poictiers [404] in Latin, and in
   Theodoret's Ecclesiastical History. [405]   In this last there occurs
   at the end the so-called "Creed of Sardica," which is now considered by
   scholars to be undoubtedly spurious.

   (c)  A Letter to the Diocese of Alexandria.--St. Athanasius [406] gives
   us the Greek text of a letter sent by the council to the diocese of
   Alexandria to the bishops of Egypt and Libya.

   (d)  A Letter to Pope Julius.--Among the Fragments of St. Hilary [407]
   is found a letter from the synod to Pope Julius.  Hefele says that the
   text is "considerably injured."  One clause of this letter above all
   others has given occasion to much controversy.  The passage runs as
   follows:  "It was best and fittest that the priests [i.e., bishops]
   from all the provinces should make their reports to the head, that is,
   the chair of St. Peter."  Blondell declares the passage to be an
   interpolation, resting his opinion upon the barbarous Latin of the
   expression valde congruentissimum.  And even Remi Ceillier, while
   explaining this by the supposition, which is wholly gratuitous, that
   the original was Greek, yet is forced to confess that the sentence
   interrupts the flow of thought and looks like an insertion.  Bower,
   [408] in his History of the Popes, and Fuchs [409] have urged still
   more strongly the spurious character of the phrase, the latter using
   the convenient "marginal comment" explanation.

   Besides these there are three documents which Scipio Maffei discovered
   in ms. at Verona, which by some are supposed to belong to the Council
   of Sardica.

   (a)  A Letter to the Christians of Mareotis.

   (b)  A Letter of St. Athanasius to the same Mareotic Churches.  This
   letter is signed not only by Athanasius, but also by a great number of
   the bishops composing the synod.

   (c)  A Letter from St. Athanasius to the Church of Alexandria.

   On the authority to be attributed to these three documents I can do no
   better than quote the closing words of Hefele, [410] whom I have
   followed in this whole excursus.

   "These extracts shew, I think, quite sufficiently the spuriousness of
   these documents.  Is it possible that the Eusebians would have said of
   themselves:  We are enemies of Christ?'  But apart from this, the whole
   contents of these three letters are lame and feeble.  The constant
   repetition of the same words is intolerable, and the whole style
   pointless and trivial.  To this it must be added that the whole of
   Christian antiquity knew nothing of these three documents, which only
   exist in the codex at Verona, so that we cannot acknowledge them as
   genuine."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [403] Athanas. Apol. contra Arian., c. 44.

   [404] Hilar. Fragm., t. ii., 1283.

   [405] Theodoret. Hist. Eccl., Lib. II., cap. 6.

   [406] Athanas. Apol. ctr. Arian., c. 37, and again in chapter 41 (this
   last, which is really the same, is addressed to the bishops of Egypt
   and Libya).

   [407] Hilar. Fragment., Tom. ii.

   [408] Bower. Hist. Popes, in loc.

   [409] Fuchs' Bibliothe der Kirchen vers., vol. ii., p. 128 (cit. by
   Hef.).

   [410] Hefele, History Councils, vol. ii., p. 166.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Excursus as to Whether the Sardican Council Was Ecumenical.

   Some theologians and canonists have been of opinion that the Council of
   Sardica was Ecumenical and would reckon it as the Second.  But besides
   the fact that such a numbering is absolutely in contrariety to all
   history it also labours under the difficulty, as we shall see
   presently, that the Westerns by insisting that St. Athanasius should
   have a seat caused a division of the synod at the very outset, so that
   the Easterns met at Philippopolis and confirmed the deposition of the
   Saint.  It is also interesting to remember that when Alexander Natalis
   in his history expressly called this synod ecumenical, the passage was
   marked with disapproval by the Roman censors.

   (Hefele.  Hist. Councils. Vol. II., pp. 172 et seqq.)

   The ecumenical character of this Synod certainly cannot be proved.
   [411]   It is indeed true that it was the design of Pope Julius, as
   well as of the two Emperors, Constantius and Constans, to summon a
   General Council at Sardica; but we do not find that any such actually
   took place:  and the history of the Church points to many like cases,
   where a synod was probably intended to be ecumenical, and yet did not
   attain that character.  In the present case, the Eastern and Western
   bishops were indeed summoned, but by far the greater number of the
   Eastern bishops were Eusebians, and therefore Semi-Arians, and instead
   of acting in a better mind in union with the orthodox, they separated
   themselves and formed a cabal of their own at Philippopolis.

   We cannot indeed agree with those who maintain that the departure of
   the Eusebians in itself rendered it impossible for the synod to be
   ecumenical, or it would be in the power of heretics to make an
   Ecumenical Council possible or not.  We cannot, however, overlook the
   fact that, in consequence of this withdrawal, the great Eastern Church
   was far more poorly represented at Sardica, and that the entire number
   of bishops present did not even amount to a hundred!  So small a number
   of bishops can only form a General Council if the great body of their
   absent colleagues subsequently give their express consent to what has
   been decided.  This was not, however, the case at the Synod of
   Sardica.  The decrees were no doubt at once sent for acceptance and
   signature to the whole of Christendom, but not more than about two
   hundred of those bishops who had been absent signed, and of these,
   ninety-four, or nearly half, were Egyptians.  Out of the whole of Asia
   only a few bishops from the provinces of Cyprus and Palestine signed,
   not one from the other Eastern provinces; and even from the Latin
   Church in Africa, which at that time numbered at least three hundred
   bishops, we meet with very few names.  We cannot give much weight to
   the fact that the Emperor Constantius refused to acknowledge the
   decrees of Sardica:  it is of much greater importance that no single
   later authority declared it to be a General Council.  Natalis Alexander
   [412] is indeed of opinion that because Pope Zosimus, in the year 417
   or 418, cited the fifth canon of Sardica as Nicene, and a synod held at
   Constantinople in 382 cited the sixth as Nicene, the synod must
   evidently have been considered as an appendix to that of Nicea, and
   therefore its equal, that is, must have been honoured as ecumenical.
   But we have already shown how Zosimus and the bishops of Constantinople
   had been led into this confusion from the defects of their manuscript
   collections of the canons.  Athanasius, Sulpicius Severus, Socrates,
   and the Emperor Justinian were cited in later times for the ecumenical
   character of this synod.  Athanasius calls it a megale sunodos;
   Sulpicius Severus says it was ex toto orbe convocata; and Socrates
   relates that "Athanasius and other bishops had demanded an Ecumenical
   Synod, and that of Sardica had been then summoned. [413]   It is clear
   at the first glance that the two last authorities only prove that the
   Synod had been intended to be a general one, and the expression "Great
   Synod," used by Athanasius, cannot be taken as simply identical with
   ecumenical.  While, however, the Emperor Justinian, in his edict of
   346, on the Three Chapters, calls the Synod of Sardica ecumenical, he
   yet, in the same edict, as well as in other places, does not reckon it
   among the General Councils, of which he counts four.  To this must be
   added, first, that the Emperor is not the authority entitled to decide
   as to the character of an Ecumenical Synod; and secondly, that the
   expression Universale Concilium was employed in a wider sense in
   speaking of those synods which, without being general, represented a
   whole patriarchate.

   The Trullan Synod and Pope Nicholas I. are further appealed to.  The
   former in its second canon approved of the Sardican canons, and Pope
   Nicholas said of them:  "omnis Ecclesia recepit eos."  But this in no
   way contains a declaration that the Synod of Sardica was ecumenical,
   for the canons of many other councils also--for instance, Ancyra,
   Neocæsarea, and others--were generally received without those synods
   themselves being therefore esteemed ecumenical.  Nay, the Trullan Synod
   itself speaks for us; for had it held the Synod of Sardica to be the
   second General Council, it would have placed its canons immediately
   after those of Nice, whereas they are placed after the four ancient
   General Councils, and from this we see that the Trullan Synod did not
   reckon the Sardican among those councils, but after them.  To this it
   must be added that the highest Church authorities speak most decidedly
   against the synod being ecumenical.  We may appeal first to Augustine,
   who only knew of the Eusebian assembly at Sardica, and nothing at all
   of an orthodox synod in that place; which would have been clearly
   impossible, if it had at that time been counted among the ecumenical
   synods.  Pope Gregory the Great [414] and St. Isidore of Seville [415]
   speak still more plainly.  They only know of four ancient General
   Councils--those of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon.  The
   objection of the Ballerini that Gregory and Isidore did not intend to
   enumerate the most ancient general synods as such, but only those which
   issued important dogmatic decrees, is plainly quite arbitrary, and
   therefore without force.  Under such circumstances it is natural that
   among the later scholars by far the great majority should have answered
   the question, whether the Synod of Sardica is ecumenical, in the
   negative, as have Cardinal Bellarmin, Peter de Marca, Edmund Richer,
   Fleury, Orsi, Sacharelli, Tillemont, Du Pin, Berti, Ruttenstock,
   Rohrbacher, Remi Ceillier, Stolberg, Neander, and others.  On the other
   hand, Baronius, Natalis Alexander, the brothers Ballerini, Mansi, and
   Palma [416] have sought to maintain the ecumenical character of the
   synod, but as early as the seventeenth century the Roman censors
   condemned the direct assertions of Natalis Alexander on the subject.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [411] Hefele refers to his having himself treated this matter fully in
   the Theologischer Quartalschrift of Tübingen, 1852.

   [412] Nat. Alex.  H. E., sec. iv., Diss. xxvij., Art. 3.

   [413] Socrates.  H. E., Lib. ii., cap. 20.

   [414] Greg. M.  Lib. ii., Epist. 10.

   [415] Isidor.  Hispal.  Etymolog., Lib. vi., cap. 16.

   [416] Jno. Bapt. Palma.  Prælectiones Hist. Eccl. quas in Collegio
   Urbano habuit.  Rome, l838.  Tom. i., P. ii., p. 85.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Canons of the CCXVII Blessed Fathers who assembled at Carthage.

   Commonly Called

   The Code of Canons of the African Church.

   a.d. 419.

   Elenchus.

   Introductory Note.

   The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introductory Note.

   An attempt to write a commentary upon all the canons of the African
   Code, would have meant nothing less than the preparation of one volume
   or more on the canon law of the West.  This is impossible and
   therefore, interesting as the field would be, I have been compelled to
   restrain my pen, and rather than give a scant and insufficient
   annotation, I have contented myself with providing the reader with as
   good a translation as I have been able to make of the very corrupt
   Latin (correcting it at times by the Greek), and have added the Ancient
   Epitome and the quaint notes in full of John Johnson from the Second
   Edition, of 1714, of his "Clergyman's Vade-mecum," Pt. II., which
   occupy little space, but may not be easily reached by the ordinary
   reader.  The student will find full scholia on these Canons in Van
   Espen in the Latin, and in Zonaras and Balsamon in the Greek.  These
   latter are in Beveridge's Synodicon.

   Johnson writes an excellent Introduction to his Epitome of these
   Canons, as follows:

   "Councils were nowhere more frequently called in the Primitive Times
   than in Africa.  In the year 418-19, all canons formerly made in
   sixteen councils held at Carthage, one at Milevis, one at Hippo, that
   were approved of, were read, and received a new sanction from a great
   number of bishops, then met in synod at Carthage.  This Collection is
   the Code of the African Church, which was always in greatest repute in
   all Churches next after the Code of the Universal Church.  This code
   was of very great authority in the old English Churches, for many of
   the Excerptions of Egbert were transcribed from it.  And though the
   Code of the Universal Church ends with the canons of Chalcedon, [417]
   yet these African Canons are inserted into the Ancient Code both of the
   Eastern and Western Churches.  These canons though ratified and
   approved by a synod, yet seem to have been divided or numbered by some
   private and unlearned hand, and have probably met with very unskilful
   transcribers, by which means some of them are much confounded and
   obscured, as to their sense and coherence.  They are by Dionysius
   Exiguus and others entituled The Canons of the Synod of Africa.  And
   though all were not originally made at one time, yet they were all
   confirmed by one synod of African bishops, who, after they had recited
   the Creed and the twenty canons of the Council of Nice, proceeded to
   make new canons, and re-enforce old ones."

   In his "Library of Canon Law" (Bibliotheca Juris Canonici) Justellus
   gives these canons, and, in my opinion, gives them rightly, the title
   "The Code of Canons of the African Church" (Codex Canonum Ecclesiæ
   Africanæ), although Hefele [418] describes them as "the collection of
   those African Canons put together in 419 by Dionysius Exiguus."  Hefele
   says that the title Dionysius gave them in his collection was "The
   Statutes of an African Council" (Statuta Concilii Africani) which would
   certainly be wholly inadequate and misleading; but in the edition of
   Dionysius in Migne's Patrologia Latina (Tom. LXVII., col. 181) in the
   Codex Canonum Ecclesiasticorum no such title occurs, but the perfectly
   accurate one, "A Synod at Carthage in Africa, which adopted one hundred
   and thirty-eight canons."  This is an exact description of what took
   place and of the origin of these most important dogmatic and
   disciplinary enactments.  Hefele must have been thinking of Dionysius's
   Preface where the expression does occur but not as a title.

   (Beveridge.  Synodicon, Tom. II., p. 202.)

   Carthage was formerly the head of the whole of Africa, as St. Augustine
   tells us in his Epistle CLXII.  From this cause it happened that a
   great number of councils were held there, gathered from all the
   provinces of Africa.  Especially while Aurelius as Archbishop was
   occupying the throne were these meetings of bishops frequently holden;
   and by these, for the establishing of ecclesiastical discipline in
   Africa, many canons were enacted.  At last, after the consulate of
   Honorius (XII.) and Theodosius (VIII.), Augustuses, on the eighth day
   before the Calends of June, that is to say, on May 25, in the year of
   our Lord 419, another Council was held in the same city at which all
   the canons previously adopted were considered, and the greater part of
   them were again confirmed by the authority of the synod.  These canons,
   thus confirmed by this council, merited to be called from that day to
   this "The Code of Canons of the African Church."  These canons were not
   at first adopted in Greek but in Latin, and they were confirmed in the
   same language.  This Dionysius Exiguus distinctly testifies to in his
   preface to the "Code of Ecclesiastical Canons," in which they are
   included.  It is uncertain when the canons of this Carthaginian synod
   were done into Greek.  This only is certain, that they had been
   translated into Greek before the Council in Trullo by which, in its
   Second Canon, they were received into the Greek Nomocanon, and were
   confirmed by the authority of this synod; so that from that time these
   canons stand in the Eastern Church on an equality with all the rest.

   An extremely interesting point arises as to what was the authority of
   the collection as a collection, and how this collection was made?
   There seems no doubt that the collection substantially as we know it
   was the code accepted by the Council of Trullo, the canons of which
   received a quasi-ecumenical authority from the subsequent general
   imprimatur given them by the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second of
   Nice.  Van Espen has considered this point at great length in
   Dissertation VIII. of the First Part of his Commentaries, and to his
   pages I must refer the reader for anything like an adequate
   presentation of the matter.  He concludes (§ I.) that the "Code owes
   its origin to this synod," and argues against De Marca in proof of the
   proposition that the collection was not the private work of Dionysius,
   but the official work of the council by one of its officials,
   concluding with the remark (§ II.) that "this was the persuasion both
   of Greeks and Latins,...and these canons are set forth by Balsamon with
   the title, The Canons of the CCXVII. Blessed Fathers who met together
   at Carthage.'"

   In the notes on each canon I shall give the source, following Hefele in
   all respects (Hist. of the Councils, vol. ii., pp. 468 et seqq.), and
   content myself here with setting down a list of the various councils
   which made the enactments, with their dates.

   Carthage (under Gratus)--345-348 a.d.

         "       (under Genethlius)--387 or 390

   Hippo--393

   I.  Carthage--394

   II.   "   (June 26)--397

   III.   "   (August 28)--397

   IV.   "   (April 27)--399

   V.   "   (June 15)--401

   VI.   "   (September 13)--401

   VII.  Milevis (August 27)--402

   VIII.  Carthage (August 25)--403

   IX.   "   (June)--404

   X.   "   (August 25)--405

   XI.   "   (June 13)--407

   XII. and XIII.  Carthage (June 16 and October 13)--408

   XIV.  Carthage (June 15)--409

   XV.   "   (June 14)--410

   XVI.   "   (May 1)--418

   XVII.   "   (May 25) which adopted the African Code--419

   The numbering of the African councils differs very widely between the
   different writers, and Cave reckons nine between 401 and 608, and
   thirty-five Carthaginian between 215 and 533. [419]   Very useful
   tables, shewing the conclusions of Fuchs, are found at the end of
   Bruns, Canones Apostolorum et Conciliorum Veterum Selecti.

   I need only add that I have frequently used Dr. Bruns's text, but have
   not confined myself to it exclusively.  Evidently in the Latin, as we
   now have it, there are many corrupt passages.  In strange
   contradistinction to this, the Greek is apparently pure and is clear
   throughout.  Possibly the Greek translation was made from a purer Latin
   text than we now possess.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [417] I do not understand what Johnson means by this statement.  Vide
   Can. j. of Chalcedon.

   [418] Hefele.  Hist. of the Councils, vol. ii., p. 468, Note 1.

   [419] For this statement I am indebted to Mr. Ffoulkes in art. "African
   Councils."  Smith and Cheetham, Dict. Christ. Antiq.
     __________________________________________________________________

   An Ancient Introduction.

   (Found in Dionysius Exiguus, Codex Can. Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. lxvii.,
   col. 182.)

   After the consulate of the most glorious emperors, Honorus for the
   twelfth time and Theodosius for the eighth time, Augustuses, on the
   VIII. before the Calends of June at Carthage, in the Secretarium of the
   basilica of Faustus, when Pope Aurelius had sat down, together with
   Valentine of the primatial see of the province of Numidia, and
   Faustinus of the Potentine Church, of the Italian province Picenum, a
   legate of the Roman Church, and also with legates of the different
   African provinces, that is to say, of the two Numidias, of Byzacena, of
   Mauritania Cæsariensis, as well as of Tripoli, and with Vincent
   Colositanus, Fortunatian, and other bishops of the proconsular
   province, in all two hundred and seventeen, also with Philip and
   Asellus, presbyters and legates of the Roman Church, and while the
   deacons were standing by, Aurelius the bishop said, etc., ut infra.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Canons of the 217 Blessed Fathers who assembled at Carthage.

   (Labbe and Cossart:  Concilia, Tom. II. Col. 1041; Dionysius Ex., Codex
   Can. Eccles.[Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LXVII.]; Beveridge, Synodicon in
   loc.)

   Aurelius the Bishop said: [420]   You, most blessed brethren, remember
   that after the day fixed for the synod we discussed many things while
   we were waiting for our brethren who now have been sent as delegates
   and have arrived at the present synod, which must be placed in the
   acts.  Wherefore let us render thanks to our Lord for the gathering
   together of so great an assembly.  It remains that the acts of the
   Nicene Synod which we now have, and have been determined by the
   fathers, as well as those things enacted by our predecessors here, who
   confirmed that same Synod, or which according to the same form have
   been usefully enacted by all grades of the clergy, from the highest
   even to the lowest, should be brought forward.  The whole Council
   said:  Let them be brought forward.

   Daniel the Notary read:  The profession of faith or statutes of the
   Nicene Synod are as follows.

   And while he was speaking, Faustinus, a bishop of the people of
   Potentia, of the Italian province of Picenum, a legate of the Roman
   Church said:  There have been entrusted to us by the Apostolic See
   certain things in writings, and certain other things as in ordinances
   to be treated of with your blessedness as we have called to memory in
   the acts above, that is to say, concerning the canons made at Nice,
   that their decrees and customs be observed; for some things are
   observed out of decree and canon, but some from custom.  Concerning
   these things therefore in the first place let us make enquiry, if it
   please your blessedness; and afterwards let the other ordinances which
   have been adopted or proposed be confirmed; so that you may be able to
   show by your rescripts to the Apostolic See, and that you may declare
   to the same venerable Pope, that we have diligently remembered these
   things; although the headings of action taken had been already inserted
   in the acts. [421]   In this matter we should act, as I have said
   above, as shall please your beloved blessedness.  Let, therefore the
   commonitorium come into the midst, that ye may be able to recognize
   what is contained in it, so that an answer can be given to each point.

   Aurelius said:  Let the commonitorium be brought forward, which our
   brethren and fellow-ministers lately placed in the acts, and let the
   rest of the things done or to be done, follow in order.

   Daniel the Notary read the Commonitorium.  To our brother Faustinus and
   to our sons, the presbyters Philip and Asellus, Zosimus, the bishop.
   You well remember that we committed to you certain businesses, and now
   [we bid you] carry out all things as if we ourselves were there (for),
   indeed, our presence is there with you; especially since ye have this
   our commandment, and the words of the canons which for greater
   certainty we have inserted in this our commonitory.  For thus said our
   brethren in the Council of Nice when they made these decrees concerning
   the appeals of bishops:

   "But it seemed good that if a bishop had been accused, etc."  [Here
   follows verbatim Canon v. of Sardica.]

   Ancient Epitome.

   If bishops shall have deposed a bishop, and if he appeal to the Roman
   bishop, he should be benignantly heard, the Roman bishop writing or
   ordering.

   And when this had been read, Alypius, bishop of the Tagastine Church,
   and legate of the province of Numidia, said:  On this matter there has
   been some legislation in former sessions of our council, and we profess
   that we shall ever observe what was decreed by the Nicene Council; yet
   I remember that when we examined the Greek copies of this Nicene Synod,
   we did not find these the words quoted--Why this was the case, I am
   sure I do not know.  For this reason we beg your reverence, holy Pope
   Aurelius, that, as the authentic record of the decrees of the Council
   of Nice are said to be preserved in the city of Constantinople, you
   would deign to send messengers with letters from your Holiness, and not
   only to our most holy brother the bishop of Constantinople, but also to
   the venerable bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, who shall send to us
   the decrees of that council with the authentification of their
   signatures, so that hereafter all ambiguity should be taken away, for
   we failed to find the words cited by our brother Faustinus;
   notwithstanding this however we promise to be ruled by them for a short
   time, as I have already said, until reliable copies come to hand.
   Moreover the venerable bishop of the Roman Church, Boniface, should be
   asked likewise to be good enough to send messengers to the
   aforementioned churches, who should have the same copies according to
   his rescript, but the copies of the aforementioned Nicene Council which
   we have, we place in these Acts.

   Faustinus the bishop, legate of the Roman Church, said:  Let not your
   holiness do dishonour to the Roman Church, either in this matter or in
   any other, by saying the canons are doubtful, as our brother and
   fellow-bishop Alypius has vouchsafed to say:  but do you deign to write
   these things to our holy and most blessed pope, so that he seeking out
   the genuine canons, can treat with your holiness on all matters
   decreed.  But it suffices that the most blessed bishop of the city of
   Rome should make enquiry just as your holiness proposes doing on your
   part, that there may not seem to have arisen any contention between the
   Churches, but that ye may the rather be enabled to deliberate with
   fraternal charity, when he has been heard from, what is best should be
   observed.

   Aurelius the bishop said:  In addition to what is set down in the acts,
   we, by the letters from our insignificance, must more fully inform our
   holy brother and fellow-bishop Boniface of everything which we have
   considered.  Therefore if our plan pleases all, let us be informed of
   this by the mouth of all.  And the whole council said:  It seems good
   to us.

   Novatus the bishop, legate of Mauritania Sitifensis, said:  We now call
   to mind that there is contained in this commonitory something about
   presbyters and deacons, how they should be tried by their own bishops
   or by those adjoining, a provision which we find nothing of in the
   Nicene Council.  For this cause let your holiness order this part to be
   read.

   Aurelius the bishop said:  Let the place asked for be read.  Daniel the
   notary read as follows:  Concerning the appeals of clergymen, that is
   of those of inferior rank, there is a sure answer of this very synod,
   concerning which thing what ye should do, we think should be inserted,
   as follows:

   "Hosius the bishop said:  I should not conceal what has come into my
   mind up to this time.  If any bishop perchance has been quickly angered
   (a thing what should not happen) and has acted quickly or sharply
   against a presbyter or a deacon of his, and has wished to drive him out
   of the Church, provision should be made that the innocent be not
   condemned, or be deprived of communion:  he that has been ejected
   should have the right of appeal to the bishops of the bordering
   dioceses, that his case should be heard, and it should be carried on
   all the more diligently because to him who asks a hearing it should not
   be denied.  And the bishop who either justly or unjustly rejected him,
   should patiently allow the affair to be discussed, so that his sentence
   be either approved or else emended, etc."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome.

   A presbyter or deacon who has been cut off, has the privilege of
   appealing to the neighbouring bishops.  Moreover, he who cut him off
   should bear with equanimity the conclusion arrived at.

   This is the first part of Canon xiv. of Sardica, as the canon
   previously quoted is Canon v. of the same synod.

   And when this had been read, Augustine, the bishop of the Church of
   Hippo of the province of Numidia, said:  We promise that this shall be
   observed by us, provided that upon more careful examination it be found
   to be of the Council of Nice.  Aurelius the bishop said.  If this also
   is pleasing to the charity of you all, give it the confirmation of your
   vote.  The whole Council said:  Everything that has been ordained by
   the Nicene Council pleases us all.  Jocundus, the bishop of the Church
   of Suffitula, legate of the province of Byzacena, said:  What was
   decreed by the Nicene Council cannot in any particular be violated.

   Faustinus the bishop, legate of the Roman Church, said:  So far as has
   developed by the confession of your holiness as well as of the holy
   Alypius, and of our brother Jocundus, I believe that some of the points
   have been made weak and others confirmed, which should not be the case,
   since even the very canons themselves have been brought into question.
   Therefore, that there may be harmony between us and your blessedness,
   let your holiness deign to refer the matter to the holy and venerable
   bishop of the Roman Church, that he may be able to consider whether
   what St. Augustine vouchsafed to enact, should be conceded or not, I
   mean in the matter of appeals of the inferior grade.  If therefore
   there still is doubt, on this head it is right that the bishop of the
   most blessed see be informed, if this can be found in the canons which
   have been approved.

   Ancient Epitome.

   Since the written decrees of the Nicene Council have not been found,
   let the Roman bishop deign to write to the bishop of Constantinople and
   to him of Alexandria, and let us know what he receives from them.

   Aurelius the bishop said:  As we have suggested to your charity, pray
   allow the copies of the statutes of the Nicene Council to be read and
   inserted in the acts, as well as those things what have been most
   healthfully defined in this city by our predecessors, according to the
   rule of that council, and those which now have been ordained by us.
   And the whole council said:  The copies of the Creed, and the statutes
   of the Nicene Synod which formerly were brought to our council through
   Cæcilean of blessed memory, the predecessor of your holiness (who was
   present at it), as well as the copies of the decrees made by the
   Fathers in this city following them, or which now we have decreed by
   our common consultation, shall remain inserted in these ecclesiastical
   acts, so that (as has been already said) your blessedness may vouchsafe
   to write to those most venerable men of the Church of Antioch, and of
   that of Alexandria, and also of that of Constantinople, that they would
   send most accurate copies of the decrees of the Council of Nice under
   the authentification of their signatures, by which, the truth of the
   matter having become evident, those chapters which in the commonitory
   our brother who is present, and fellow-bishop Faustinus, as well as our
   fellow-presbyters Philip and Asellus brought with them, if they be
   found therein, may be confirmed by us; or if they be not found, we will
   hold a synod and consider the matter further.  Daniel the notary read
   the profession of faith of the Council of Nice and its statutes to the
   African Council.

   The Profession of Faith of the Nicene Council.

   We believe in one God, etc.,...and in the Holy Ghost.  But those who
   say, etc.,...anathematize them.

   The statutes also of the Nicene Council in twenty heads were likewise
   read, as are found written before.  Then what things were promulgated
   in the African Synods, were inserted in the present acts.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [420] The reader must not complain if he finds the meaning of the
   translation often obscure.  So great a scholar as Hefele says of one of
   these speeches, "This, I believe, must be the meaning of the somewhat
   unintelligible text, etc.," and again of another passage he says that
   it "is even more obscure," and that "the text is undoubtedly corrupt.
   The sense is probably, etc."

   [421] I have followed in this passage the Greek text as a trifle less
   incomprehensible.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon I.

   That the statutes of the Nicene Council are to be scrupulously
   observed.

   Aurelius the bishop said:  Such are the statutes of the Nicene Council,
   which our fathers at that time brought back with them:  and preserving
   this form, let these things which follow, adopted and confirmed by us,
   be kept firm.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon I.

   Let the copies of the decrees of the Nicene Council which our fathers
   brought back with them from that synod, be observed.

   Johnson.

   It is certain that Cæcilian, then Bishop of Carthage, was present at
   the Council of Nice; that any other African bishop was there does not
   appear; but probably he was attended with several clergyman, who were
   afterwards ordained bishops.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon II.

   Of Preaching the Trinity.

   The whole Council said:  By the favour of God, by a unanimous
   confession the Church's faith which through us is handed down should be
   confessed in this glorious assembly before anything else; then the
   ecclesiastical order of each is to be built up and strengthened by the
   consent of all.  That the minds of our brethren and fellow bishops
   lately elevated may be strengthened, those things should be propounded
   which we have certainly received from our fathers, as the unity of the
   Trinity, which we retain consecrated in our senses, of the Father, and
   of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which has no difference, as we say,
   [422] so we shall instruct the people of God.  Moreover by all the
   bishops lately promoted it was said:  So we openly confess, so we hold,
   so we teach, following the Evangelic faith and your teaching.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon II.

   No difference is recognised or taught by the decrees of the Council of
   Nice between the Persons of the Holy Trinity.

   This canon, or rather introduction, is taken from Canon j., of the
   Council of Carthage held under Genethlius, a.d. 387 or 390. [423]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [422] Or "have learned."

   [423] In assigning these canons to the several synods that adopted
   them, I have simply followed Hefele.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon III.

   Of Continence.

   Aurelius the bishop said:  When at the past council the matter on
   continency and chastity was considered, those three grades, which by a
   sort of bond are joined to chastity by their consecration, to wit
   bishops, presbyters, and deacons, so it seemed that it was becoming
   that the sacred rulers and priests of God as well as the Levites, or
   those who served at the divine sacraments, should be continent
   altogether, by which they would be able with singleness of heart to ask
   what they sought from the Lord:  so that what the apostles taught and
   antiquity kept, that we might also keep.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon III.

   Let a bishop, a presbyter, and a deacon be chaste and continent.

   This canon is taken from Canon ij., of Carthage 387 or 390.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon IV.

   Of the different orders that should abstain from their wives.

   Faustinus, the bishop of the Potentine Church, in the province of
   Picenum, a legate of the Roman Church, said:  It seems good that a
   bishop, a presbyter, and a deacon, or whoever perform the sacraments,
   should be keepers of modesty and should abstain from their wives.

   By all the bishops it was said:  It is right that all who serve the
   altar should keep pudicity from all women.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.

   Let those who pray abstain from their wives that they may obtain their
   petitions.

   This canon is taken from Canon ij., of Carthage 387 or 390, last
   mentioned.

   Johnson.

   See Canon XXV.  "Abstain from their wives," i.e. Some time before and
   after the Eucharist, as the old Scholiasts understand it.  [i.e. the
   Greek scholiasts, but see notes to Canon xiij. of Quinisext.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon V.

   Of Avarice.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  The cupidity of avarice (which, let no one
   doubt, is the mother of all evil things), is to be henceforth
   prohibited, lest anyone should usurp another's limits, or for gain
   should pass beyond the limits fixed by the fathers, nor shall it be at
   all lawful for any of the clergy to receive usury of any kind.  And
   those new edicts (suggestiones) which are obscure and generally
   ambiguous, after they have been examined by us, will have their value
   fixed (formam accipiunt); but with regard to those upon which the
   Divine Scripture hath already most plainly given judgment, it is
   unnecessary that further sentence should be pronounced, but what is
   already laid down is to be carried out.  And what is reprehensible in
   laymen is worthy of still more severe censure in the clergy.  The whole
   synod said:  No one hath gone contrary to what is said in the Prophets
   and in the Gospels with impunity.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

   As the taking of any kind of usury is condemned in laymen, much more is
   it condemned in clergymen.

   This canon is made up of Canons x. and xiij. of the Synod of Carthage
   held under Gratus in a.d. 345-348.  This synod was held to return
   thanks for the ending of the Donatist schism; and indeed for some time
   the evil did seem to have been removed.  Donatist worship was
   prohibited by the imperial law and it was not until the times of
   Constans and Constantius that it again openly asserted itself.  The
   synod while in session also took advantage of the opportunity of
   passing some useful general canons on discipline.

   Johnson.

   See Canon of the Apostles 36 (44); Nic., 17.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VI.

   That the chrism should not be made by presbyters.

   Fortunatus the bishop, said:  In former councils we remember that it
   was decreed that the chrism or the reconciliation of penitents, as also
   the consecration of virgins be not done by presbyters:  but should
   anyone be discovered to have done this, what ought we to decree with
   regard to him?

   Aurelius the bishop said:  Your worthiness has heard the suggestion of
   our brother and fellow-bishop Fortunatus; What answer will you give?

   And all the bishops replied:  Neither the making of the chrism, nor the
   consecration of virgins, is to be done by presbyters, nor is it
   permitted to a presbyter to reconcile anyone in the public mass (in
   publica missa), this is the pleasure of all of us.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.

   Let no presbyter make the chrism, nor prepare the unction, nor
   consecrate virgins, nor publicly reconcile anyone to communion.

   This is Canon iij. of the Carthaginian Synod under Genethlius, a.d. 387
   or 390.

   Johnson.

   Not the chrism used upon persons at their baptism, says the scholion in
   Bishop Beveridge's Annotation, but the Mystical Chrism, viz., that used
   at Confirmation; though neither was the chrism used at baptism to be
   consecrated by Priests.  See Decr. of Gelasius 6.

   Du Pin observes, That this is one of the first monuments where the name
   of "mass" occurs to signify the public prayers, which the church made
   at offering the Eucharist.  And let the reader observe, that there is
   no mention of the "mass" in the copies which the Greeks made use of.
   And further, he restrains the meaning of the word "mass" too much, when
   he supposes that it denoted the Communion Office only.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VII.

   Concerning those who are reconciled in peril of death.

   Aurelius the bishop said:  If anyone had fallen into peril of death
   during the absence of the bishop, and had sought to reconcile himself
   to the divine altars, the presbyter should consult the bishop, and so
   reconcile the sick man at his bidding, which thing we should strengthen
   with healthy counsel.  By all the bishops it was said:  Whatever your
   holiness has taught us to be necessary, that is our pleasure.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.

   A priest desiring to reconcile anyone in peril to the sacred altars
   must consult the bishop and do what seems good to him.

   This is Canon iv. of the Synod of 387 or 390.

   Johnson.

   See Canon 43.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon VIII.

   Of those who make accusation against an elder; and that no criminal is
   to be suffered to bring a charge against a bishop.

   Numidius, the bishop of Maxula, said:  Moreover, there are very many,
   not of good life, who think that their elders or bishops should be the
   butt for accusation; ought such to be easily admitted or no?  Aurelius
   the bishop said:  Is it the pleasure of your charity that he who is
   ensnared by divers wickednesses should have no voice of accusation
   against these?

   All the bishops said:  If he is criminous, his accusation is not to be
   received.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.

   It has seemed good that they who are themselves defendants for crimes
   should not bring accusations; nor should they be allowed to lay crimes
   to anyone's charge.

   This is Canon vi. of Genethlius's Synod at Carthage, a.d. 387 or 390.

   Johnson.

   See Canons 132 and 133 and Constantinople Canon 6.

   [The "elders" mentioned in this canon are] probably the same with senes
   in other canons, viz., Metropolitans, as is generally believed.  The
   Latin here calls them Majores natu, the Greek pateras.  Bishop
   Beveridge supposes that the word denotes bishop, though perhaps Majores
   natu may signify presbyters.  Justellus on the canon produces some
   seeming authorities for this.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon IX.

   Of those who on account of their deeds are justly cast forth from the
   congregation of the Church.

   Augustine the bishop, the legate of the Numidian province, said:  Deign
   to enact that if any perchance have been rightly on account of their
   crimes cast forth from the Church, and shall have been received into
   communion by some bishop or presbyter, such shall be considered as
   guilty of an equal crime with them who flee away from the judgment of
   their own bishop.  And all the bishops said:  This is the pleasure of
   all of us.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.

   Let him be excommunicated who communicates with one excommunicated.

   This is Canon vii. of the same synod of 387 or 390.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon X.

   Of presbyters who are corrected by their own bishops.

   Alypius the bishop, a legate of the province of Numidia, said:  Nor
   should this be passed over; if by chance any presbyter when corrected
   by his bishop, inflamed by self-conceit or pride, has thought fit to
   offer sacrifices to God separately [from the authority of the bishop]
   or has believed it right to erect another altar, contrary to
   ecclesiastical faith and discipline, such should not get off with
   impunity.  Valentine, of the primatial see of the province of Numidia,
   said:  The propositions made by our brother Alypius are of necessity
   congruous to ecclesiastical discipline and faith; therefore enact what
   seems good to your belovedness.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon X.

   If one condemned by his bishop shall separate himself and set up an
   altar or make the offering he should be punished.

   Aristenus.

   Whoever has been cut off by his own bishop and does not go to the synod
   to which his bishop is subject, that an examination may be made of the
   grounds of his cutting off, and that whatever is contrary to justice
   may be corrected; but, puffed up with pride and conceit, shall despise
   the synod and separate himself from the Church, and shall set up
   another altar, and shall offer to God the holy gifts; such an one shall
   not be allowed to go on with impunity, since he is acting contrary to
   the faith and constitution of the Church; but he is to be stricken with
   anathema.

   This and the following canon are Canon viii. of the so often mentioned
   synod of 387 or 390.

   Johnson.

   See Canon of the Apostles 24 (or 32) and that of Gangra 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XI.

   If any presbyter, inflated against his bishop, makes a schism, let him
   be anathema.

   All the bishops said:  If any presbyter shall have been corrected by
   his superior, he should ask the neighbouring bishops that his cause be
   heard by them and that through them he may be reconciled to his
   bishop:  but if he shall not have done this, but, puffed up with pride,
   (which may God forbid!) he shall have thought it proper to separate
   himself from the communion of his bishop, and separately shall have
   offered the sacrifice to God, and made a schism with certain
   accomplices, let him be anathema, and let him lose his place; and if
   the complaint which he brought against his bishop shall [not] have been
   found to be well founded, an enquiry should be instituted.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.

   A Presbyter condemned by his bishop, is allowed to appeal to the
   neighbouring bishops:  but if he shall not make any appeal, but shall
   make a schism, and be elated with conceit and shall offer the Holy
   Gifts to God, let him be anathema.

   See note to last canon.  The last clause is certainly corrupt; in the
   council of Carthage at which it was first adopted there is no "non,"
   making the meaning clear.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XII.

   If any bishop out of Synod time shall have fallen under accusation, let
   his cause be heard by 12 bishops.

   Felix the bishop, said:  I suggest, according to the statutes of the
   ancient councils, that if any bishop (which may God forbid!) shall have
   fallen under any accusation, and there shall have been too great
   necessity to wait for the summoning of a majority of the bishops, that
   he may not rest under accusation, let his cause be heard by 12 bishops;
   and let a presbyter be heard by six bishops with his own bishop, and a
   deacon shall be heard by three.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.

   When a bishop is to be tried, if the whole synod does not sit, let at
   least twelve bishops take up the matter; and for the case of a
   presbyter, six and his own diocesan; and for the case of a deacon,
   three.

   This is Canon x. of the Synod of Genethlius.

   Johnson.

   Hereby must be meant African canons; that under Gratus [a.d. 348] had
   decreed the same thing.

   Who was the bishop's judge at the first instance does not appear by
   this canon; but it is natural to suppose it was the Primate.  It is
   probable that this canon is to be understood of hearing upon an appeal,
   because it is certain that a priest's cause, at the first instance, was
   to be tried before the bishop (see Can. 10, 11).  And therefore the
   latter part of the canon can be understood of no hearing but by way of
   appeal, nor by consequence the former.  And this seems more clear by
   Can. Afr. 29.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIII.

   That a bishop should not be ordained except by many bishops, but if
   there should be necessity he may be ordained by three.

   Bishop Aurelius said:  What says your holiness on this matter?  By all
   the bishops it was answered:  The decrees of the ancients must be
   observed by us, to wit, that without the consent of the Primate of any
   province even many bishops assembled together should not lightly
   presume to ordain a bishop.  But should there be a necessity, at his
   bidding, three bishops should ordain him in any place they happen to
   be, and if anyone contrary to his profession and subscription shall
   come into any place he shall thereby deprive himself of his honour.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

   At the bidding of the Primate even three bishops can make a bishop.
   But whoever goes counter to his profession, and subscription, is
   deprived of his honour by his own judgment.

   This is Canon xij. of the before mentioned Synod of 387 or 390.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Ap. 1, Nic. 1.

   He that was called a Metropolitan in other Churches was a Primate in
   Africa.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIV.

   That one of the bishops of Tripoli should come as legate, and that a
   presbyter might be heard there by five bishops.

   It also seemed good that one bishop from Tripoli, on account of the
   poverty of the province, should come as a legation, and that there a
   presbyter might be heard by five bishops, and a deacon by three, as has
   been noted above, his own bishop presiding.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.

   On account of the scarcity of bishops in Tripoli, one bishop shall
   suffice for a legation.

   This canon is made up of two parts.  The first part is Canon v. of the
   synod of Hippo, a.d. 393, and was repeated at the Carthaginian synod of
   397.  The second half is from Canon viij. of the same council.

   Johnson (See Canon 12).

   "Legate," i.e., to a Synod, there being few bishops in that province.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XV.

   Of the divers orders who serve the Church, that if any one fall into a
   criminal business and refused to be tried by the ecclesiastical court,
   he ought to be in danger therefor; and that the sons of bishops
   (sacerdotum) are not to attend worldly shows.

   Moreover it seemed good that if any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who
   had a criminal charge brought against him or who had a civil cause,
   refused to be tried by the ecclesiastical tribunal, but wished to be
   judged by the secular courts, even if he won his suit, nevertheless he
   should lose his office.

   This is the law in a criminal suit; but in a civil suit he shall lose
   that for the recovery of which he instituted the proceedings, if he
   wishes to retain his office.

   This also seemed good, that if from some ecclesiastical judges an
   appeal was taken to other ecclesiastical judges who had a superior
   jurisdiction, this should in no way injure the reputation of those from
   whom the appeal was taken, unless it could be shown that they had given
   sentence moved by hatred or some other mental bias, or that they had
   been in some way corrupted.  But if by the consent of both parties
   judges had been chosen, even if they were fewer in number than is
   specified, no appeal can be taken.

   And [it seemed good] that the sons of bishops should not take part in
   nor witness secular spectacles.  For this has always been forbidden to
   all Christians, so let them abstain from them, that they may not go
   where cursing and blasphemy are to be found.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.

   A bishop or cleric who has a criminal suit brought against him, if he
   leaves the Church and betakes himself to secular judges even if he had
   been unjustly used, shall lose his rank.  And if he was successful in
   his political affairs, if he follows this, he shall lose his own
   grade.  No appeal can be taken from the ecclesiastical judges, except
   they be proved to have given their decision beforehand moved thereto by
   a bribe or by hatred.  No appeal can be taken from the decision of
   judges chosen by each side.

   This canon is made up of Canons ix., x., and xj. of the Council of
   Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   In this canon the African bishops made bold with the Civil Courts.  To
   lay such restraints on bishops and clergymen is, I am sure, very
   proper, to say no more.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVI.

   That no bishop, presbyter or deacon should be a "conductor;" and that
   Readers should take wives; and that the clergy should abstain from
   usury; and at what age they or virgins should be consecrated.

   Likewise it seemed good that bishops, presbyters, and deacons should
   not be "conductors" or "procurators;" nor seek their food by any base
   and vile business, for they should remember how it is written, "No man
   fighting for God cumbereth himself with worldly affairs."

   Also it seemed good that Readers when they come to years of puberty,
   should be compelled either to take wives or else to profess continence.

   Likewise it seemed good that if a clergyman had lent money he should
   get it back again, but if kind (speciem) he should receive back the
   same kind as he gave.

   And that younger than twenty-five years deacons should not be ordained,
   nor virgins consecrated.

   And that readers should not salute the people.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of XVI.

   A bishop, presbyter, and deacon may not be a "conductor" or a
   "procurator."  A reader when he comes to puberty must contract marriage
   or profess continence.

   A cleric who has lent to someone, what he gave let him receive, or as
   much.

   Let not him be a deacon, who is made a deacon being under twenty-five.

   And let not readers salute the people.

   This canon is made up of Canons xv., xviij., and xxj., and added to
   these Canon j. of the same Second Series of the synod of Hippo, a.d.
   393.

   Johnson.

   Zonaras says this was never observed anywhere but in Africa.  See Can.
   Afr. 19 (27).

   Du Pin turns the Latin, saluto, by "addressing his speech to the
   people."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVII.

   That any province on account of its distance, may have its own Primate.

   It seemed good that Mauretania Sitiphensis, as it asked, should have a
   Primate of its own, with the consent of the Primate of Numidia from
   whose synod it had been separated. [424]   And with the consent of all
   the primates of the African Provinces and of all the bishops permission
   was given, by reason of the great distance between them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.

   Mauretania Sitiphensis, on account of the great distance, is permitted
   to have its own Primate.

   This canon is Canon iij. of the first series of canons enacted at Hippo
   in 393.

   Johnson.

   N.B.  From this place forward the Latin and Greek numeration varies;
   but Justellus's Edition in Greek and Latin follows the Latin division.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [424] The text here is corrupt.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XVIII.  (Gk. xviii.  The Latin caption is the canon of the
   Greek.)

   If any cleric is ordained he ought to be admonished to observe the
   constitutions.

   And that neither the Eucharist nor Baptism should be given to the
   bodies of the dead.

   And that every year in every province the Metropolitans come together
   in synod.

   (Gk. Canon xix.)

   It seemed good that before bishops, or clerics were ordained, the
   provisions of the canons should be brought to their notice, lest, they
   might afterwards repent of having through ignorance acted contrary to
   law.

   Ancient Epitome of Greek Canon XIX.

   The things which have been adopted by the synods should be made known
   to him who is to be ordained.

   (Gk. Canon xx.)

   It also seemed good that the Eucharist should not be given to the
   bodies of the dead.  For it is written:  "Take, Eat," but the bodies of
   the dead can neither "take" nor "eat."  Nor let the ignorance of the
   presbyters baptize those who are dead.

   Ancient Epitome of Greek Canon XX

   The Eucharist is not to be given to the body of one dead for it neither
   eats nor drinks.

   The ignorance of a presbyter shall not baptize a dead man.

   (Gk. Canon xxi.)

   And therefore in this holy synod should be confirmed in accordance with
   the Nicene decrees, on account of Ecclesiastical causes, which often
   are delayed to the injury of the people, that every year there should
   be a synod, to which all, who are primates of the provinces, should
   send bishops as legates, from their own synods, two or as many as they
   choose; so that when the synod meets it may have full power to act.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Greek Canon XXI.

   According to the decrees of the Nicene Fathers a yearly synod shall be
   assembled, and two legates or as many as they shall choose, shall be
   sent by the primates of every province.

   This is composed of Canons II., IV., and V. of the second series of
   enactments of Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   The 18th canon in the Edition of Tilius and Bishop Beveridge runs thus;
   viz. [If any clergyman be ordained he ought to be reminded to keep the
   canons; and that the Eucharist or Baptism be not given to dead corpses;
   and that the Metropolitans in every province meet in synod yearly.]
   They speak their own language, and call him a Metropolitan, whom the
   Africans called a Primate; but then they have also the entire 18th
   canon, as it here stands according to the Latin, which they divide into
   three, and number them 19, 20, 21.

   See Can. Nic. 5.  It seems very odd that they should allege the
   authority of the Nicene Synod upon this occasion; for that orders a
   synod twice a year, this but once; that intends a provincial synod,
   this a diocesan or national one.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XIX.  (Greek xxii.) [425]

   That if any bishop is accused the cause should be brought before the
   primate of his own province.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  Whatever bishop is accused the accuser
   shall bring the case before the primates of the province to which the
   accused belongs, and he shall not be suspended from communion by reason
   of the crime laid to his charge unless he fails to put in an appearance
   on the appointed day for arguing his cause before the chosen judges,
   having been duly summoned by the letters; that is, within the space of
   one month from the day in which he is found to have received the
   letters.  But should he be able to prove any true necessity which
   manifestly rendered it impossible for him to appear, he shall have the
   opportunity of arguing his case within another full month; but after
   the second month he shall not communicate until he is acquitted.

   But if he is not willing to come to the annual general council, so that
   his cause may there be terminated, he himself shall be judged to have
   pronounced the sentence of his own condemnation at the time in which he
   does not communicate, nor shall he communicate either in his own church
   or diocese.

   But his accuser, if he has not missed any of the days for pleading the
   cause, shall not be shut out from communion; but if he has missed some
   of them, withdrawing himself, then the bishop shall be restored to
   communion and the accuser shall be removed from communion; so,
   nevertheless, that the possibility of going on with the case be not
   taken from him, if he shall prove that his absence was caused by lack
   of power and not by lack of will.

   And this is enacted, that if the accuser turn out to be himself a
   criminal when the case against the bishop has come to argument, he
   shall not be allowed to testify unless he asserts that the causes are
   personal and not ecclesiastical.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.

   A bishop accused and haled to judgment shall have the space of two
   months; if there is any excuse [426] for his delay from the other
   side.  But after this he shall be excommunicated if he does not
   appear.  But if when the accused is present the accuser flees, then the
   accuser shall be deprived of communion.  But the accuser who is
   infamous shall not be an accuser at all.

   This canon is made up from Canons VI. and VII. of the last mentioned
   second series of the enactments of Hippo, 393.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Afr. 28 and Can. Ap. 11 (14).

   By this ["Universal Synod"] is meant a National Synod of Africa.

   See Can. Constantinople 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [425] For Greek xx. and xxi. see Latin Canon XVIII.

   [426] It would seem that this must be the meaning.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XX.  (Greek xxiii.)

   Of accused presbyters or clerks.

   But if presbyters or deacons shall have been accused, there shall be
   joined together from the neighbouring places with the bishop of the
   diocese, the legitimate number of colleagues, whom the accused shall
   seek from the same; that is together with himself six in the case
   against a presbyter, in that against a deacon three.  They shall
   discuss the causes, and the same form shall be kept with regard to days
   and postponements and removals from communion, and in the discussion of
   persons between the accusers and the accused.

   But the causes of the rest of the clergy, the bishop of the place shall
   take cognizance of and determine alone.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

   When a presbyter is accused, six of the neighbouring bishops together
   with the bishop of that region shall judge the matter.  But for a
   deacon, three.  What things concern the other clerics even one bishop
   shall examine.

   This is Canon viii. of Hippo, 393.

   Johnson.

   See Canon 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXI.  (Greek xxiv.)

   That the sons of clergymen are not to be joined in marriage with
   heretics.

   Likewise it seemed good that the sons of clergymen should not be joined
   in matrimony with gentiles and heretics.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.

   [The same as the canon.]

   This is Canon xij. of Hippo, 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXII.  (Greek xxv.)

   That bishops or other clergymen shall give nothing to those who are not
   Catholics.

   And that to those who are not Catholic Christians, even if they be
   blood relations, neither bishops nor clergymen shall give anything at
   all by way of donation of their possessions.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.

   Bishops and clergymen shall give nothing of their goods to heretics,
   nor confer aught upon them even if they be their relatives.

   This is Canon xiv. of Hippo, 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXIII.  (Greek xxvi.)

   That bishops shall not go across seas.

   Item, That bishops shall not go beyond seas without consulting the
   bishop of the primatial see of his own province:  so that from him they
   may be able to receive a formed or commendatory letter.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.

   A bishop is not to cross the seas unless he has received from the
   Primate of his region a letter dimissory.

   This is Canon xxvij. of Hippo, 393.

   Johnson.

   See note on Canons of the Apostles, 10 (13). [viz.:]

   [The use of Letters Commendatory was very early in the Church; St. Paul
   mentions them II. Cor. iij. 1.  And it is not easy to be conceived how
   discipline can be restored but by the reviving of this practice.  It is
   surely irregular to admit all chance comers to the Communion, who, for
   aught we know, may stand excommunicated by their own bishop.  Of the
   difference between Commendatory and Pacific and Formal Letters, see
   Can. Chalc., 11; Apost., 25, 26; Ant., 6; Sardic., 13].
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXIV.  (Greek xxvii.)

   That nothing be read in church besides the Canonical Scripture.

   Item, that besides the Canonical Scriptures nothing be read in church
   under the name of divine Scripture.

   But the Canonical Scriptures are as follows:

   Genesis.

   Exodus.

   Leviticus.

   Numbers.

   Deuteronomy.

   Joshua the Son of Nun.

   The Judges.

   Ruth.

   The Kings, iv. books.

   The Chronicles, ij. books.

   Job.

   The Psalter.

   The Five books of Solomon.

   The Twelve Books of the Prophets.

   Isaiah.

   Jeremiah.

   Ezechiel.

   Daniel.

   Tobit.

   Judith.

   Esther.

   Ezra, ij. books.

   Macchabees, ij. books.

   The New Testament.

   The Gospels, iv. books.

   The Acts of the Apostles, j. book.

   The Epistles of Paul, xiv.

   The Epistles of Peter, the Apostle, ij.

   The Epistles of John the Apostle, iij.

   The Epistles of James the Apostle, j.

   The Epistle of Jude the Apostle, j.

   The Revelation of John, j. book.

   Let this be sent to our brother and fellow bishop, Boniface, and to the
   other bishops of those parts, that they may confirm this canon, for
   these are the things which we have received from our fathers to be read
   in church.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.

   Let nothing besides the canonical Scriptures be read in church.

   This is Canon xxxvj. of Hippo., 393.  The last phrase allowing the
   reading of the "passions of the Martyrs" on their Anniversaries is
   omitted from the African code.

   Johnson.

   These two books [i.e. the two Maccabees] are mentioned only in
   Dionysius Exiguus's copy.  See Can. Ap. ult., Can. Laod. ult.

   "Boniface," i.e., Bishop of Rome.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXV.  (Greek xxviii.)

   Concerning bishops and the lower orders who wait upon the most holy
   mysteries.  It has seemed good that these abstain from their wives.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  We add, most dear brethren, moreover,
   since we have heard of the incontinency of certain clerics, even of
   readers, towards their wives, it seemed good that what had been enacted
   in divers councils should be confirmed, to wit, that subdeacons who
   wait upon the holy mysteries, and deacons, and presbyters, as well as
   bishops according to former statutes, [427] should contain from their
   wives, so that they should be as though they had them not and unless
   they so act, let them be removed from office.  But the rest of the
   clergy are not to be compelled to this, unless they be of mature age.
   And by the whole council it was said:  What your holiness has said is
   just, holy, and pleasing to God, and we confirm it.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.

   Those who handle holy things should abstain even from their own wives
   at the times of their ministration.

   This is founded upon Canon iv. of the Council of Carthage, which met
   September 13th, 401, but the provisions are more stringent here,
   subdeacons as well as deacons being constrained to continence.

   Johnson.

   "Times of ministration," so it is explained, Can. Trull., 13, where
   there were several African Bishops present, and allowed of that
   explication; yet Dion. Exig. is not clear, viz., Secundum propria
   statuta.

   By Can. Laod., 23.  Ministers, i.e., sub-deacons, are forbid to touch
   the Holy Vessels, yet here they are said to handle the Mysteries; I
   suppose they might handle the Holy Vessels, etc. before and after the
   celebration, but not during the solemnity; or else the customs of
   several ages and countries differed as to this particular.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [427] The Greek reads "kata tous idious horous," and so it was
   understood at the Council of Trullo, as is evident from Canon XIII, of
   that synod.  The Latin is "secundum propria statuta," but Bruns reads
   "priora."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXVI.  (Greek xxix.)

   That no one should take from the possessions of the Church. [428]

   Likewise it seemed good that no one should sell anything belonging to
   the Church:  that if there was no revenue, and other great necessity
   urged thereto, this might be brought before the Metropolitan of the
   province that he might deliberate with the appointed number of bishops
   whether this should be done:  that if such urgent necessity lay upon
   any church that it could not take counsel beforehand, at least let it
   call together the neighbouring bishops as witnesses, taking care to
   refer all the necessities of his church to the council:  and that if he
   shall not do this, he shall be held as responsible toward God, and as a
   seller in the eye of the council, and he shall have lost thereby his
   honour.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.

   Church goods must not be sold.  If they bring in no revenue they may be
   sold at the will of the bishops.  If the necessity does not allow that
   consultation should take place, he who sells shall call together the
   neighbouring bishops.  If he does not do so he shall be held
   responsible to God and to the Synod.

   This is Canon v. of the Synod of Carthage, Sept. 13th, 401.

   Johnson.

   "Appointed number," i.e., Twelve, see Canon 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [428] Not found in the Greek of Beveridge, but in that given by Labbe.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXVII.  (Greek xxx.)

   Presbyters and deacons convicted of the graver crimes shall not receive
   laying on of hands, like laymen. [429]

   It also was confirmed that if presbyters or deacons were convicted of
   any of the greater crimes on account of which it was necessary that
   they should be removed from the ministry, that hands should not be laid
   upon them as upon penitents, or as upon faithful layman, nor should it
   be permitted that they be baptized over again and then advanced to the
   clerical grade.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVII.

   A presbyter convicted and repenting, is not to be rebaptized as one to
   be advanced, neither as a layman is he to be reordained.

   This is Canon xij. of the before-mentioned Council of Carthage, Sept.
   13th, 401.

   Johnson.

   This canon seems to have been designed to preclude deposed clergymen
   from all possibility of being restored, directly or indirectly.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [429] This found only in Latin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXVIII.  (Greek xxxi.)

   Presbyters, deacons, or clerics, who shall think good to carry appeals
   in their causes across the water shall not at all be admitted to
   communion. [430]

   It also seemed good that presbyters, deacons, and others of the
   inferior clergy in the causes which they had, if they were dissatisfied
   with the judgments of their bishops, let the neighbouring bishops with
   the consent of their own bishop hear them, and let the bishops who have
   been called in judge between them:  but if they think they have cause
   of appeal from these, they shall not betake themselves to judgments
   from beyond seas, but to the primates of their own provinces, or else
   to an universal council, as has also been decreed concerning bishops.
   But whoso shall think good to carry an appeal across the water shall be
   received to communion by no one within the boundaries of Africa.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVIII.

   Clerics who have been condemned, if they take exception to the
   judgment, shall not appeal beyond seas, but to the neighbouring
   bishops, and to their own; if they do otherwise let them be
   excommunicated in Africa.

   This canon is the same as Canon xvij. of the Synod of Carthage of 418,
   but it has some words with regard to appeals which that canon does not
   contain, viz.:  "Aut ad universale conciliam, sicut et de episcopis
   sæpe constitutum est."  This clause, affirming that bishops have often
   been forbidden to appeal across the water from the decisions of the
   African bishops, has caused great perplexity as no such decrees are
   extant.  The Ballerini, to avoid this difficulty, and possibly for
   other reasons, suggest an entirely different meaning to the passage,
   and suppose that it means that "bishops have often been allowed to
   appeal to the Universal Council and now this privilege is extended to
   priests." [431]   But this would seem to be a rather unnatural
   interpretation and Van Espen in his Commentary shews good reason for
   adopting the more evident view.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Afr., 19.

   Clearly the See of Rome is here aimed at, as if Carthage were the place
   designed by Providence to put a stop to the growth of power in
   Christian Rome, as well as heathen.  It is strange, that this canon
   should be received by the Church of Rome in former ages.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [430] This is not found in the Greek of Beveridge.

   [431] Ballerini, edit. S. Leon M., Tom. II., p. 966.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXIX.  (Greek xxxii.)

   If anyone who is excommunicated shall receive communion before his
   cause is heard he brings damnation on himself. [432]

   Likewise it pleased the whole Council that he who shall have been
   excommunicated for any neglect, whether he be bishop, or any other
   cleric, and shall have presumed while still under sentence, and his
   cause not yet heard, to receive communion, he shall be considered by so
   doing to have given sentence against himself.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX.

   One excommunicate who shall communicate before absolution sentences
   himself.

   This canon seems to be founded upon Canon iv. of Antioch.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Ap., 21 (29), Antioch, 4.

   By this canon the criminous bishop is supposed to be excommunicated
   before he comes to have his cause heard by a Synod, or by 12
   neighbouring bishops:  and it is therefore most rational to believe
   that he was thus censured by his Primate.  See Can. Afr., 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [432] Not found in the Greek of Beveridge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXX.  (Greek xxxiii.)

   Concerning the accused or accuser. [433]

   Likewise it seemed good that the accused, or the accusor, if (living in
   the same place as the accused) he fears some evil may be done him by
   the tumultuous multitude, may choose for himself a place near by, where
   the cause may be determined, and where there will be no difficulty in
   producing the witnesses.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX.

   Accuser or accused may select for himself a safe place if he fears
   violence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [433] Found only in Latin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXI.  (Greek xxxiv.)

   If certain clerics advanced by their own bishops are supercilious, let
   them not remain whence they are unwilling to come forth.

   It also seemed good that whoever of the clergy or of the deacons would
   not help the bishop in the necessities of the churches, when he wished
   to lift them to a higher position in his diocese, should no longer be
   allowed to exercise the functions of that grade from which they were
   not willing to be removed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXI.

   Who despises a greater honour shall lose what he hath.

   Johnson.

   It is most probable that this canon is to be understood of deacons
   designed by the bishop to be ordained priests, for the deacons, at
   least in some Churches, were provided of a better maintenance than
   priests; or it may be understood of inferior clergymen, who were
   permitted to marry in the degree they were now in, but would not
   willingly take the order of priest or deacon, because then they were
   prohibited marriage.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXII.  (Greek xxxv.)

   If any poor cleric, no matter what his rank may be, shall acquire any
   property, it shall be subject to the power of the bishop. [434]

   It also seemed good that bishops, presbyters, deacons and any other of
   the clergy, who when they were ordained had no possessions, and in the
   time of their episcopate or after they became clerics, shall purchase
   in their own names lands or any other property, shall be held guilty of
   the crime of intrenching upon the Lord's goods, unless, when they are
   admonished to do so, they place the same at the disposal of the
   Church.  But should anything come to them personally by the liberality
   of anyone, or by succession from some relative, let them do what they
   will with it; if, however, they demand it back again, contrary to what
   they proposed, they shall be judged unworthy of ecclesiastical honour
   as back-sliders.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXII.

   Whoso after his ordination although he has nothing yet buys a field,
   shall give it to the Church, unless he got it by succession from a
   relation or by pure liberality.

   In this canon there is difficulty about the meaning of the phrase "quod
   eorum proposito congruat."  Hardouin suggests that "propositum" is the
   same as "profession," or "calling," and the meaning, were this the
   case, would be that he must employ it as befits his clerical calling.
   Van Espen follows Balsamon and Zonaras in understanding it to mean that
   if he has proposed to employ a part for the Church or for the poor, and
   changes his mind, he is to be deposed; and this meaning I have
   followed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [434] "Of the Church" in Dion. Exig.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXIII.  (Greek xxxvi.)

   That presbyters should not sell the goods of the Church in which they
   are constituted; and that no bishop can rightly use anything the title
   to which vests in the ecclesiastical maternal centre (matrikos).

   It also seemed good that presbyters should not sell the ecclesiastical
   property where they are settled without their bishop's knowledge; and
   it is not lawful for bishops to sell the goods of the Church without
   the council or their presbyters being aware of it.  Nor should the
   bishop without necessity usurp the property of the maternal (matricis)
   Church [nor should a presbyter usurp the property of his own cure
   (tituli)]. [435]

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIII.

   A presbyter is not to sell ecclesiastical property without the consent
   of the bishop.  A bishop is not to sell without the approbation of his
   synod a country property.

   Fuchs (Biblioth. der Kirchenvers., vol. iij., p. 5) thinks the text is
   corrupt in the last sentence and should be corrected by Canon x. of the
   Council of Carthage of 421, so as to read, "that which is left by will
   to a rural church in the diocese must not be applied to the Mother
   Church through the usurpation of the bishop."

   Johnson.

   "Or title."  So I turn the Lat. Titulus for want of a proper English
   word.  It denotes a lesser church in any city or diocese, served by a
   priest.

   "The Mother Church," i.e., The cathedral, the Church in which the
   bishop resides.

   Moreover at this Synod we read all the conciliar decrees of all the
   Province of Africa in the different synods held in the time of Bishop
   Aurelius. [436]

   Concerning the Synod which assembled in Hippo Regio.

   Under the most illustrious consuls, the most glorious Emperor
   Theodosius Augustus for the third time, and Abundantius, on the viij.
   Ides of October, at Hippo Regio, in the secretarium of the Church of
   Peace.  And the rest of the acts of this Synod have not been written
   down here because these constitutions are found set forth above.

   Of the Council of Carthage at which the proconsular bishops were
   appointed legates to the Council at Adrumetum.

   In the consulate of the most glorious emperors--Arcadius for the third
   time and Honorius for the second time, Augustuses, on the vi^th [437]
   day before the Calends of July, at Carthage.  In this council the
   proconsular bishops were chosen as legates to the Council of Adrumetum.

   Of a Council of Carthage at which many statutes were made.

   In the consulate of those most illustrious men, Cæsarius and Atticus,
   on the v^th day before the Calends of September in the secretarium of
   the restored basilica, when Aurelius the bishop, together with the
   bishops, had taken his seat, the deacons also standing by, and Victor
   the old man of Puppiana, Tutus of Migirpa and Evangel of Assuri.

   The Allocution of Aurelius the bishop of Carthage to the bishops.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said: [438]   After the day fixed for the
   council, as ye remember, most blessed brethren, we sat and waited for
   the legations of all the African provinces to assemble upon the day, as
   I have said, set by our missive; but when the letter of our Byzacene
   bishops had been read, that was read to your charity, which they had
   discussed with me who had anticipated the time and day of the council;
   also it was read by our brethren Honoratus and Urban, who are to-day
   present with us in this council, sent as the legation of the
   Sitifensine Province.  For our brother Reginus of the Vege [t]selitane
   [439] Church, [440] the letters sent to my littleness by Crescentian
   and Aurelius, our fellow-bishops, of the first sees of the [two]
   Numidias, in which writings your charity will see with me how they
   promised that either they themselves would be good enough to come or
   else that they would send legates according to custom to this council;
   but this it seems they did not do at all, the legates of Mauritania
   Sitifensis, who had come so great a distance gave notice that they
   could stay no longer; and, therefore, brethren, if it seem good to your
   charity, let the letters of our Byzacene brethren, as also the
   breviary, which they joined to the same letter, be read to this
   assembly, so that if by any chance they are not entirely satisfactory
   to your charity, such things in the breviary may be changed for the
   better after diligent examination.  For this very thing our brother and
   fellow-bishop of the primatial see, a man justly conspicuous for his
   gravity and prudence, Mizonius, demanded in a letter he addressed to my
   littleness.  If therefore it meets with your approval, let there be
   read the things which have been adopted and let each by itself be
   considered by your charity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [435] Only found in the Latin.

   [436] These interludes or "Digressions," as Van Espen calls them, are
   found in Dionysius and in the Greek texts.

   [437] In the Greek this reads xvi^th.

   [438] The text here I suspect is much corrupted.  The Greek and Latin
   do not agree.

   [439] In Gustavus Willmann's Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, vol.
   viii., p. 47, the reading is given as Vegeselitanæ, in one word.  The
   town was Vegesela, and unfortunately there were two towns having the
   same name and not far one from the other.  Cf. map 20, Spruner-Sieglin,
   Atlas Antiquus.

   [440] The verb is lacking.  The Ed. of Migne's Dion. Exig. suggests
   legit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXIV.  (Greek xxxvii.)

   That nothing of those things enacted in the Synod of Hippo is to be
   corrected.

   Bishop Epigonius said:  In this summary (Breviarium) which was adopted
   at the Synod of Hippo, we think nothing should be amended, nor anything
   added thereto except that the day on which the holy Feast of Easter
   falls should be announced in Synod.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIV.

   Nothing is to be corrected in the synod of Hippo, nor anything added
   thereto, except that the time of celebrating Easter should be announced
   in time of synod.

   The first of these introductions is that of the Synod of Hippo in a.d.
   393; the next that of Carthage in a.d. 394, and the third that of the
   same place, held August 28th, a.d. 397.

   This canon (number xxxiv. of the code) is the beginning of Canon v. of
   the last named Synod.

   Johnson.

   See Canons 51 and 73.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXV.  (Greek xxxviii.)

   That bishops or clergymen should not easily set free their sons.

   That bishops or clerics should not easily let their children pass out
   of their power; unless they were secure of their morals and age, that
   their own sins may pertain to them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXV.

   Bishops and clergy shall not set their children free until their morals
   are established.

   This canon is Canon xiij. of the Synod of Hippo a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXVI.  (Greek xxxix.)

   That bishops or clergymen are not to be ordained unless they have made
   all their family Christians.

   None shall be ordained bishop, presbyters, or deacons before all the
   inmates of their houses shall have become Catholic Christians.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVI.

   He shall not be ordained who hath not made all his household orthodox.

   This canon is Canon xvij. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXVII.  (Greek xl.)

   It is not lawful to offer anything in the Holy Mysteries except bread
   and wine mixed with water.

   In the sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord nothing else shall
   be offered than that which the Lord himself ordained, that is to say,
   bread and wine mixed with water.  But let the first-fruits, whether
   honey or milk, be offered on that one most solemn day, as is wont, in
   the mystery of the infants.  For although they are offered on the
   altar, let them have nevertheless their own benediction, that they may
   be distinguished from the sacraments of the Lord's body and blood;
   neither let there be offered as first-fruits anything other than grapes
   and corns.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVII.

   Let bread and wine mixed with water only be offered.

   The text of the Greek here does not exactly agree with the Latin.  The
   Greek reads as follows:  "That in the Holy Mysteries nothing else be
   offered than the body and blood of the Lord, even as the Lord himself
   delivered, that is bread and wine mixed with water."

   Further down with regard to the first-fruits I have followed the Greek
   text which seems decidedly preferable, in fact the Latin is so corrupt
   that Van Espen notes that for the ordinary "offerantur" some mss. read
   "non offerantur."

   This canon is Canon xxiij. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Ap. 2 (3).

   "The Mystery of Infants" of this Quære, all that I have met with are in
   the dark as to this matter.  Dionysius Exiguus's Latin is Lac, etc.
   The Greek stands thus, Eite ;gala k.t.l.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXVIII.  (Greek xli.)

   That clerics or those who are continent shall not visit virgins or
   widows.

   Neither clerics nor those who profess continence should enter the
   houses of widows or virgins without the bidding or consent of the
   bishops or presbyters:  and then let them not go alone, but with some
   other of the clergy, or with those assigned by the bishop or presbyter
   for this purpose; not even bishops and presbyters shall go alone to
   women of this sort, except some of the clergy are present or some other
   grave Christian men.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVIII.

   Clerics and those who are continent shall not go to widows or virgins,
   unless at the bidding of the bishop and presbyter:  and even then not
   alone, but with those with whom presbyters and deacons visit them.

   This canon is canon xxiv. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XXXIX.  (Greek xlii.)

   That a bishop should not be called the chief of the priests. [441]

   That the bishop of the first see shall not be called Prince of the
   Priests or High Priest (Summus Sacerdos) or any other name of this
   kind, but only Bishop of the First See.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIX.

   The first bishop shall not be called Prince of the Priests nor High
   Priest but Bishop of the first see.

   This canon is Canon xxv. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   "The bishop of the Prime See," i.e., The primate.  So Xantippus is
   called bishop of the Prime.  So in Numidia, Nicetius in Mauritania, in
   the original Latin between Can. 85, and Can. 86, and see Can. 86.

   N.B.  Justellus on this canon shews, that Tertullian, Optatus, and
   Augustine, did apply these titles to their own African bishops; and
   therefore supposes, that the meaning of the canon was to suppress the
   flame of vain glory, which proceeded from these sparks of lofty titles.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [441] The Greek reads for "bishop," "a Primate."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XL.  (Greek xliii.)

   Concerning the non-frequenting of taverns by the clergy, except when
   travelling.

   That the clergy are not to enter taverns for eating or drinking, nor
   unless compelled to do so by the necessity of their journey.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XL.

   A cleric on a journey may enter a tavern, otherwise not.

   This canon is Canon xxvj. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLI.  (Greek xliv.)

   That by men who are fasting sacrifices are to be offered to God.

   That the Sacraments of the Altar are not to be celebrated except by
   those who are fasting, except on the one anniversary of the celebration
   of the Lord's Supper; for if the commemoration of some of the dead,
   whether bishops or others, is to be made in the afternoon, let it be
   only with prayers, if those who officiate have already breakfasted.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLI.

   The holy mysteries are not offered except by those who are fasting.

   This canon is Canon xxviij. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   From this canon and the 29th of Trullo, it is evident that by the
   Lord's Supper, the ancients understood the supper going before the
   Eucharist, and not the Eucharist itself, and that on Maunday-Thursday
   [442] yearly, before the Eucharist, they had such a public
   entertainment in imitation of our Saviour's last Paschal Supper.  I
   refer it to the consideration of the learned reader, whether St. Paul,
   by the Deipnon kuriakon, 1 Cor. xi. 20, does not mean this
   entertainment.  For the obvious translation of that verse is, "It is
   not your [duty or business] when you meet together [in the church] to
   eat the Lord's Supper."  He would not have them to eat this supper in
   the public assembly:  "For" (says he) "have ye not houses to eat and
   drink in, or despise ye the Church of God?"  From the 4th age forward,
   the Eucharist was sometimes called the Lord's Supper; but from the
   beginning it was not so.  And even after it did sometimes pass by this
   name, yet at other times this name was strictly used for the previous
   entertainment, as may be seen by this canon, which was made in the 4th
   century.  Further it seems probable, that the Lord's Supper and the
   Love-feast was the same, though it was not usually called the Lord's
   Supper; but only (perhaps) that love-feast, which was made on the day
   of the institution of the Eucharist, which we now call Maundy-Thursday.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [442] This is Johnson's spelling here, but not in the last phrase of
   this same note.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLII.  (Greek xiv.)

   Concerning the not having feasts under any circumstances in churches.

   That no bishops or clerics are to hold feasts in churches, unless
   perchance they are forced thereto by the necessity of hospitality as
   they pass by.  The people, too, as far as possible, are to be
   prohibited from attending such feasts.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLII.

   A cleric is not to feast in a church, unless perchance he is driven
   thereto by the necessity of hospitality.  This also is forbidden to the
   laity.

   This canon is Canon xxix. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLIII.  (Greek xlvi.)

   Concerning penitents.

   That to penitents the times of their penance shall be assigned by the
   will of the bishop according to the difference of their sins; and that
   a presbyter shall not reconcile a penitent without consulting the
   bishop, unless the absence of the bishop urges him necessarily
   thereto.  But when of any penitent the offence has been public and
   commonly known, so as to have scandalized the whole Church, he shall
   receive imposition of the hand before the altar (Lat. "before the
   apse").

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIII.

   The bishops shall fix the time of penance for those doing penance
   according to their sins.  A presbyter without his knowledge shall not
   reconcile one doing penance, even when necessity impels him thereto.
   [443]

   This canon is canon xxx. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   Here [i.e., in translating absidem church-porch] I follow Zonoras; see
   Can. Nic., 11.  Du Pin renders absidem, a high place near the bishop's
   throne.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [443] This last clause seems manifestly to be corrupt and should read
   "unless when, etc."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLIV.  (Greek xlvii.)

   Concerning Virgins.

   That holy virgins when they are separated from their parents by whom
   they have been wont to be guarded, are to be commended by the care of
   the bishop, or presbyter where the bishop is absent, to women of graver
   age, so that [444] living with them they may take care of them, lest
   they hurt the reputation of the Church by wandering about.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIV.

   She who leaves her father for the sake of virginity is to be commended
   to grave women.

   This canon is Canon xxxj. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [444] The Latin is aut.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLV.  (Greek xlviii.)

   Concerning those who are sick and cannot answer for themselves.

   That the sick are to be baptized who cannot answer for themselves if
   their [servants] shall have spoken at their own proper peril a
   testimony of the good will [of the sick man].

   (Greek Canon xlix.)

   Concerning players who are doing penance and are converted to the Lord.
   [445]

   That to players and actors and other persons of that kind, as also to
   apostates when they are converted [446] and return to God, grace or
   reconciliation is not to be denied.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLV.

   That he who cannot answer for himself on account of illness is to be
   baptized when he shall have given evidence of his desire.

   A repentant actor is to be received to penance.

   This canon is made up of Canons xxxij. and xxxiij. of the Synod of
   Hippo, a.d. 393.

   Johnson.

   "Apostates," i.e., those who elsewhere are called Lapsi; those who had
   done sacrifice through the violence of torment in time of persecution,
   professing in the meantime that their consciences did not consent to
   what their hands did.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [445] Found only in the Greek.

   [446] In the Greek "doing penance."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLVI.  (Greek l.)

   Concerning the passions of the martyrs.

   The passions of the Martyrs may be read when their anniversary days are
   celebrated.

   Note.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVI.

   The passions of the martyrs are to be read on their commemorations.

   This canon is the last part of Canon xxxvj. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d.
   393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLVII.  (Greek li.)

   Concerning [the Donatists and [447] ] the children baptized by the
   Donatists.

   Concerning the Donatists [448] it seemed good that we should hold
   counsel with our brethren and fellow priests Siricius and Simplician
   concerning those infants alone who are baptized by Donatists: [449]
   lest what they did not do of their own will, when they should be
   converted to the Church of God with a salutary determination, the error
   of their parents might prevent their promotion to the ministry of the
   holy altar.

   But when these things had been begun, Honoratus and Urbanus, bishops of
   Mauritania Sitifensis, said:  When some time ago we were sent to your
   holiness, we laid aside what things had been written on this account,
   that we might wait for the arrival of our brethren the legates from
   Numidia.  But because not a few days have passed in which they have
   been looked for and as yet they are not arrived, it is not fitting that
   we should delay any longer the commands we received from our
   brother-bishops; and therefore, brethren, receive our story with
   alacrity of mind.  We have heard concerning the faith of the Nicene
   tractate:  True it is that sacrifices are to be forbidden after
   breakfast, so that they may be offered as is right by those who are
   fasting, and this has been confirmed then and now.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVII.

   When those in infancy baptized by Donatists are converted, this shall
   be no impediment to them.  And the Holy Mysteries, as is right, are to
   be celebrated only by them fasting.

   This canon is made from Canon xxxvij. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393,
   and from Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage of August 28th, a.d. 397.

   Johnson.

   See Can. 41.

   The pretence that the Donatists had for making a schism was, that
   Cæcilian, Bishop of Carthage, had, in the time of persecution, been a
   Traditor, i.e., given up the Bible to the heathen inquisitors; this was
   denied by the Orthodox, who charged them with the same crime in effect,
   viz. of being too favourable to the Traditors, and those that had
   lapsed.  They likewise are charged with Arianism.

   I have omitted what is here mentioned concerning the Council of Nice;
   because I do not find that any one has been able to penetrate into the
   meaning of the Fathers as to that particular.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [447] Found only in the Greek.

   [448] Not in the Greek.

   [449] Latin reads "among them" instead of "by Donatists."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLVIII.  (Greek lii.)

   Of rebaptisms, reordinations, and translations of bishops.

   But we suggest that we decree what was set forth by the wisdom of the
   plenary synod at Capua, that no rebaptisings, nor reordinations should
   take place, and that bishops should not be translated.  For Cresconius,
   bishop of Villa Regis, left his own people and invaded the Church of
   Tubinia and having been admonished down to this very day, to leave,
   according to the decree, the diocese he had invaded, he treated the
   admonition with disdain.  We have heard that the sentence pronounced
   against him has been confirmed; but we seek, according to our decree,
   that ye deign to grant that being driven thereto by necessity, it be
   free to us to address the rector of the province against him, according
   to the statutes of the most glorious princes, so that whoever is not
   willing to acquiesce in the mild admonition of your holiness and to
   amend his lawlessness, shall be immediately cast out by judicial
   authority.  Aurelius the bishop said:  By the observance of the
   constituted form, let him not be judged to be a member of the synod, if
   he has been asked by you, dear brethren, to depart and has refused:
   for out of his own contempt and contumacy he has fallen to the power of
   the secular magistrate. [450]   Honoratus and Urban the bishops said:
   This pleases us all, does it not?  And all the bishops answered:  It is
   just, it pleases us.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVIII.

   Let there be no rebaptisms, nor reordinations nor translations of
   bishops.  Therefore let Cresconius be forbidden by judicial authority,
   for he has left his own people, and has taken possession of the diocese
   of Ceneum, although ecclesiastically admonished that he was not to
   change.

   This canon is Canon j., of the Synod of Carthage of August 28th. a.d.
   397.  The acts of this synod were first accurately edited by the
   Ballerini (in their edition of the works of St. Leo) and were printed
   by Mansi, in an amended form, in his Concilia.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [450] I have followed the Greek text here, the Latin is very confused.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XLIX.  (Greek liii.)

   How many bishops there should be to ordain a bishop.

   Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said:  We have issued this command,
   that (because lately two of our brethren, bishops of Numidia, presumed
   to ordain a pontiff,) only by the concurrence of twelve bishops the
   ordination of bishops be celebrated.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  The
   ancient form shall be preserved, that not less than three suffice who
   shall have been designated for ordaining the bishop.  Moreover, because
   in Tripoli, and in Arzug the barbarians are so near, for it is asserted
   that in Tripoli there are but five bishops, and out of that number two
   may be occupied by some necessity; but it is difficult that all of the
   number should come together at any place whatever; ought this
   circumstance to be an impediment to the doing of what is of utility to
   the Church?  For in this Church, to which your holiness has deigned to
   assemble [451] we frequently have ordinations and nearly every Lord's
   day; could I frequently summon twelve, or ten, or about that number of
   bishops?  But it is an easy thing for me to join a couple of neighbours
   to my littleness.  Wherefore your charity will agree with me that this
   cannot be observed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIX.

   Fewer than three bishops do not suffice for the ordination of a bishop.

   This is Canon ij., of the Synod of Carthage, August 28th, 397.

   Johnson.

   See Can. 13.

   The occasion of this canon was a complaint that two bishops in Numidia
   had presumed to ordain a third; upon which it was proposed that not
   less than twelve should perform this office:  But Aurelius, Bishop of
   Carthage, desires that the old form might be observed, and three
   bishops be sufficient; especially, because in Tripoli, where there were
   but five bishops in all, it would be hard to get more than three
   together.  And he adds, that though it were no hard matter for him to
   get two bishops to assist him in his ordinations at Carthage, yet it
   would not be practicable for him to get twelve:  "For," says he, "we
   have frequently, and almost every Sunday, men to be ordained."  He must
   mean bishops for otherwise it had been nothing to his purpose, because
   he could ordain priests or deacons by himself, without the assistance
   of other bishops:  and yet it is very strange, that ordinations of
   bishops should be so frequent as to bear that expression of "almost
   every Sunday."  There were indeed above one hundred bishoprics in his
   Province; but these could not occasion above six or eight ordinations
   in a year; but it is probable that the privilege belonging to him, Can.
   55, brought very many ordinations to the church of Carthage; for it is
   evident, there was a great scarcity of men fit for the Episcopal office
   in Africa.  It is further evident from this canon, that bishops were
   not ordained in the church of their own see, but in that of the
   Primate.  See Can. Ant., 19.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [451] Notice the African use of the phrase, convenire ad.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon L.  (Greek liv.)

   How many bishops should be added to the number of those ordaining, if
   any opposition had been made to the one to be ordained.

   But this should be decreed, that when we shall have met together to
   choose a bishop, if any opposition shall arise, because such things
   have been treated by us, the three shall not presume to purge [452] him
   who was to be ordained, but one or two more shall be asked to be added
   to the aforesaid number, and the persons of those objecting shall first
   be discussed in the same place (plebe) for which he was to be
   ordained.  And last of all the objections shall be considered; and only
   after he has been cleared in the public sight shall he at last be
   ordained.  If this agrees with the mind of your holiness, let it be
   confirmed by the answer of your worthiness.  All the bishops said, We
   are well pleased.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon L.

   If any controversy arise concerning a bishop who has been elected by
   three bishops, let two others be coöpted, and so let there be an
   examination made of his affairs; and if it shall appear that he is
   pure, let him be ordained.

   This canon is Canon iij., of the Synod of Carthage, Aug. 28th, 397.

   Johnson.

   Here the bishops meet to choose a new one, and it is evident by the
   foregoing canon, that they met not in the vacant church, but in that of
   the Primate; and that therefore not the people, but the bishops had the
   chief share in the election.  The people might make their objections,
   which supposes they knew who their intended bishop was; but the bishops
   were the judges of the cause.  And it seems probable, that if there
   were any dispute, some of the bishops went to the vacant church to hear
   the allegations against the person that was elected, or proposed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [452] The Greek reads "to depose him," and varies considerably from the
   Latin.  I have followed the Latin but confess that in part I have
   failed to catch a meaning.  The Greek is perfectly clear, as usual.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LI.  (Greek lv.)

   That the date of Easter is to be announced by the Church of Carthage.

   Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said:  Since all things treated by
   our commonitory are known, [453] we add also what has been ordered
   concerning the day of Easter, that we be informed of the date always by
   the Church of Carthage, as has been accustomed and that no short time
   before.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  If it seems good to your
   holiness, since we remember that we pledged ourselves sometime ago that
   every year we would come together for discussion, when we assemble,
   then let the date of the holy Easter be announced through the legates
   present at the Council.  Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said:  Now
   we seek of the present assembly that ye deign to inform our province of
   that day by letters.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  It is necessary it
   should be so.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LI.

   Let the day on which Easter is to be kept be announced by the Church of
   Carthage in the annual synod.

   This canon is the first part of Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage,
   August 28th, 397.

   Johnson.

   The synod met in August.  See Can. 73.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [453] The Latin "noscuntur" is almost certainly corrupt, Van Espen
   suggests "absoluta sunt" as the meaning.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LII.  (Greek lvi.)

   Of visiting provinces.

   Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said:  This was commanded to us in
   word, that because it had been decreed in the Council of Hippo that
   each province should be visited in the time of the council, that ye
   also deign that this year or next, according to the order ye have drawn
   up, you should visit the province of Mauritania.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  Of the province of Mauritania because it
   is situated in the confines of Africa, we have made no decree, for they
   are neighbours of the barbarians; but God grant (not however that I
   make any rash promise of doing so), we may be able to come to your
   province.  For ye should consider, brethren, that this same thing our
   brethren of Tripoli and of the Arzuges region [454] could demand also,
   if occasion offered.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LII.

   As the Synod at Hippo decreed, every province should be visited in an
   annual Synod.

   This canon is the last part of canon iv. of the Council of Carthage,
   August 28th, a.d. 397.

   Johnson.

   The manner of visiting provinces, and that annually; and the persons by
   whom this visitation was performed, can scarce now be discovered; only
   it appears, by the words of Aurelius, that the Bishop of Carthage was
   one, if not the only visitor; but it was impossible that he could visit
   all the provinces in Africa personally every year, he must use
   delegates.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [454] Vide Corripus (Partsch's ed.) Johannid in Mon. Germ. Hist. (in
   the Series Auctores Antiquissimi), Proem, p. xiv.  It seems from
   Orosius that the same province was called Tripolitana and Regio
   Arzugum, and that Arzuges was a race name of wider application.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LIII.  (Greek lvii.)

   That dioceses should not receive a bishop except by the consent of its
   own bishop.

   Epigonius, the bishop, said:  In many councils it has been decreed by
   the sacerdotal assembly that such communities as are contained in other
   dioceses and ruled by their bishops, and which never had any bishops of
   their own, should not receive rulers, that is bishops, for themselves
   except with the consent of the bishop under whose jurisdiction they
   have been.  But because some who have attained a certain domination
   abhor the communion of the brethren, or at least, having become
   depraved, claim for themselves domination with what is really tyranny,
   for the most part tumid and stolid presbyters, who lift up their heads
   against their own bishops or else win the people to themselves by
   feasting them or by malignant persuasion, that they may by unlawful
   favour wish to place themselves as rulers over them; we indeed hold
   fast that glorious desire of your mind, most pious brother Aurelius,
   for thou hast often opposed these things, paying no heed to such
   petitioners; but on account of their evil thoughts and basely conceived
   designs this I say, that such a community, which has always been
   subject in a diocese, ought not to receive a rector, nor should it ever
   have a bishop of its own.  Therefore if this which I have proposed
   seems good to the whole most holy council, let it be confirmed.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  I am not in opposition to the proposition
   of our brother and fellow bishop:  but I confess that this has been and
   shall be my practice concerning those who were truly of one mind, not
   only with regard to the Church of Carthage, but concerning every
   sacerdotal assemblage.  For there are many who, as has been said,
   conspire with the people whom they deceive, tickling their ears and
   blandly seducing them, men of vicious lives, or at least puffed up and
   separated from this meeting, who think to watch over their own people,
   and never come to our council for fear that their wickedness should be
   discussed.  I say, if it seems good, that not only should these not
   keep their dioceses, but that every effort should be made to have them
   expelled by public authority from that church of theirs which has
   evilly favoured them, and that they be removed even from the chief
   sees.  For it is right that he who cleaves to all the brethren and the
   whole council, should possess with full right not only his church but
   also the dioceses.  But they who think that the people suffice them and
   spurn the love of the brethren, shall not only lose their dioceses, but
   (as I have said,) they shall be deprived by public authority of their
   own cures as rebels.  Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said:  The
   lofty provision of your holiness obtains the adherence of the minds of
   all of us, and I think that by the answer of all what you have deigned
   to propose will be confirmed.  All the bishops said:  Placet, placet.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LIII.

   Whoso shall neglect his call to a synod, and shall despise the charity
   of his brethren, putting his trust in the multitude who are with him,
   let him be deprived of them by the imperial authority.

   This canon is Canon v. of the Synod of Carthage of August 28th, a.d.
   397, beginning with the second clause.

   Johnson.

   It is very evident that a diocese here signifies some town or village
   lying remote from the Bishop's City, but belonging to his jurisdiction;
   and is to be understood to be a place distinct from the bishop's church
   or cathedral.

   See also Can. 56 and Decr. Anast., 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LIV.  (Greek lviii.)

   That a strange cleric is under no circumstances to be received by
   another.

   Epigonius, the bishop, said:  This has been decreed in many councils,
   also just now it has been confirmed by your prudence, most blessed
   brethren, that no bishop should receive a strange cleric into his
   diocese without the consent of the bishop to whose jurisdiction the
   cleric belongs.  But I say that Julian, who is ungrateful for the
   layouts bestowed upon him by God through my littleness, is so rash and
   audacious, that a certain man who was baptized by me, when he was a
   most needy boy, commended to me by the same, and when for many years he
   had been fed and reared by me, it is certain that this one, as I have
   said, was baptized in my church, by my own unworthy hands; this same
   man began to exercise the office of reader in the Mappalien diocese,
   and read there for nearly two years, with a most incomprehensible
   contempt of my littleness, the aforenamed Julian took this man, whom he
   declared to be a citizen of his own city Vazarita, and without
   consulting me ordained him deacon.  If, most blessed brethren, that is
   permissible, let it be declared to us; but if not, let such an impudent
   one be restrained that he may in no way mix himself in someone's
   communion.

   Numidius, the bishop, said:  If, as it seems, Julian did this without
   your worthiness being asked for his consent, nor even consulted, we all
   judge that this was done iniquitously and unworthily.  Wherefore unless
   Julian shall correct his error, and shall return the cleric to your
   people with proper satisfaction, since what he did was contrary to the
   decrees of the council, let him be condemned and separated from us on
   account of his contumacy.  Epigonius, the bishop, said:  Our father in
   age, and most ancient by his promotion, that laudable man, our brother
   and colleague Victor wishes that this petition should be made general
   to all.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV.

   Since Julian has ordained a reader of Epigonius's to the diaconate,
   unless he shall shew authority received from him to do so, he shall
   increase the penalty of his contumacy.

   This canon is Canon vj. of the Synod of Carthage, August 28th, a.d.
   397.

   Johnson.

   See Canon of the Apostles, 12 (15, 16), and Chalcedon, 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LV.  (Greek lix.)

   That it be lawful for the bishop of Carthage to ordain a cleric
   whenever he wishes.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  My brethren, pray allow me to speak.  It
   often happens that ecclesiastics who are in need seek deacons
   [præpositis in the Latin], or presbyters or bishops from me:  and I,
   bearing in mind what things have been ordained these I observe, to wit,
   I summon the bishop of the cleric who is sought for, and I shew him the
   state of affairs, how that they of a certain church ask for a certain
   one of his clergy.  Perchance then they make no objection, but lest it
   happen that afterwards they might object when in this case they shall
   have been demanded (postulati) by me, who (as you know) have the care
   of many churches and of the ordinands.  It is right therefore that I
   should summon a fellow bishop with two or three witnesses from our
   number.  But if he be found indevotus [akathosiotos], what does your
   charity think should be done?  For I, as ye know, brethren, by the
   condescension of God have the care of all the churches.

   Numidius, the bishop, said: [455]   This see always had the power of
   ordaining a bishop according to the desire of each Church as he wills
   and on whose name there was agreement (fuisset conventus).  Epigonius,
   the bishop, said:  Your good nature makes small use of your powers, for
   you make much less use of them than you might, since, my brother, you
   are good and gentle to all; for you have the power, but it is far from
   your practice to satisfy the person of each bishop in prima tantummodo
   conventione.  But if it should be thought that the rights of this see
   ought to be vindicated, you have the duty of supporting all the
   churches, wherefore we do not give thee power, but we confirm that
   power thou hast, viz.:  that thou hast the right at thy will always to
   choose whom thou wilt, to constitute [456] prelates over peoples and
   churches who shall have asked thee to do so, and when thou so
   desirest.  Posthumianus, the bishop, said:  Would it be right that he
   who had only one presbyter should have that one taken away from him?
   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  But there may be one bishop by whom many
   presbyters can be made through the divine goodness, but one fit to be
   made bishop is found with difficulty.  Wherefore if any bishop has a
   presbyter necessary for the episcopate and has one only, my brother, as
   you have said, even that one he ought to give up for promotion.
   Posthumianus, the bishop, said:  If some other bishop has plenty of
   clergy, should that other diocese come to my help?  Aurelius, the
   bishop, said:  Of course, when you have come to the help of another
   Church, he who has many clerics should be persuaded to make one over to
   you for ordination.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LV.

   It is lawful for the bishop of Carthage, whenever he wills, to choose
   those who are to be set over the churches:  even if there were only one
   presbyter worth of rule.  For one bishop can ordain many presbyters,
   but one fit for the episcopate is hard to find.

   This canon is the first half of Canon vij. of the Council of Carthage
   held August 28th a.d. 397.

   Johnson.

   It is evident, that this privilege of the Bishop of Carthage extended
   to the whole African diocese or the six provinces of Africa, which
   contained near five hundred bishoprics.  This was what caused such
   frequent ordinations of bishops in the Church of Carthage (See Can.
   Afr. 49, and the Note).  And it is further apparent, that the Bishop of
   Carthage had some power over the whole African church, and was probably
   their visitor (See Can. 52).  But that he had the sole power of
   ordaining bishops for every church, with the assistance of any two
   bishops, does not appear, though Justellus is of this opinion; nay, the
   49th canon proves that he had it not.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [455] The meaning of this whole canon is very obscure, the text is
   almost certainly corrupt; and the Greek in many places in no way
   corresponds to the Latin.

   [456] Migne's text reads this negatively "ut non constituas," but I
   have followed Labbe and Cossart and have omitted the "non."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LVI.  (Greek lx.)

   That bishops who were ordained for dioceses shall not choose for
   themselves dioceses [in the Greek provinces].

   Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said:  We have heard that it has been
   decreed that dioceses should not be deemed fit to receive bishops,
   unless with the consent of their founder:  but in our province since
   some have been ordained bishops in the diocese, by the consent of that
   bishop by whose power they were established, have even seized dioceses
   for themselves, this should be corrected by the judgment of your
   charity, and prohibited for the future.  Epigonius, the bishop, said:
   To every bishop should be reserved what is right, so that from the mass
   of dioceses no part should be snatched away, so as to have its own
   bishop, without consent from the proper authority.  For it shall
   suffice, if the consent be given, that the diocese thus set apart have
   its own bishop only, and let him [457] not seize other dioceses, for
   only the one cut off from the many merited the honour of receiving a
   bishop.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  I do not doubt that it is
   pleasing to the charity of you all, that he who was ordained for a
   diocese by the consent of the bishop who held the mother see, should
   retain only the people for whom he was ordained.  Since therefore I
   think that everything has been treated of, if all things are agreeable
   to your mind, pray confirm them all by your suffrage.  All the bishops
   said:  We all are well pleased, and we have confirmed them with our
   subscription.  And they signed their names.

   I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this
   decree, and have subscribed what has been read.  So too did all the
   other bishops in like fashion sign.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LVI.

   If any diocese has received consent to have a bishop of its own from
   him who has the right, that one shall not invade the rest of the
   dioceses.

   This is the last part of Canon vij. of the Synod of Carthage, August
   28, a.d. 397.

   Johnson.

   It had scarce been worth while to give so much of this canon in English
   if I had not thought it proper, in order to confirm the sense of the
   word diocese, mentioned in note on Can. 53, viz., a town or village,
   where there is a church subject to the bishop of the city.

   Between this canon and the following, there is a reference to a former
   council at Carthage forbidding bishops to sail, without a formal letter
   from the Primate; and this said to be done when Cæsarius and Atticus
   were consuls, anno æræ vulg. 397, and there is mention of an embassy of
   two bishops from a council of Carthage to the Emperors, to procure the
   privilege of sanctuary to all impeached for any crime, if they fled to
   the Church.  This is said to be done when Honorius and Eutychianus were
   consuls, anno æræ vulg. 398.  And further, here is an account of a
   bishop sent legate to Anastasius, Bishop of the Apostolical see, and
   Venerius of Milan, to supply the African Church with men fit to be
   ordained.  For Aurelius complains that many Churches have not so much
   as one man, not so much as an illiterate one, in deacon's orders, much
   less had they a competent number of men for the superior dignities.  He
   speaks of the importunate clamours of many people, that were themselves
   almost killed, I suppose, by some common pestilence.

   In this council it was decreed that bishops should not travel by sea
   without formed letters.

   During the consulate of those illustrious men, Cæsar and Atticus, on
   the sixth before the Calends of July, at Carthage, it seemed good that
   no bishop should travel by water without "formed letters" from the
   Primate.  The authentic acts will be found by him who seeks them.

   In this council, bishops whose names are set down hereafter were sent
   as legates to the Emperor.

   After the consulate of the most glorious Emperor Honorius Augustus for
   the fourth time, and of the renowned Eutychian, on the fifth of the
   calends of May, at Carthage in the secretarium of the restored
   basilica.  In this council Epigonius and Vincent, the bishops, received
   a legation, in order that they might obtain a law from the most
   glorious princes in behalf of those taking refuge in the Church,
   whatever might be the crime of which they were accused, that no one
   should dare to force them away.

   In this council a legation was sent to the Bishops of Rome and Milan
   with regard to children baptized by heretics, and to the Emperor with
   regard to having such idols as still remained taken away, and also with
   regard to many other matters.

   After the consulate of the renowned Flabius Stilico, on the sixteenth
   of the calends of July, at Carthage in the secretarium of the restored
   basilica.

   When Aurelius, the Bishop, together with his fellow-bishops had taken
   their seats, the deacons standing by, Aurelius, the Bishop, said:  Your
   charity, most holy brethren, knows fully as well as I do the
   necessities of the churches of God throughout Africa.  And since the
   Lord has vouchsafed that from a part of your holy company this present
   assembly should be convened, it seems to me that these necessities
   which in the discharge of our solicitude we have discovered, we ought
   to consider together.  And afterwards, that there should be chosen a
   bishop from our number who may, with the help of the Lord and your
   prayers, assume the burden of these necessities, and zealously
   accomplish whatever ought to be done in the premises, going to the
   parts of Italy across seas, that he may acquaint our holy brethren and
   fellow-bishops, the venerable and holy brother Anastasius, bishop of
   the Apostolic see, and also our holy brother Venerius the Bishop of
   Milan, with our necessity and grief, and helplessness.  For there has
   been withheld from these sees the knowledge of what was necessary to
   provide against the common peril, especially that the need of clergy is
   so great that many churches are in such destitution as that not so much
   as a single deacon or even an unlettered clerk is to be found.  I say
   nothing of the superior orders and offices, because if, as I have said,
   the ministry of a deacon is not easily to be had, it is certainly much
   more difficult to find one of the superior orders.  [And let them also
   tell these bishops] that we can no longer bear to hear the daily
   lamentations of the different peoples almost ready to die, and unless
   we do our best to help them, the grievous and inexcusable cause of the
   destruction of innumerable souls will be laid at our door before God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [457] The common reading "vindicent" is almost certainly wrong, and is
   not even mentioned by Bruns.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LVII.  (Greek lxi.)

   That persons baptized when children by the Donatists may be ordained
   clergymen in the Catholic Church.

   Since in the former council it was decreed, as your unanimity remembers
   as well as I do, that those who as children were baptized by the
   Donatists, and not yet being able to know the pernicious character of
   their error, and afterward when they had come to the use of reason, had
   received the knowledge of the truth, abhorred their former error, and
   were received, (in accordance with the ancient order) by the imposition
   of the hand, into the Catholic Church of God spread throughout the
   world, that to such the remembrance of the error ought to be no
   impediment to the reception of the clerical office.  For in coming to
   faith they thought the true Church to be their own and there they
   believed in Christ, and received the sacraments of the Trinity.  And
   that all these sacraments are altogether true and holy and divine is
   most certain, and in them the whole hope of the soul is placed,
   although the presumptuous audacity of heretics, taking to itself the
   name of the truth, dares to administer them.  They are but one after
   all, as the blessed Apostle tells us, saying:  "One God, one faith, one
   baptism," and it is not lawful to reiterate what once only ought to be
   administered.  [Those therefore who have been so baptized] having
   anathematized their error may be received by the imposition of the hand
   into the one Church, the pillar as it is called, and the one mother of
   all Christians, where all these Sacraments are received unto salvation
   and everlasting life; even the same sacraments which obtain for those
   persevering in heresy the heavy penalty of damnation.  So that which to
   those who are in the truth lighteneth to the obtaining of eternal life,
   the same to them who are in error tends but to darkness and damnation.
   With regard then to those who, having fled from error, acknowledge the
   breasts of their mother the Catholic Church, who believe and receive
   all these holy mysteries with the love of the truth, and besides the
   Sacraments have the testimony of a good life, there is no one who would
   not grant that without doubt such persons may be raised to the clerical
   office, especially in such necessity as the present.  But there are
   others of this sect, who being already clergymen, desire to pass to us
   with their peoples and also with their honours, such as for the sake of
   office are converts to life, and that they may retain them seek for
   salvation [i.e., enter the Church].  I think that the question
   concerning such may be left to the graver consideration of our
   aforesaid brothers, and that when they have considered by their more
   prudent counsel the matter referred to them, they may vouchsafe to
   advise us what approves itself to them with regard to this question.
   Only concerning those who as children were baptized by heretics we
   decree that they consent, if it seems good, to our decision concerning
   the ordination of the same.  All things, therefore, which we have set
   forth above with the holy bishops, let your honourable fraternity with
   me adjudge to be done.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LVII.

   Such as have been while children baptized by the Donatists may be
   ordained should they repent, anathematize their heresy, and be
   otherwise worthy.

   Of the three Introductions to Carthaginian Councils which precede this
   canon, the first refers to the synod held June 26, a.d. 397; the second
   to that held April 27, a.d. 399; and the third to that of June 15 (or
   16), a.d. 401.

   The canon is Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage of June 15 (or 16), a.d.
   401.  The eight other canons of this synod follow in the African Code
   in their own order.

   Johnson.

   See Can. 47, which was made in a former synod.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LVIII.  (Greek lxii.)

   Of the remaining idols or temples which should be done away by the
   Emperors.

   Wherefore the most religious Emperors should be asked [458] that they
   order the remaining idols to be taken entirely away throughout all
   Africa; for in many maritime places and in divers possessions the
   iniquity of this error still flourishes:  that they command them to be
   taken away and their temples, (such as are no ornament, being set up in
   fields or out of the way places) be ordered to be altogether destroyed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LVIII.

   The remains of the idols should be abolished altogether.

   This is Canon ij. of the Synod of Carthage of June 15 (16), a.d. 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [458] I have followed the Greek text.  The Latin reads:  "Instant etiam
   aliæ necessitates religiosis imperitoribus postulandæ."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LIX.  (Greek lxiii.)

   That clerics be not compelled to give testimony in public concerning
   the cognizance of their own judgment.

   It should be petitioned also that they deign to decree, that if
   perchance any shall have been willing to plead their cause in any
   church according to the Apostolic law imposed upon the Churches, and it
   happens that the decision of the clergy does not satisfy one of the
   parties, it be not lawful to summon that clergyman who had been
   cognitor or present, [459] into judgment as a witness, and that no
   person attached to any ecclesiastic be compelled to give testimony.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LIX.

   A cleric who has decided a case shall not, if it be displeasing, be
   summoned to a tribunal to give evidence concerning it; and no
   ecclesiastical person shall be forced to give testimony.

   This is Canon iij. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16). a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   "According to the Apostolic law," viz., that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. vi. 1,
   2, etc.  I follow the Greek scholia in rendering this canon.  In Latin
   cognitor is he that is solicitor, or advocate, rather than the judge
   who takes cognizance.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [459] This must mean "who had heard the cause or been present at the
   hearing," and so the Greek has it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LX.  (Greek lxiii.)

   Of heathen feasts.

   This also must be sought, that (since contrary to the divine precepts
   feasts are held in many places, which have been induced by the heathen
   error, so that now Christians are forced to celebrate these by
   heathens, from which state of things it happens that in the times of
   the Christian Emperors a new persecution seems to have secretly
   arisen:)  they order such things to be forbidden and prohibit them from
   cities and possessions under pain of punishment; especially should this
   be done since they do not fear to commit such iniquities in some cities
   even upon the natal days of most blessed martyrs, and in the very
   sacred places themselves.  For upon these days, shame to say, they
   perform the most wicked leapings throughout the fields and open places,
   so that matronal honour and the modesty of innumerable women who have
   come out of devotion for the most holy day are assaulted by lascivious
   injuries, so that all approach to holy religion itself is almost fled
   from.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LX.

   The Greek feasts must cease to be kept, because of their impropriety,
   and because they seduce many Christians, moreover they are celebrated
   on the commemorations of the martyrs.

   This is Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage, Aug. 15 (or 16), a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   Bishop Beveridge and Tilius's edition of these canons, in Greek and
   Latin, number the two preceding canons as I have done in the margin,
   with the same figures [viz.:  63].  I follow them in this error because
   by this means the reader may more readily be referred from the Latin
   original and from this English translation to the Greek.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXI.  (Greek lxiv.)

   Of spectacles, that they be not celebrated on Lord's days nor on the
   festivals of the Saints.

   Furthermore, it must be sought that theatrical spectacles and the
   exhibition of other plays be removed from the Lord's day and the other
   most sacred days of the Christian religion, especially because on the
   octave day of the holy Easter [i.e., Low Sunday] the people assemble
   rather at the circus than at church, and they should be transferred to
   some other day when they happen to fall upon a day of devotion, nor
   shall any Christian be compelled to witness these spectacles, [460]
   especially because in the performance of things contrary to the
   precepts of God there should be no persecution made by anyone, but (as
   is right) a man should exercise the free will given him by God.
   Especially also should be considered the peril of the cooperators who,
   contrary to the precepts of God, are forced by great fear to attend the
   shews.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXI.

   There shall be no theatrical representations upon Lord's days or feast
   days.

   This is Canon V. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15th (16), a.d. 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [460] Here ends the Greek text.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXII.  (Greek lxv.)

   Of condemned clerics.

   And this should be sought, that they deign to decree that if any
   clergyman of whatever rank shall have been condemned by the judgment of
   the bishops for any crime, he may not be defended either by the
   churches over which he presided, nor by anyone whatever, under pain of
   loss both of money and office, and let them order that neither age nor
   sex be received as an excuse.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXII.

   No one shall justify a clergyman condemned by his own bishop.

   This is Canon vj. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), a.d. 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXIII.  (Greek lxvi.)

   Of players who have become Christians.

   And of them also it must be sought that if anyone wishes to come to the
   grace of Christianity from any ludicrous art (ludicra arte) and to
   remain free of that stain, it be not lawful for anyone to induce him or
   compel him to return to the performance of the same things again.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIII.

   Whoever has turned away from the stage to adopt an honest life, shall
   not be led back thereto.

   This is Canon vij. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   This canon is probably to be understood of slaves bought by their
   masters for the service of the Circ, or Theatre.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXIV.  (Greek lxvii.)

   Of celebrating manumissions in church, that permission be asked from
   the Emperor.

   Concerning the publishing of manumissions in church, if our fellow
   bishops throughout Italy shall be found to do this, it will be a mark
   of our confidence to follow their order [of proceedings], full power
   being given to the legate we send, that whatever he can accomplish
   worthy of the faith, for the state of the Church and the salvation of
   souls, we shall laudably accept in the sight of the Lord.  All which
   things, if they please your sanctity, pray set forth, that I may be
   assured that my suggestion has been ratified by you and that their
   sincerity may freely accept our unanimous action.  And all the bishops
   said:  The things which have been enjoined to be done and have been
   wisely set forth by your holiness are pleasing to all.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIV.

   The Emperor's permission should be sought to allow the public
   manumission of slaves in church.

   This is Canon viij. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), a.d.
   401.

   Johnson.

   It is certain, that in Italy, and some other parts of the Empire,
   slaves were solemnly set at liberty by their masters, in the church and
   presence of the bishop, from the time of Constantine, but it should
   seem this custom had not yet obtained in Africa.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXV.  (Greek lxviii.)

   Concerning the condemned bishop Equitius.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  I do not think that the case of Equitius
   should be passed over in the legation, who some time ago for his crimes
   was condemned by an Episcopal sentence; that if by any chance our
   legate should meet him in those parts, our brother should take care for
   the state of the Church, as opportunity offered or where he could, to
   act against him.  And all the bishops said:  This prosecution is
   exceedingly agreeable to us, especially as Equitius was condemned some
   time ago, his impudent unrest ought to be repelled everywhere more and
   more for the good estate and health of the Church.  And they
   subscribed, I, Aurelius, the bishop of the Church of Carthage, have
   consented to this decree, and after having read it have signed my
   name.  Likewise also signed all the other bishops.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXV.

   Equitius, who had been condemned by the judgment of the bishops, and
   had behaved impudently against the ecclesiastical authority, ought to
   be opposed.

   This is Canon ix. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Afr., 78.

   In this council the letters of Anastasius the Roman Pontiff were read,
   admonishing the Catholic bishops concerning the Donatists.

   In the consulship of those most illustrious men Vencentius and Flavius,
   on the Ides of September, at Carthage, in the secretarium of the
   restored basilica.  When we had been gathered together in council in
   the church at Carthage and had taken our seats, bishops from all the
   African Provinces, that is to say, Aurelius, the bishop of that see
   with his colleagues (just who they were is made evident by their
   signatures) [the same bishop Aurelius said]:  When the letters of our
   most blessed brother and fellow priest, Anastasius, bishop of the
   Church of Rome, had been read, in which he exhorted us out of the
   solicitude and sincerity of his paternal and brotherly love, that we
   should in no way dissimulate with regard to the wiles and wickednesses
   of the Donatist heretics and schismatics, by which they gravely vex the
   Catholic Church of Africa, we thank our Lord that he hath vouchsafed to
   inspire that best and holy archbishop with such a pious care for the
   members of Christ, although in divers lands, yet builded together into
   the one body of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXVI.  (Greek lxix.)

   That the Donatists are to be treated leniently.

   Then when all things had been considered and treated of which seem to
   conduce to the advantage of the church, the Spirit of God suggesting
   and admonishing us, we determined to act leniently and pacifically with
   the before-mentioned men, although they were cut off from the unity of
   the Lord's body by an unruly dissent, so that (as much as in us lies)
   to all those who have been caught in the net of their communion and
   society, it might be known throughout all the provinces of Africa, how
   they have been overcome by miserable error, holding different opinions,
   "that perchance," as the Apostle says, when we have corrected [461]
   them with gentleness, "God should grant them repentance for the
   acknowledging of the truth, and that they might be snatched out of the
   snares of the devil, who are led captive of him at his will."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVI.

   It seemed good that the Donatists should be treated kindly and with
   leniency, even if they should separate themselves from the Church, so
   that perchance through their respect for our great gentleness they may
   be loosed from their captivity.

   The introduction refers to the Synod of Carthage of September 13, 401,
   and this canon is part of Canon j. of that Synod.  We are indebted to
   the Ballerini for collecting the acts of this Synod by a comparison of
   the pseudo-Isidore, Dionysius, Ferrandus and the quotations contained
   in the acts of the Synod of Carthage of 525.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [461] The Greek reads "when we have gathered them together."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXVII.  (Greek lxx.)

   Of the letters to be sent to the judges, that they may take note of the
   things done between the Donatists and the Maximianists.

   Therefore it seemed good that letters should be given from our council
   to the African judges, from whom it would seem suitable that this
   should be sought, that in this matter they would aid the common mother,
   the Catholic Church, that the episcopal authority may be fortified
   [462] in the cities; that is to say that by their judicial power and
   with diligence out of their Christian faith, they enquire and record in
   the public acts, that all may have a firm notion of it, what has taken
   place in all those places in which the Maximianists, who made a schism
   from them, have obtained basilicas.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVII.

   The secular arm must be implored by synodal letters to assist our
   common Mother the Catholic Church against those by whom the authority
   of the bishop is despised.

   This canon is the other half of Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage,
   September 13, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   Maximianists were a sect bred out of the Donatists, and separating from
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [462] In the Greek, "since the episcopal authority is spurned."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXVIII.  (Greek lxxi.)

   That the Donatist clergy are to be received into the Catholic Church as
   clergymen.

   It moreover seemed good that letters be sent to our brethren and
   fellow-bishops, and especially to the Apostolic See, over which our
   aforesaid venerable brother and colleague Anastasius, presides, that
   [epeide in the Greek, quo in the Latin] he may know that Africa is in
   great need, for the peace and prosperity of the Church, that those
   Donatists who were clergymen and who by good advice had desired to
   return to Catholic unity, should be treated according to the will and
   judgment of each Catholic bishop who governs the Church in that place;
   and, if it seem good for Christian peace, they be received with their
   honours, as it is clear was done in the former times of this same
   division.  And that this was the case the example of the majority, yea,
   of nearly all the African Churches in which this error had sprung up,
   testify; not that the Council which met about this matter in foreign
   parts should be done away, but that it may remain in force with regard
   to those who so will to come over to the Catholic Church that there be
   procured by them no breaking of unity.  But those through whom Catholic
   unity was seen to have been altogether perfected or assisted by the
   manifest winning of the souls of their brethren in the places where
   they live, there shall not be objected to them the decree contrary to
   their honour adopted by a foreign council, for salvation is shut off to
   no one, that is to say, that those ordained by the Donatist party, if
   having been corrected they have been willing to return to the Catholic
   Church, are not to be [463] received in their grades, according to the
   foreign council; but they are to be excepted through whom they received
   the advice to return to Catholic unity.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVIII.

   Those ordained by the Donatists, even though their reception has been
   forbidden by a foreign synod, since it is truly good that all should be
   saved, if they correct themselves, let them be received.

   Balsamon.

   This canon is special, for it seemed good to the fathers that such of
   the Donatists as came to the orthodox faith should be so received as to
   hold the grade of their holy orders, even though a transmarine, that is
   to say an Italian, council had decreed otherwise.

   Aristenus.

   Those Donatists who are penitent and anathematize their heresy are to
   be allowed to remain in their proper rank, and be numbered among the
   clergy of the Catholic Church, because Africa was labouring under a
   great shortness of clergy.

   This canon is Canon ij. of Carthage, Sept., a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   Whether the Donatists' clergy should be re-ordained was only a point of
   discipline; for the Donatists retained Episcopacy.  Therefore the
   African fathers, as they leave other churches to their liberty, so at
   the same time they declare that they would continue their old practice,
   and leave every bishop to act according to his own discretion in this
   matter.  Probably, one great motive, besides that of peace, which they
   had to this, was the great scarcity of clergymen in Africa, of which
   Aurelius complains in his speech, inserted into the Acts before Canon
   77 (61), and proposes that they send to the bishops of Rome and Milan
   for a supply.  And that this was the true reason, does in some measure
   appear from the words of the Latin canon at large, in which the
   occasion of this decree is said to be propter necessitatem.  And this
   is the most probable reason why it is left to the discretion of the
   bishop, whether to admit Donatist clergymen as such, if he had occasion
   for their service.  And after all it is clear from this very canon,
   that other churches had determined this point the contrary way.
   Therefore Mr. Calamy exceeds when he says:  "As for the Donatists, all
   agree that their orders were acknowledged."  Further, he would have it
   thought probable that orders were not always conferred among the
   Donatists by persons superior to presbyters.  This he would infer from
   the great number of the bishops of that faction in Africa, viz., 278,
   many of which (says he) could be no more than parish ministers.  But
   why so?  Were there not above four hundred Catholic bishops?  And why
   not as many of one side as the other?  If our dissenters of any sort
   had fallen into the Episcopal form of government, no question but they
   would have had a bishop in every city at least, and equalled our church
   in the number of prelates.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [463] The Greek and Beveridge introduce a second "not."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXIX.  (Greek lxxii.)

   That a legation be sent to the Donatists for the sake of making peace.

   It further seemed good, that when these things were done, legates
   should be sent from our number to those of the Donatists whom they hold
   as bishops, or to the people, for the sake of preaching peace and
   unity, without which Christian salvation cannot be attained; and that
   these legates should direct the attention of all to the fact that they
   have no just objection to urge against the Catholic Church.  And
   especially that this be made manifest to all by the municipal acts (on
   account of the weight of their documents) what they themselves had done
   in the case of the Maximianists, their own schismatics.  For in this
   case it is shown them by divine grace, if they will but heed it, that
   their separation from the unity of the Church is as iniquitous as they
   now proclaim the schism of the Maximianists from themselves to be.
   Nevertheless from the number, those whom they condemned by the
   authority of their plenary council, they received back with their
   honours, and accepted the baptism which they had given while condemned
   and cut off.  And thus let them see how with stupid heart they resist
   the peace of the Church scattered throughout the whole world, when they
   do these things on the part of Donatus, neither do they say that they
   are contaminated by communion with those whom they so receive for the
   making of peace, and yet they despise us, that is the Catholic Church,
   which is established even in the extreme parts of the earth, as being
   defiled by the communion of those whom the accusers have not been able
   to win over to themselves. [464]

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIX.

   It seemed good that legates be sent to preach peace and unity to the
   Donatists who had been converted to the orthodox faith.

   This canon is Canon iij. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [464] I think this is the probable meaning of the canon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXX.  (Greek lxxiii.)

   What clerics should abstain from their wives.

   Moreover since incontinence has been charged against some clergymen
   with regard to their own wives it has seemed good that bishops,
   presbyters, and deacons should according to the statutes already made
   abstain even from their own wives; and unless they do so that they
   should be removed from the clerical office.  But the rest of the clergy
   shall not be forced to this but the custom of each church in this
   matter shall be followed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXX.

   Bishops, presbyters and deacons shall abstain for their wives or else
   be removed from the ecclesiastical order.  But the rest of the clergy
   shall not be forced to the same:  but let the custom be observed.

   This is Canon iv. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   A repetition of Canon 25 (28).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXI.  (Greek lxxiv.)

   Of those who leave in neglect their own people.

   Moreover it seemed good that no one should be allowed to leave his
   chief cathedral and go to another church built in the diocese, or to
   neglect the care and frequent attendance upon his own cathedral by
   reason of too great care for his own affairs.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXI.

   It seemed good that no bishop shall translate himself to another see,
   leaving his own, nor that through a care for his own affairs he should
   neglect his diocese.

   This is Canon vj. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   See Canons 53 (57), 56 (60).

   "Principalis Cathedra," his own Cathedral.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXII.  (Greek lxxv.)

   Of the baptism of infants when there is some doubt of their being
   already baptized.

   Item, it seemed good that whenever there were not found reliable
   witnesses who could testify that without any doubt they were baptized
   and when the children themselves were not, on account of their tender
   age, able to answer concerning the giving of the sacraments to them,
   all such children should be baptized without scruple, lest a hesitation
   should deprive them of the cleansing of the sacraments.  This was urged
   by the Moorish Legates, our brethren, since they redeem many such from
   the barbarians.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXII.

   It seemed good that they should be baptized about whom there was an
   ambiguity whether they had been baptized or no; lest they might through
   that doubt lose the divine ablution.

   This is Canon vij. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXIII.  (Greek lxxvi.)

   The date of Easter and the date of the Council should be announced.

   Item, it seemed good that the day of the venerable Easter should be
   intimated to all by the subscription of formed letters; and that the
   same should be observed with regard to the date of the Council,
   according to the decree of the Council of Hippo, that is to say the X.
   Calends of September, and that it should be written to the primates of
   each province so that when they summon their councils they do not
   impede this day.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIII.

   It seemed good that the day of the Holy Easter should be announced on
   the day of the annual Synod, or on the tenth day before the calends of
   September.

   This is Canon viij. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   See Can. 51 (55).

   "The time of council," i.e., of the national council at Carthage.

   The Greek canon says he pro deka kalandon Septembrion, and Zonaras
   makes this the 21st of August, but he mistakes in his calculation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXIV.  (Greek lxxvii.)

   That no bishop who is an intercessor is to hold the see where he is
   intercessor.

   Item, it has been decreed that it is not lawful to any intercessor to
   retain the see to which he has been appointed as intercessor, by any
   popular movements and seditions; but let him take care that within a
   year he provide them with a bishop:  but if he shall neglect to do so,
   when the year is done, another intercessor shall be appointed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIV.

   It seemed good that the bishop who had been called in as an
   intercessor, by the zeal and dissensions of the people, should not be
   allowed to become the occupant of its throne:  but let a bishop be
   provided within a year, or else in the next year let another
   intercessor be appointed.

   This is Canon IX. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   We here call this officer "Guardian of the spiritualities" in the
   vacancy of the see.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXV.  (Greek lxxviii.)

   Of asking from the Emperors defenders of the Churches.

   On account of the afflictions of the poor by whose troubles the Church
   is worn out without any intermission, it seemed good to all that the
   Emperors be asked to allow defenders for them against the power of the
   rich to be chosen under the supervision of the bishops.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXV.

   That the bishop be not annoyed, let Defensors be appointed.

   This is Canon X. of Carthage, September, 401.

   Johnson.

   See note on Can. Chalcedon, 23.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXVI.  (Greek lxxix.)

   Of bishops who do not put in an appearance at Council.

   Item, it seemed good that as often as the council is to be assembled,
   the bishops who are impeded neither by age, sickness, or other grave
   necessity, come together, and that notice be given to the primates of
   their several provinces, that from all the bishops there be made two or
   three squads, and of each of these squads there be elected some who
   shall be promptly ready on the council day:  but should they not be
   able to attend, let them write their excuses in the tractory, [465] or
   if after the coming of the tractory certain necessities suddenly arise
   by chance, unless they send to their own primate an account of their
   impediment, they ought to be content with the communion of their own
   Church.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVI.

   Those who do not attend the annual synod, unless they be involuntarily
   prevented, must be satisfied with the communion of their own churches.

   This is Canon xj., of Carthage, September, 401.

   Johnson.

   "Tractory" has several significations; here it seems to denote the
   written return made by the Primate of the province to the synodical
   letter sent by the Bishop of Carthage.  In the acts inserted between
   canon 90th and 91st "Tractoria" seems to denote the letter of the
   Primate to the inferior bishops for choosing legates, if it do not
   rather denote the Bishop of Carthage's circular-letter to all the
   primates, as it does in the next paragraph.

   [The penalty in the last clause is] a very singular sort of censure,
   and very moderate.  See Can. 80 (83).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [465] All mention of the "tractory" is omitted in the Greek version.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXVII.  (Greek lxxx.)

   Of Cresconius.

   Concerning Cresconius of Villa Regis this seemed good to all, that the
   Primate of Numidia should be informed on this matter so that he should
   by his letters summon the aforementioned Cresconius in order that at
   the next plenary Council of Africa he should not put off making an
   appearance.  But if he contemns the summons and does not come, let him
   recognize the fact that sentence should be pronounced against him.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVII.

   Unless Cresconius who has been summoned by letter to the Synod, shall
   appear, let him know that he will have sentence given against him.

   This canon was probably formerly an appendix (so Hefele thinks) to
   Canon xj., of the Synod of Carthage of September 13, 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXVIII.  (Greek lxxxi.)

   Of the Church of Hippo-Diarrhytus.

   It further seemed good that since the destitution of the Church of
   Hippo-Diarrhytus should no longer be neglected, and the churches there
   are retained by those who have declined the infamous communion of
   Equitius, that certain bishops be sent from the present council, viz.:
   Reginus, Alypius, Augustine, Maternus, Theasius, Evodius, Placian,
   Urban, Valerius, Ambivius, Fortunatus, Quodvultdeus, Honoratus,
   Januarius, Aptus, Honoratus, Ampelius, Victorian, Evangelus and
   Rogation; and when those had been gathered together, and those had been
   corrected who with culpable pertinacity were of opinion that this
   flight of the same Equitius should be waited for, let a bishop be
   ordained for them by the vote of all.  But if these should not be
   willing to consider peace, let them not prevent the choosing for
   ordination of a bishop, for the advantage of the church which has been
   so long destitute.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVIII.

   It seemed good that, after Equitius had been condemned by the universal
   vote, a bishop of Hippo should be elected, and that they should in no
   way impede the ordination of a prelate for that church.

   This canon was likewise probably an appendix, to Canon xiij, of the
   Synod of Carthage of September 13th, 401, according to Hefele.

   Johnson.

   See Can. Afr., 65.

   Here the place of election and consecration seems to be the vacant see.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXIX.  (Greek lxxxii.)

   Of clerics who do not take care to have their causes argued within a
   year.

   It was further decreed that as often as clergymen convicted and
   confessed [466] of any crime either on account of eorum, quorum
   verecundiæ parcitur, or on account of the opprobrium to the Church, and
   of the insolent glorying of heretics and Gentiles, if perchance they
   are willing to be present at their cause and to assert their innocence,
   let them do so within one year of their excommunication; if in truth
   they neglect during a year to purge their cause, their voice shall not
   be heard afterwards.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIX.

   When a cleric has been convicted of a crime, if he says his cause
   should be heard upon appeal, let the appeal be made within a year;
   after that the appeal shall not be admitted.

   This is Canon xiij. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   Though the Latin syntax of this canon is very confused, and, I am apt
   to think, corrupted, yet it is evident enough, that this is the
   intention of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [466] Bruns says, Locus corruptus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXX.  (Greek lxxxiii.)

   That it is not permitted to make superiors of monasteries nor to ordain
   as clerics those who are received from a monastery not one's own.

   Item, it seemed good that if any bishop wished to advance to the
   clericature a monk received from a monastery not under his
   jurisdiction, or shall have appointed him superior of a monastery of
   his own, the bishop who shall have thus acted shall be separated from
   the communion of others and shall rest content with the communion of
   his own people alone, but the monk shall continue neither as cleric nor
   superior.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXX.

   Whoever shall receive a monk from a monastery not subject to his
   jurisdiction, and if he shall ordain him to the clerical estate or
   shall appoint him prior of his monastery, such an one shall be cut off
   from communion.

   This is Canon xiv. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   See Canons 76 (79) and 122 (123).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXI.  (Greek lxxxiv.)

   Of bishops who appoint heretics or heathens as their heirs.

   Item, it was ordained that if any bishop should prefer to his Church
   strangers to blood relationship with him, or his heretical relatives,
   or pagans as his heirs, he shall be anathematized even after his death,
   and his name shall by no means be recited among those of the priests of
   God.  Nor can he be excused if he die intestate, because being a bishop
   he was bound not to postpone making such a disposition of his goods as
   was befitting his profession.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXI.

   Let a bishop be anathema if he make heretics and heathen his heirs.

   This is Canon xv. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   There were in this age two written tables kept in every church, whereof
   one contained the names of all eminent bishops and clergymen now
   living, with whom that church held communion and correspondence; the
   other, the names of all eminent bishops, and other men of their own or
   other churches, now dead.  The deacon rehearsed all the names, in both
   tables at the altar, whenever the Eucharist was celebrated.  These
   tables were by the Greeks called Diptucha, and by some English writers
   "diptychs."  See Can. of Peter of Alex., 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXII.  (Greek lxxxv.)

   Of manumissions.

   Item, it seemed good that the Emperor be petitioned with regard to
   announcing manumissions in church.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXII.

   The imperial permission must be asked for the making of the manumission
   of slaves in churches.

   Aristenus.

   This is the same as the sixty-fourth [Greek numbering] canon, and is
   there explained.

   This is Canon xvj. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   A repetition of Canon 64 (67).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXIII.  (Greek lxxxvi.)

   Of false Memories of Martyrs.

   Item, it seemed good that the altars which have been set up here and
   there, in fields and by the wayside as Memories of Martyrs, in which no
   body nor reliques of martyrs can be proved to have been laid up, should
   be overturned by the bishops who rule over such places, if such a thing
   can be done.  But should this be impossible on account of the popular
   tumult it would arouse, the people should none the less be admonished
   not to frequent such places, and that those who believe rightly should
   be held bound by no superstition of the place.  And no memory of
   martyrs should at all be accepted, unless where there is found the body
   or some reliques, on which is declared traditionally and by good
   authority to have been originally his habitation, or possession, or the
   scene of his passion.  For altars which have been erected anywhere on
   account of dreams or inane quasi-revelations of certain people, should
   be in every way disapproved of.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIII.

   An altar in the fields or in a vineyard which lacks the reliques of the
   martyrs should be thrown down unless it would cause a public tumult to
   do so:  and the same is the case with such as have been set up on
   account of dreams and false revelations.

   This is Canon xvij. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXIV.  (Greek lxxxvii.)

   Of extirpating the remains of the idols.

   Item, it seemed good to petition the most glorious Emperors that the
   remains of idolatry not only in images, but in any places whatever or
   groves or trees, should altogether be taken away.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIV.

   Let all remains of idolatry be abolished whether in statues, or in
   places, or groves or trees.

   This is Canon xviij. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   Johnson.

   See Canon 58 (62.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXV.  (Greek lxxxviii.)

   That by the bishop of Carthage, when there shall be need, letters shall
   be written and subscribed in the name of all the bishops.

   It was said by all the bishops:  If any letters are to be composed in
   the name of the council it seemed good that the venerable bishop who
   presides over this See should vouchsafe to dictate and sign them in the
   name of all, among which also are those to the episcopal legates, who
   are to be sent throughout the African provinces, in the matter of the
   Donatists; and it seemed good that the letters given them should
   contain the tenor of the mandate which they are not to go beyond.  And
   they subscribed:  I, Aurelius, bishop of the church of Carthage have
   consented to this decree and having read it have signed it.  Likewise
   all the rest of the bishops subscribed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXV.

   It seemed good that whatever letters were to be sent from the Synod
   should be written and subscribed by the bishop of Carthage in the name
   of all.

   This is Canon xix. of Carthage, September, a.d. 401.

   In this Council previous decrees are confirmed.

   In the fifth consulate of the most glorious Emperors Arcadius and
   Honorius, Augusti, the VI Calends of September, in the City of Milevis,
   in the secretarium of the basilica, when Aurelius the bishop of
   Carthage had taken his seat in plenary council, the deacons standing
   by, Aurelius, the bishop, said:  Since the body of the holy Church is
   one, and there is one head of all the members, it has come to pass by
   the divine permission and assistance given to our weakness, that we,
   invited out of brotherly love, have come to this church.  Wherefore I
   beg your charity to believe that our coming to you is neither
   superfluous, nor unacceptable to all; and that the consent of all of us
   may make it manifest that we agree with the decrees already confirmed
   by the Council at Hippo or which were defined afterwards by a larger
   synod at Carthage, these shall now be read to us in order.  Then at
   last the agreement of your holiness will appear clearer than light, if
   they know that the things lawfully defined by us in former councils, ye
   have set forth, not only by your consent to these acts, but also by
   your subscriptions.

   Xantippus, bishop of the first see of Numidia said:  I believe what
   pleased all the brethren and the statutes they confirmed with their
   hands; we by our subscribing our names shew that it pleases us also,
   and have confirmed them with our superscription.

   Nicetius, the bishop of the first see of Mauritania Sitifensis said:
   The decrees which have been read, since they do not lack reason, and
   have been approved by all, these also are pleasing to my littleness,
   and I will confirm them with my subscription.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXVI.  (Greek lxxxix.)

   Of the order of bishops, that those ordained more recently do not dare
   to take precedence of those ordained before them.

   Valentine, the bishop, said:  If your good patience will permit, I
   follow the things which were done in time past in the Church of
   Carthage, and which were illustrious having been confirmed by the
   subscriptions of the brethren, and I profess that we intend to preserve
   this.  For this we know, that ecclesiastical discipline has always
   remained inviolate:  therefore let none of the brethren dare to place
   himself before those ordained earlier than himself; but by the offices
   of charity this has always been shewn to those ordained earlier, which
   always should be accepted joyfully by those ordained more recently.
   Let your holiness give command that this order be strengthened by your
   interlocutions.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  It would not be fitting
   that we should repeat these things, were it not for the existence of
   certain inconsiderate minds, which would induce us to making such
   statutes; but this is a common cause about which our brother and fellow
   bishop has spoken, that each one of us should recognize the order
   decreed to him by God, and that the more recent should defer to the
   earlier ordained, and they should presume to do nothing when these have
   not been consulted.  Wherefore I say, now that I think of it, that they
   who think they may presume to take precedence over those ordained
   before them, should be coerced suitably by the great council.
   Xantippus, bishop of the first see of Numidia, said:  All the brethren
   present have heard what our brother and fellow bishop Aurelius has
   said, what answer do we make?  Datian, the bishop, said:  The decrees
   made by our ancestors should be strengthened by our assent, so that the
   action taken by the Church of Carthage in past synods should hold fast,
   being confirmed by the full assent of all of us.  And all the bishops
   said:  This order has been preserved by our fathers and by our
   ancestors, and shall be preserved by us through the help of God, the
   rights of the primacy of Numidia and of Mauritania being kept intact.

   Of the archives and matricula of Numidia.

   Moreover it seemed good to all the bishops who subscribed in this
   council that the matricula and the archives of Numidia should be at the
   first see and in the Metropolis, that is Constantina.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVI.

   Thou shalt not prefer thyself to thine elders, but shalt follow them.
   For he that spurns those who were before him should be frowned down
   upon.

   The introduction belongs to the Synod of Milevis, of August 27, a.d.
   402.

   This canon (lxxxvj.) is Canon j., of the above named Synod.

   Johnson.

   From this canon it appears that the primacy in Africa was ambulatory,
   and belonged to the senior bishop of the province.  If the primacy had
   been fixed to the bishop of any certain city, as in other countries,
   there would have been a salvo or exception for that bishop, as there is
   in the 24th canon of the Synod of Bracara [Braga] in Spain, which
   orders that all bishops take place according to their seniority, with a
   reserve to the bishop of the metropolis.  The bishop of Carthage was
   not included in this canon; for it is evident that he had a precedence
   annexed to his see, and that he was in reality a sort of patriarch.
   The reason why Numidia and Mauritania are particularly mentioned is,
   that some disputes had been started there on that subject.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXVII.  (Greek xc.)

   Concerning Quodvultdeus, the bishop.

   In the case of Quodvultdeus of Centuria, it pleased all the bishops
   that no one should communicate with him until his cause should be
   brought to a conclusion, for his accuser when he sought to bring the
   cause before our council, upon being asked whether he was willing with
   him to be tried before the bishops, at first said that he was, but on
   another day answered that he was not willing, and went away.  Under
   these circumstances to deprive him of his bishoprick, before the
   conclusion of his cause was known, could commend itself to no Christian
   as a just act.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVII.

   Since Quodvultdeus at first promised to come to our synod when his
   opposer had asked that he be admitted, and afterwards withdrew, saying
   that that was displeasing to him, he should be excommunicated, until
   the cause is finished.  But it is not just that he be deposed before
   sentence is given.

   This canon is part of Canon ij. of Synod of Milevis, a.d. 402.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXVIII.  (Greek xci.)

   Of Maximian, the bishop.

   But in the case of Maximian of Vagai [467] it seemed good that letters
   be sent from the council both to him and to his people; that he should
   vacate the bishoprick, and that they should request another to be
   appointed for them.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVIII.

   Let Maximian of Bagai be expelled from his church, and another be set
   in his room.

   This canon is remaining part of Canon ij., of the Synod of Milevis,
   a.d. 402.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [467] Hefele says (Hist. Councils.  Vol. II., p. 428) that Vagiensem
   not Bagajensem is the true reading.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon LXXXIX.  (Greek xcii.)

   That bishops who are ordained shall receive letters from their
   ordainers bearing the date and the name of the consul.

   It further seemed good that whoever thereafter should be ordained by
   the bishops throughout the African provinces, should receive from their
   ordainers letters, written in their own hands, containing the name of
   the consul and the date, that no altercation might arise concerning
   which were ordained first and which afterwards.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIX.

   Whoever is ordained in Africa let him have letters signed by the proper
   hand of him that ordained him, containing the date and the name of the
   Consul.

   This is Canon iij. of Milevis, a.d. 402.

   Johnson.

   It is evident from this canon that the church in this age followed the
   date of the civil government, which was in the consulship of Caius and
   Titius, as our civil date is in the 1st, 2d, 3d, etc., year of the
   reign of our King or Queen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XC.  (Greek xciii.)

   Of those who have once read in church, that they cannot be advanced by
   others.

   Item, it seemed good that whoever in church even once had read should
   not be admitted to the ministry (clericatum) by another church.

   And they subscribed:  I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of Carthage,
   have consented to this decree, and, having read it, have signed it.
   Likewise also the rest of the bishops signed.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XC.

   He who has only once read in a Church [i.e., diocese] shall not be
   admitted into the clergy by another Church.

   This is Canon iv. of Milevis, 402.

   There is set forth in this council what the bishops did who were sent
   as legates across seas.

   In the consulship of those most illustrious men, the most glorious
   Emperor Theodosius Augustus, and Rumoridus, the VIII. [468] Calends of
   September, at Carthage, in the basilica of the second region, when
   Aurelius the bishop had taken his seat in plenary council, the deacons
   standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, said:  From stress of circumstances,
   venerable brethren, I, although so small, have been led to assemble you
   in council.  For a while ago, as your holinesses will remember, while
   holding a council we sent our brothers as legates to the regions beyond
   seas.  It is right that these should at this meeting of your holinesses
   narrate the course of their now finished legation, and although
   yesterday when we were in session concerning this matter, besides
   ecclesiastical matters, we paid some prolonged attention to what they
   had done, nevertheless it is right that to-day the discussion of
   yesterday should be confirmed by ecclesiastical action.

   Of the bishops of the African provinces who were not present at this
   council. [469]

   The right order of things demands that first of all we should enquire
   concerning our brethren and fellow bishops, who were to come to this
   council either from Byzacena or at least from Mauritania, like as they
   decreed that they would be present in this council.  And when
   Philologius, Geta, Venustianus, and Felician, bishops of the province
   of Byzacena had presented and read their letters of legation, and
   Lucian and Silvanus, legates of the province of Mauritania Sitiphensis,
   had done the same, the bishop Aurelius said:  Let the text of these
   writings be placed in the acts.

   Of the Byzacene bishops.

   Numidius, the bishop, said:  We observe that our brethren and fellow
   bishops of the province of Byzacena and of the province of Mauritania
   Sitiphensis have sent legates to the council; we now seek whether the
   legates of Numidia have come, or at least of the province of Tripoli or
   of Mauritania-Cæsariensis.

   Of the bishops of Mauritania Sitiphensis.

   Lucian and Silvanus, the bishops, legates of the Province of Mauritania
   Sitiphensis said:  The tractory came late to our Cæsarian brethren or
   they would have been here; and they will certainly come, and we are
   confident of their attitude of mind that whatever shall be determined
   by this council, they without doubt will assent unto.

   Of the bishops of Numidia.

   Alypius, bishop of the church of Tagaste said:  We have come from
   Numidia, I and the holy brethren Augustine and Possidius, but a
   legation could not be sent from Numidia, because by the tumult of the
   recruits the bishops have either been prevented from coming or fully
   occupied by their own necessary affairs in their sees.  For after I had
   brought to the holy Senex Xantippus your holiness's tractory, this
   seemed good in the present business that a council should be appointed,
   to which a delegation with instructions should be sent, but when I
   reported to him in later letters the impediment of the recruits, of
   which I have just spoken, he excused them by his own rescripts.
   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  There is no doubt that the aforesaid
   brethren and bishops of Numidia, when they shall have received the acts
   of the council, will give their consent and will take pains to carry
   into effect whatever shall have been adopted.  It is therefore
   necessary that by the solicitude of this see what we shall have
   determined be communicated to them.

   Of the bishops of Tripoli.

   This is what I could learn concerning our brethren of Tripoli, that
   they appointed our brother Dulcicius as a legate: but because he could
   not come, certain of our sons coming from the aforesaid province
   asserted that the aforesaid had taken shipping, and that it was thought
   that his arrival had been delayed by storms; nevertheless also
   concerning these matters, if your charity is willing, this form shall
   be preserved, that the placets of the council be sent to them.  And all
   the bishops said:  What your holiness has decreed pleases us all.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [468] Nine, in some mss.

   [469] In the Greek this is made part of the last sentence, and for "Of"
   it reads "for the sake of" (dia).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCI.  (Greek xciv.)

   Of holding meetings with the Donatists.

   Aurelius, the bishop, said:  What has come out in the handling of your
   charity, I think this should be confirmed by ecclesiastical acts.  For
   the profession of all of you shews that each one of us should call
   together in his city the chiefs of the Donatists either alone and with
   one of his neighbour bishops, so that in like manner in the different
   cities and places there should be meetings of them assembled by the
   magistrates or seniors of the places.  And let this be made an edict if
   it seems good to all.  And all the bishops said:  It seems good to all,
   and we all have confirmed this with our subscription.  Also we desire
   that your holiness sign the letters to be sent from the council to the
   judges.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  If it seems good to your charity,
   let the form of summoning them be read, in order that we all may hold
   the same tenour of proceeding.  All the bishops said:  Let it be read.
   Lætus the Notary read.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCI.

   Let each of the bishops meet with the leaders of the Donatists in his
   own city; or let him associate with himself a neighbouring bishop, that
   they together may meet them.

   This introduction together with the propositions of the different
   bishops belongs to the Synod of Carthage of August, 403.

   This canon (xcj.) is Canon j. of that synod.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCII.  (Greek xcv.)

   Form of convening the Donatists.

   That bishop of that church said:  What by the authority of that most
   ample see we shall have impetrated, we ask your gravity to have read,
   and that you order it to be joined to the acts and carried into
   effect.  When the jussio had been read and joined to the acts, the
   bishop of the Catholic Church, [470] said:  Vouchsafe to listen to the
   mandate to be sent through your gravity to the Donatists, and to insert
   it in the acts, and to carry it to them, and informs us in your acts of
   their answer.  "We, sent by the authority of our Catholic Council, have
   called you together, desiring to rejoice in your correction, bearing in
   mind the charity of the Lord who said:  Blessed are the peacemakers,
   for they shall be called the children of God; and moreover he
   admonished through the prophet those who say they are not our brothers,
   that we ought to say:  Ye are our brethren.  Therefore you ought not to
   despise this pacific commonitory coming of love, so that if ye think we
   have any part of the truth, ye do not hesitate to say so:  that is,
   when your council is gathered together, ye delegate of your number
   certain to whom you intrust the statement of your case; so that we may
   be able to do this also, that there shall be delegated from our Council
   who with them delegated by you may discuss peacefully, at a determined
   place and time, whatever question there is which separates your
   communion from us; and that at length the old error may receive an end
   through the assistance of our Lord God, lest through the animosity of
   men, weak souls, and ignorant people should perish by sacrilegious
   dissension.  But if ye shall accept this proposition in a fraternal
   spirit, the truth will easily shine forth, but if ye are not willing to
   do this, your distrust will be easily known."  And when this had been
   read, all the bishops said:  This pleases us well, so let it be.  And
   they subscribed:  I, Aurelius, bishop of the Carthaginian Church, have
   consented to this decree, and having read it, have subscribed it.
   Likewise also the rest of the bishops signed.

   This synod sent a legation to the Princes against the Donatists.

   The most glorious emperor Honorius Augustus, being consul for the sixth
   time, on the Calends of July, at Carthage in the basilica of the second
   region.  In this council Theasius and Euodius received a legation
   against the Donatists.  In this council was inserted the commonitorium
   which follows.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCII.

   What things should be said to the Donatists are these:  "We greatly
   desire to rejoice in your conversion; for we have been commanded to say
   even to those not desiring to be our brethren, Ye are our brothers.'
   We come therefore to you and we exhort you that if you have any defence
   to make, ye should appoint certain persons to whom this should be
   entrusted, who, at a fixed time and place, shall urge your case;
   otherwise your distrust wilt be thenceforward patent."

   This canon is Canon ij. of the Synod of Carthage of August 25, a.d.
   403.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [470] i.e. Carthage.  Migne reads "of that Church" and differs in what
   follows.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCIII.  (Greek xcvi.)

   The character of the Commonitory which the legates received against the
   Donatists.

   The Commonitorium for our brothers Theasius and Evodius, sent as
   legates from the Council of Carthage to the most glorious and most
   religious princes.  When by the help of the Lord they are come into the
   presence of the most pious princes, they shall declare to them with
   what fulness of confidence, according to the direction of the council
   of the year before, the prelates of the Donatists had been urged by the
   municipal authority to assemble, in order that if they really meant
   their professions, they might by fit persons chosen from their number,
   enter into a peaceful conference with us in Christian meekness, and
   whatever they held as truth they might not hesitate to declare it
   frankly; so that from such conference the sincerity of the Catholic
   position, which has been conspicuous for so long a time, might be
   perceived even by those who from ignorance or obstinacy were opposing
   themselves to it.  But deterred by their want of confidence they
   scarcely ventured to reply.  And forsooth, because we had discharged
   toward them the offices which become bishops and peacemakers, and they
   had no answer to make to the truth, they betook themselves to
   unreasonable acts of brute force, and treacherously oppressed many of
   the bishops and clergy, to say nothing of the laity.  And some of the
   churches they actually invaded, and tried to assault still others.

   And now, it behoves the gracious clemency of their Majesties to take
   measures that the Catholic Church, which has begotten them as
   worshippers of Christ in her womb, and has nourished them with the
   strong meat of the faith, should by their forethought, be defended,
   lest violent men, taking advantage of the times of religious
   excitement, should by fear overcome a weak people, whom by argument
   they were not able to pervert.  It is well known how often the vile
   gatherings (detestabilis manus) of the Circumcelliones [471] have been
   forbidden by the laws, and also condemned by many decrees of the
   Emperors, their majesties most religious predecessors.  Against the
   madness of these people it is not unusual nor contrary to the holy
   Scriptures to ask for secular [theias in the Greek] protection, since
   Paul the Apostle, as is related in the authentic Acts of the Apostles,
   warded off a conspiracy of certain lawless men by the help of the
   military.  Now then we ask that there be extended to the Catholic
   Churches, without any dissimulation, the protection of the ordinum
   [i.e. companies of soldiers, stationed] in each city, and of the
   holders of the suburban estates in the various places. [472]   At the
   same time it will be necessary to ask that they give commandment that
   the law, set forth by their father Theodosius, of pious memory, which
   imposed a fine of ten pounds of gold upon both the ordainers and the
   ordained among heretics, and which was also directed against
   proprietors at whose houses conventicles were held, be confirmed anew;
   so that it may be effective with persons of this sort when Catholics,
   provoked by their wiles, shall lay complaint against them; so that
   through fear at least, they may cease from making schisms and from the
   wickedness of the heretics, since they refuse to be cleansed and
   corrected by the thought of the eternal punishment.

   Let request be also made that the law depriving heretics of the power
   of being able to receive or bequeath by gift or by will, be straightway
   renewed by their Piety, so that all right of giving or receiving may be
   taken away from those who, blinded by the madness of obstinacy, are
   determined to continue in the error of the Donatists.

   With regard to those who by considerations of unity and peace are
   willing to correct themselves, let permission be granted to them to
   receive their inheritance, the law notwithstanding, even though the
   bequest by gift or inheritance was made while they were yet living in
   the error of the heretics; those of course being excepted, who under
   the stress of legal proceedings have sought to enter the Catholic
   Church; for it may well be supposed, that persons of this latter sort
   desired Catholic unity, not so much from fear of the judgment of
   heaven, as from the greed of earthly gain.

   For the furtherance of all these things the help of the Powers
   (Potestatum) of each one of the provinces is needed.  With regard to
   other matters, whatever they shall perceive is for the Church's
   interests, this we have resolved that the legation have full authority
   to do and to carry into effect.  Moreover it seemed good to us all,
   that letters from our assembly should be sent to the most glorious
   Emperors and most Excellent Worthinesses, whereby they may be assured
   of the agreement of us all that the legates should be sent by us to
   their most blessed court.

   Since it is a very slow business for us all to set our names to these
   letters, and in order that they may not be burdened with the signature
   of each one of us, we desire thee, brother Aurelius, that thy charity
   be good enough to sign them in the name of us all.  And to this they
   all agreed.

   I, Aurelius, Bishop of the Church of Carthage have consented to this
   decree and have subscribed my name.  And so all the other bishops
   subscribed.

   Letters ought likewise to be sent to the judges that, until the lord
   permit the legates to return to us, they give protection through the
   soldiers of the cities, and through the holders of the farms of the
   Catholic Church.  It ought also to be added concerning the dishonest
   Equitius, which he had shewn by laying claim to the jus sacerdotum,
   that he be rejected from the diocese of Hippo according to the statutes
   of the Emperors.  Letters ought also to be sent to the Bishop of the
   Church of Rome in commendation of the legates, and to the other Bishops
   who may be where the Emperor is.  To this they assented.

   Likewise I, Aurelius, Bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented
   to this decree, and having read it, have set my name to it.

   And all the other bishops likewise subscribed.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIII.

   The Emperors who were born in the true religion and were educated in
   the faith, ought to stretch forth a helping hand to the Churches.  For
   the military band overthrew the dire conspiracy which was threatening
   Paul.

   Here follows a brief declaration of what things were decreed in this
   Synod.

   When Stilico a second time and Anthemius, those illustrious men, were
   consuls, on the tenth before the calends of September, at Carthage in
   the basilica of the second region.  I have not written out in full the
   acts of this council [473] because they treat of the necessities of the
   time rather than of matters of general interest, but for the
   instruction of the studious I have added a brief digest of the same
   council. [474]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [471] Vide Kraus.  Real. Encyclopædie.

   [472] The text is corrupt and the Greek and Latin do not agree in many
   places.

   [473] In the Greek, "The acts of the present synod have not been
   written out here in full, etc."

   [474] The Greek text here is much to be preferred, "wherefore a brief
   synopsis of what was studiously enacted in this synod is here set
   forth."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCIV.  (Greek xcvii.)

   Summary of Chapters.

   That a free delegation be sent to the council from all the provinces to
   Mizoneum.  Legates [475] and letters were ordered to be sent for the
   purpose of directing the free legation:  that became the unity had been
   made only at Carthage, letters should also be given to the judges, that
   they might order in the other provinces and cities the work of union to
   be proceeded with, and the thanksgivings of the Church of Carthage for
   the whole of Africa concerning the exclusion of the Donatists should be
   sent with the letters of the bishops to Court (ad Comitatum).

   The letters of Pope Innocent were read:  that bishops ought not readily
   to carry causes across seas, and this very thing was confirmed by the
   judgment of the bishops themselves; that on account of thanksgiving and
   the exclusion of the Donatists, two clerics of the Church of Carthage
   should be sent to Court.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIV.

   It seemed good that letters be sent to the Magistrates that the
   Donatists be expelled. [476]

   This introduction is taken from the Synod of Carthage of August 23,
   405.  There is also added the introduction of the Synod of Carthage of
   June 13, 407.

   In this synod certain things already decreed are corrected.

   Under the most illustrious emperors Honorius for the VII^th time, and
   Theodosius for the second time, the consuls being the Augusti, on the
   Ides of July in Carthage in the basilica of the second region, when
   bishop Aurelius together with his other bishops had taken his seat, and
   while the deacons stood by, he said:  Since it was decreed in the
   council of Hippo, that each year there should assemble a plenary
   council of Africa, not only here in Carthage but also in the different
   provinces in their order, and this was reserved that we should
   determine its place of meeting sometimes in Numidia and sometimes in
   Byzacium.  But this seemed laborious to all the brethren.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [475] The Latin text here is certainly corrupt.

   [476] This is placed by Beveridge under Greek canon xcviij.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCV.  (Greek xcviii.)

   An universal council to be held only when necessary.

   It seemed good that there should be no more the yearly necessity of
   fatiguing the brethren; but as often as common cause, that is of the
   whole of Africa, demands, that letters shall be given on every side to
   that see in this matter, that a synod should be gathered in that
   province, where the desirability of it induces; but let the causes
   which are not of general interest be judged in their own provinces.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCV.

   When general necessity so urges, letters are to be sent to the chief
   see, and a synod held in a convenient place.  But let ordinary causes
   be settled in their own provinces.

   This canon is Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   This canon is a tacit revocation of that clause for annual synods in
   the 18th canon, which was made in a former council.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCVI.  (Greek xcix.)

   That from judges who have been chosen, no appeals may be taken.

   If an appeal be taken, let him who makes it choose the judges, and with
   him he also against whom the appeal is taken; and from their decision
   no appeal may be made.

   Concerning the delegates of the different provinces.

   When all the delegates of the different provinces came together, they
   have been most graciously received, that is those of the Numidians,
   Byzacenes, Stifensian Moors, as well as Cæsarians and Tripolitans.

   Concerning the executors of Churches.

   It has seemed good moreover that the appointment of five executors
   should be asked for in all matters pertaining to the necessities of the
   Church, who shall be portioned off in the different provinces.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVI.

   If one party to a suit takes an appeal, and if both choose together a
   judge, no further appeal shall be allowed.

   This canon is Canon ij. of Carthage, a.d. 407.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCVII.  (Greek c.)

   That there be sought from the Emperor the protection of Advocates in
   causes ecclesiastical.

   It seemed good that the legates who were about leaving, viz., Vincent
   and Fortunatian, should in the name of all the provinces ask from the
   most glorious Emperors to give a faculty for the establishment of
   scholastic defensors, whose shall be the care of this very kind of
   business:  so that as the priests [477] of the province, they who have
   received the faculty as defensors of the Churches in ecclesiastical
   affairs, as often as necessity arises, may be able to enter the private
   apartments of the judges, so as to resist what is urged on the other
   side, or to make necessary explanations.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVII.

   That there be asked of the Emperor the appointment of Patrons for
   ecclesiastical heads, whose care it should be to defend the Church in
   its affairs, and who as priests could easily refer what things were
   urgent.

   (Greek ci.)

   That the legation be free.

   It seemed good that the chosen legates should have at the meeting
   freedom of action (legationem liberam).

   The protest of the Mauritanian bishops against Primosus.

   It is evident that those of Mauritania Cæsariensis gave evidence in
   their own writings that Primosus had been summoned by the chiefs of the
   Thiganensian city, that he should present himself to the plenary
   council according to the imperial constitutions, and, when sought for,
   as was right, Primosus was not found, at least so the deacons
   reported.  But since the same Mauritanians petitioned that letters be
   sent from the whole synod to the venerable brother, the aged Innocent,
   it seemed good that they should be sent, that he might know that
   Primosus had been sought at the council and not found at all.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome.

   [Lacking.]

   Balsamon.

   The contents of this canon being special are useless, therefore no
   explanation has been given.

   This Canon is Canon iij. of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   See can. 75 (78) and note on Can. Chalced., 23.

   These officers [i.e. "defensors"] seem to be called "executores" in the
   acts of synod just before this canon.

   The "priest of the province" was one chosen out of the body of
   advocates to be counsel to the province, to act and plead in their
   behalf; and that he might do it more effectually he was allowed to have
   private conference with the judge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [477] Mansi notes that this refers to the heathen priests, and quotes
   Cod. Theod. 47, de decurionibus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCVIII.  (Greek cii.)

   Of the peoples which never had bishops.

   It seemed good that such peoples as had never had bishops of their own
   should in no way receive such unless it had been decreed in a plenary
   council of each province and by the primates, and with the consent of
   the bishop of that diocese to which the church belonged.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVIII.

   Whoso never heretofore had a bishop of their own, unless the general
   synod of the Province shall agree to it, and the Primate, in agreement
   with him to whom the province in which the Church is, is subject, shall
   not have bishops of their own.

   This canon is Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage, a.d. 407.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon XCIX.  (Greek ciii.)

   Of people or dioceses returned from the Donatists.

   Such communities as have returned from the Donatists and have had
   bishops, without doubt may continue to have them even without any
   action of the councils, but such a community as had a bishop and when
   he dies wish no longer to have a bishop of their own, but to belong to
   the diocese of some other bishop, this is not to be denied them.  Also
   such bishops as before the promulgation of the imperial law concerning
   unity as brought back their people to the Catholic Church, they ought
   to be allowed still to rule them:  but from the time of that law of
   unity, all the Churches, and their dioceses, and if perchance there be
   any instruments of the Church or things pertaining to its rights should
   belong to the Catholic bishops of those places to whom the places
   pertained while under the heretics, whether they be converted to the
   Catholic Church or remain unconverted heretics.  Whoever after this law
   shall make any such usurpation, shall restore as is meet the usurped
   possessions.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIX.

   Whoever are converted from the Donatists may retain their own bishops,
   although they had them without the consent of the synod; and when the
   bishop is dead, if they do not wish another to be substituted in his
   room, but desire to place themselves under some other bishop, they
   shall be allowed to do so.  And such bishops as before the union have
   brought back the people they ruled, let them still rule them.  After
   the imperial Edict on Unity every church must defend its own rights.

   This canon is Canon v. of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   "An imperial law concerning unity" i.e. For uniting all in the catholic
   faith, and ejecting the donatistical bishops.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon C.  (Greek civ.)

   Of the suggestion of Bishop Maurentius.

   [Hefele says "The text of this canon is much corrupted and very
   difficult to be understood."  He gives as a synopsis, "The council
   appoints judges in the affair of Bishop Maurentius."  (Hefele, Vol. II,
   p. 443.)]

   Johnson thus condenses and translates.

   Bishop Maurentius having an information against him, lying before the
   council, moves for a hearing; but the informers don't appear upon three
   calls made by the deacons on the day appointed.  The cause is referred
   to Senex Xantippus, Augustinus, and five more summoned by the council,
   the informers were to make up the number twelve.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon C.

   It is right that sentence be given on the subdeacons who are said to be
   present from Nova Germania, who have thrice been sought and not found.
   But out of regard to ecclesiastical gentleness, let some be sent to
   look into the matter.

   Balsamon.

   The contents of this canon are of a private character, and therefore
   have not been commented on.

   This canon is Canon vj. of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   "Senex" i.e. Primate Xantippus, as is commonly believed.  He and others
   have this title frequently given them in the acts of these councils.
   See can. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CI.  (Greek civ. bis)

   Of making peace between the Churches of Rome and Alexandria.

   It seemed good that a letter be written to the holy Pope Innocent
   concerning the dissension between the Churches of Rome and Alexandria,
   so that each Church might keep peace with the other as the Lord
   commanded.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CI.

   It seemed good to write to Innocent that the Roman and Alexandrian
   churches might be at peace between themselves.

   This canon is Canon vij. of Carthage, a.d. 407.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CII.  (Greek cv.)

   Of those who put away their wives or husbands, that so they remain.

   It seemed good that according to evangelical and apostolical discipline
   a man who had been put away from his wife, and a woman put away from
   her husband should not be married to another, but so should remain, or
   else be reconciled the one to the other; but if they spurn this law,
   they shall be forced to do penance, covering which case we must
   petition that an imperial law be promulgated.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CII.

   Married people who are loosed must remain unmarried or else be
   reconciled, otherwise they shall be forced to do penance.

   This canon is Canon viij. of Carthage, a.d. 407, and is found in the
   Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, P. II., Causa xxxij., Quæst.
   vij., can. v.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CIII.  (Greek cvi.)

   Of the prayers to be said at the Altar.

   This also seemed good, that the prayers which had been approved in
   synod should be used by all, whether prefaces, commendations, or laying
   on of the hand, and that others contrary to the faith should not be
   used by any means, but that those only should be said which had been
   collected by the learned.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CIII.

   [The same as the canon, but omits the last phrase.]

   This canon is Canon ix. of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   That is, such forms fitted for the present time or occasion, as our
   Church uses in her Communion Office before the trisagium, on Christmas,
   Easter, etc.  These prefaces were very ancient in the Christian
   church.  Prayers used to recommend the catechumens, penitents, and
   dying souls to God's protection were styled "Commendations."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CIV.  (Greek cvii.)

   Of these who ask from the Emperor that secular judges may take
   cognizance of their causes.

   It seemed good that whoever should seek from the Emperor, that secular
   judges should take cognizance of his business, should be deprived of
   his office; if however, he had asked from the Emperor an episcopal
   trial, no objection should be made.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CIV.

   Let not him be a bishop who from the Emperor seeks a public judgment.

   This canon is Canon X. of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   See Canon Ant., 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CV.  (Greek cviii.)

   Of those who do not communicate in Africa and would go across seas.

   Whoever does not communicate in Africa, and goes to communicate across
   seas, let him be cast out of the clergy.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CV.

   Whoever is cut off from communion in Africa, and goes to parts across
   seas that he may there communicate, is to be cast out of the clergy.

   This canon is Canon j. of Carthage, a.d. 407.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CVI.  (Greek cix.)

   That those who are going to carry their case to court should be careful
   to inform either the bishop of Carthage or [478] the bishop of Rome.

   It seemed good that whoever wished to go to court, should give notice
   in the form which is sent to the Church of the city of Rome, that from
   thence also he should receive a formed letter to court.  But if
   receiving only a formed letter to Rome, and saying nothing about the
   necessity which he had of going to court, he willed immediately to go
   thither, let him be cut off from communion.  But if while at Rome the
   necessity of going to court suddenly arose, let him state his necessity
   to the bishop of Rome and let him carry with him a rescript of the same
   Roman bishop.  But let the formed letters which are issued by primates
   and by certain bishops to their own clergy have the date of Easter; but
   if it be yet uncertain what is the date of Easter of that year, let the
   preceding Easter's date be set down, as it is customary to date public
   acts after the consulship.

   It further seemed good that those who were sent as delegates from this
   glorious council should ask of the most glorious princes whatever they
   saw would be useful against the Donatists and Pagans, and their
   superstitions.

   It also seemed good to all the bishops that all conciliar letters be
   signed by your holiness alone.  And they subscribed:  I, Aurelius,
   Bishop of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and having read it,
   now subscribe my name.  Likewise also the rest of the bishops
   subscribed.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CVI.

   Whoever from any necessity was going to court, must declare his
   intention to the bishop of Carthage and to the bishop of Rome, and
   receive a letter dimissory, and otherwise he shall be excommunicated.

   Whatever shall seem to the legates useful against the Donatists and
   Greeks, and their superstitions, that shall be sought from the Emperor.

   (Greek cx.)

   Synod against the pagans and heretics.

   In the consulship of those most illustrious men Bassus and Philip, the
   xvi^th Calends of July, at Carthage, in the secretarium of the restored
   basilica.* [479]   In this council the bishop Fortunatian received a
   second appointment as legate against the pagans and heretics.

   Item, a council against the pagans and heretics.

   In the consulship of those most illustrious men Bassus and Philip, the
   iii. Ides of October at Carthage, in the Secretarium of the restored
   basilica*.  In this council the bishops Restitutus and Florentius
   received a legation against the pagans and heretics, at the time
   Severus and Macarius were slain, and on their account the bishops
   Euodius, Theasius and Victor were put to death.

   Notes.

   This canon is Canon xij. of Carthage, a.d. 407.

   Johnson.

   Of "Formal Letters" see Can. Ap., 10 (13).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [478] "And" in the Greek, which omits the preceding "either."

   [479] Between these asterisks all is missing in the Greek.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CVII.  (Greek cx. continued.)

   A Council concerning a bishop taking cognizance.

   In the consulate of the most glorious Emperors Honorius for the VII^th
   time and Theodosius for the IIId, Augusti, xvii. Calends of July, a
   synod was held at Carthage in the basilica of the second region.  In
   this council it seemed good that no one bishop should claim the right
   to take cognizance of a cause.  The acts of this council I have not
   here written down, because it was only provincial and not general.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CVII.

   One bishop shall not claim for himself to take cognizance of a cause
   alone.

   (Greek cxi.)

   Synod against the Donatists.

   After the consulate of the most illustrious Emperors Honorius for the
   VIII^th time and Theodosius for the IV^th time, Augusti, xviii. Calends
   of July, at Carthage in the basilica of the second region.  In this
   council the bishops, Florentius, Possidius, Præsidius and Benenatus
   received legation against the Donatists, at that time at which a law
   was given that anyone might practice the Christian worship at his own
   will.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CVII.

   Let each one receive the practice of piety of his own free will.

   The two first introductions belong respectively to the Synods of
   Carthage of June 16 and of October 13, a.d. 408.

   Canon cvij. of the African code and that which follows it are the
   introductions to the Synods of Carthage of June 15, a.d. 409, and of
   June 14, a.d. 410.

   Johnson.

   See can. 10, 11, 12, 28 (31), 79 (80).  Recognises, a law of the
   Empire, that everyone receive christianity at his own free choice.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CVIII.  (Greek cxii.)

   Synod against the heresy of Pelagius and Celestius.

   In the consulate of the most glorious Emperors, Honorius for the XII^th
   time and Theodosius for the VIII^th, Augusti most exalted, on the
   Calends of May, at Carthage in the secretarium of the Basilica of
   Faustus.  When Aurelius the bishop presided over the whole council, the
   deacons standing by, it pleased all the bishops, whose names and
   subscriptions are indicated, [480] met together in the holy synod of
   the Church of Carthage to define-- [481]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [480] The Latin here is corrupt.

   [481] Here begins Canon CIX. of the Latin text.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CIX.  (Greek cxij. continued.)

   That Adam was not created by God subject to death.

   That whosoever says that Adam, the first man, was created mortal, so
   that whether he had sinned or not, he would have died in body--that is,
   he would have gone forth of the body, not because his sin merited this,
   but by natural necessity, let him be anathema.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CIX.

   Whoso shall assert that the protoplast would have died without sin and
   through natural necessity, let him be anathema.

   Canon CVIII. is the introduction to the Synod of Carthage of May 1,
   a.d. 418; and Canon CIX. is Canon j. of that synod.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CX.  (Greek cxii. bis)

   That infants are baptized for the remission of sins.

   Likewise it seemed good that whosoever denies that infants newly from
   their mother's wombs should be baptized, or says that baptism is for
   remission of sins, but that they derive from Adam no original sin,
   which needs to be removed by the laver of regeneration, from whence the
   conclusion follows, that in them the form of baptism for the remission
   of sins, is to be understood as false and not true, let him be
   anathema.

   For no otherwise can be understood what the Apostle says, "By one man
   sin is come into the world, and death through sin, and so death passed
   upon all men in that all have sinned," than the Catholic Church
   everywhere diffused has always understood it.  For on account of this
   rule of faith (regulam fidei) even infants, who could have committed as
   yet no sin themselves, therefore are truly baptized for the remission
   of sins, in order that what in them is the result of generation may be
   cleansed by regeneration.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CX.

   Whoso affirms that those newly born and baptized contract nothing from
   Adam's transgression, which needs to be washed away by baptism, is to
   be execrated:  for through one both death and sin invaded the whole
   world.

   This is Canon ij. of Carthage, a.d. 418 [Greek Canon 112].

   Johnson.

   See Can. 63, 104, both which are double, as this likewise is in the old
   Greek scholiasts.

   [Also it seemed good, that if anyone should say that the saying of the
   Lord, "In my Father's house are many mansions" is to be understood as
   meaning that in the kingdom of heaven there will be a certain middle
   place, or some place somewhere, in which infants live in happiness who
   have gone forth from this life without baptism, without which they
   cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, which is eternal life, let him be
   anathema.  For after our Lord has said:  "Except a man be born again of
   water and of the Holy Spirit he shall not enter the kingdom of heaven,"
   what Catholic can doubt that he who has not merited to be coheir with
   Christ shall become a sharer with the devil:  for he who fails of the
   right hand without doubt shall receive the left hand portion.]

   Notes.

   The foregoing, says Surius, is found in this place in a very ancient
   codex.  It does not occur in the Greek, nor in Dionysius.  Bruns
   relegates it to a foot-note.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXI.  (Greek cxiij.)

   That the grace of God not only gives remission of sins, but also
   affords aid that we sin no more.

   Likewise it seemed good, that whoever should say that the grace of God,
   by which a man is justified through Jesus Christ our Lord, avails only
   for the remission of past sins, and not for assistance against
   committing sins in the future, let him be anathema.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXI.

   Whoever is of opinion that the grace of God only gives remission of
   those sins we have already committed, and does not afford aid against
   sin in the future, is to be twice execrated.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXII.  (Greek cxiij. continued.)

   That the grace of Christ gives not only the knowledge of our duty, but
   also inspires us with a desire that we may be able to accomplish what
   we know.

   Also, whoever shall say that the same grace of God through Jesus Christ
   our Lord helps us only in not sinning by revealing to us and opening to
   our understanding the commandments, so that we may know what to seek,
   what we ought to avoid, and also that we should love to do so, but that
   through it we are not helped so that we are able to do what we know we
   should do, let him be anathema.  For when the Apostle says:  "Wisdom
   puffeth up, but charity edifieth" it were truly infamous were we to
   believe that we have the grace of Christ for that which puffeth us up,
   but have it not for that which edifieth, since in each case it is the
   gift of God, both to know what we ought to do, and to love to do it; so
   that wisdom cannot puff us up while charity is edifying us.  For as of
   God it is written, "Who teacheth man knowledge," so also it is written,
   "Love is of God."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXII.

   Whoever says that the grace of God is given to us only that we may know
   what we ought to do and what to flee from, but not also that we may
   love the thing known, and be able to accomplish it, let him be
   anathema.

   Canon cxi. is Canon iij. of Carthage, a.d. 418, and Canon cxii. is
   Canon iv. of the same synod.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXIII.  (Greek cxiiii.)

   That without the grace of God we can do no good thing.

   It seemed good that whosoever should say that the grace of
   justification was given to us only that we might be able more readily
   by grace to perform what we were ordered to do through our free will;
   as if though grace was not given, although not easily, yet nevertheless
   we could even without grace fulfil the divine commandments, let him be
   anathema.  For the Lord spake concerning the fruits of the
   commandments, when he said:  "Without me ye can do nothing," and not
   "Without me ye could do it but with difficulty."

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXIII.

   Whoso preaches that without grace we could keep the commandments
   although with difficulty, is to be thrice execrated.  For the Lord
   says, "Without me ye can do nothing."

   This is Canon V. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXIV.  (Greek cxv.)

   That not only humble but also true is that voice of the Saints:  "If we
   say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves."

   It also seemed good that as St. John the Apostle says, "If we shall say
   that we have no sin we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us,"
   whosoever thinks that this should be so understood as to mean that out
   of humility, we ought to say that we have sin, and not because it is
   really so, let him be anathema.  For the Apostle goes on to add, "But
   if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins
   and to cleanse us from all iniquity," where it is sufficiently clear
   that this is said not only of humility but also truly.  For the Apostle
   might have said, "If we shall say we have no sins we shall extoll
   ourselves, and humility shall have no place in us;" but when he says,
   "we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us" he sufficiently
   intimates that he who affirmed that he had no sin would speak not that
   which is true but that which is false.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXIV.

   Whosoever shall interpret the saying of the Divine [i.e. St. John]:
   "If we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves" as not
   being really true but as spoken out of humility, let him be anathema.

   This is Canon vj. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXV.  (Greek cxvi.)

   That in the Lord's Prayer the Saints say for themselves:  "Forgive us
   our trespasses."

   It has seemed good that whoever should say that when in the Lord's
   prayer, the saints say, "forgive us our trespasses," they say this not
   for themselves, because they have no need of this petition, but for the
   rest who are sinners of the people; and that therefore no one of the
   saints can say, "Forgive me my trespasses," but "Forgive us our
   trespasses;" so that the just is understood to seek this for others
   rather than for himself; let him be anathema.  For holy and just was
   the Apostle James, when he said, "For in many things we offend all."
   For why was it added "all," unless that this sentence might agree also
   with the psalm, where we read, "Enter not into judgment with thy
   servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified;"
   and in the prayer of the most wise Solomon:  "There is no man that
   sinneth not;" and in the book of the holy Job:  "He sealeth in the hand
   of every man, that every man may know his own infirmity;" wherefore
   even the holy and just Daniel when in prayer said several times:  "We
   have sinned, we have done iniquity," and other things which there truly
   and humbly he confessed; nor let it be thought (as some have thought)
   that this was said not of his own but rather of the people's sins, for
   he said further on:  "When I shall pray and confess my sins and the
   sins of my people to the Lord my God;" he did not wish to say our sins,
   but he said the sins of his people and his own sins, since he as a
   prophet foresaw that those who were to come would thus misunderstand
   his words.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXV.

   Whoso expounds this, "forgive us our trespasses" as speaking only of
   the multitude and not of individuals let him be anathema:  Since Daniel
   even he can behold saying with the multitude "I confessed my sins and
   the sins of my people."

   This is Canon vij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXVI.  (Greek cxvii.)

   That the Saints say with accuracy, "Forgive us our trespasses."

   Likewise also it seemed good, that whoever wished that these words of
   the Lord's prayer, when we say, "Forgive us our trespasses" are said by
   the saints out of humility and not in truth let them be anathema.  For
   who would make a lying prayer, not to men but to God?  Who would say
   with his lips that he wished his sins forgiven him, but in his heart
   that he had no sins to be forgiven.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXVI.

   (Lacking.)

   This is Canon viij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXVII.  (Greek cxviii.)

   Of peoples converted from the Donatists.

   Item, it seemed good, since it was so decreed some years ago by a
   plenary council, that whatever churches were erected in a diocese
   before the laws were made concerning Donatists when they became
   Catholic, should pertain to the sees of those bishops through whom
   their return to Catholic unity was brought about; but after the laws
   whatever churches communicated were to belong there where they belonged
   when they were Donatists.  But because many controversies afterward
   arose and are still springing up between bishops concerning dioceses,
   which were not then at all in prospect, now it has seemed good to this
   council, that wherever there was a Catholic and a Donatist party,
   pertaining to different sees, at whatever time unity has been or shall
   be made, whether before or after the laws, the churches shall belong to
   that see to which the Catholic church which was already there belonged.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXVII.

   Whenever conversions and unions of Donatists are effected, let them be
   subject to that throne to which the Catholic Church which was formerly
   there was subject.

   This is Canon ix. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXVIII.  (Greek cxix.)

   How bishops as well Catholic as those who have been converted from the
   Donatists are to divide between themselves the dioceses.

   So, too, it has seemed good that if a bishop has been converted from
   the Donatists to Catholic unity, that equally there should be divided
   what shall have been so found where there were two parties; that is,
   that some places should pertain to one and some to the other; and let
   the division be made by him who has been the longest time in the
   episcopate, and let the younger choose.  But should there be only one
   place let it belong to him who is found to be the nearer.  But should
   the distance be equal to each of the two cathedrals let it belong to
   the one the people may choose.  But should the old Catholics wish their
   own bishop, and if the same be the case with the converted Donatists,
   let the will of the greater number prevail, but should the parties be
   equal, let it belong to him who has been longest bishop.  But if so
   many places be found in which there were both parties, that an equal
   division is impossible, as for example, if they are unequal in number,
   after those places have been distributed which have an equal number,
   the place that remains over shall be disposed of as is provided above
   in the case where there is but one place to be treated.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXVIII.

   Those who have been converted from Donatus, let them divide the
   dioceses; and let the senior bishop make the division, and the junior
   choose which he will.

   This is Canon x. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXIX.  (Greek cxx.)

   That if a bishop shall possess a diocese which he has snatched from
   heresy for three years, no one may take it from him.

   Item, it seemed good that if anyone after the laws should convert any
   place to Catholic unity and retain it for three years without
   opposition, it should not be taken away from him afterwards.  If
   however there was during those three years a bishop who could claim it
   and was silent, he shall lose the opportunity.  But if there was no
   bishop, no prejudice shall happen to the see, [482] but it shall be
   lawful when the place that had none shall receive a bishop, to make the
   claim within three years of that day.  Item, if a Donatist bishop shall
   be converted to the Catholic party, the time that has elapsed shall not
   count against him, but from the day of his conversion for three years
   he shall have the right of making a claim on the places which belonged
   to his See.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXIX.

   Whosoever shall convert a region to Orthodoxy and shall keep it
   converted for three years, let him be without blame.  But if the bishop
   converted from Donatus within three years of its conversion seeks his
   diocese again, let it be returned to him (ei enagei, enageto.)

   This is Canon xj. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [482] In the Latin "Matrici."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXX.  (Greek cxxi.)

   Of those who intrude upon peoples which they think belong to them,
   without the consent of those by whom they are held.

   Item, it seemed good that whatever bishops seek the peoples whom they
   consider to pertain to their see, not by bringing their causes before
   the episcopal judges, but rush in while another is holding the place,
   all such, (whether said people are willing to receive them or no) shall
   lose their case.  And whoever have done this, if the contention between
   the two bishops is not yet finished but still going on, let him depart
   who intruded without the decree of the ecclesiastical judges; nor let
   anyone flatter himself that he will retain [what he has seized] if he
   shall obtain letters from the primate, but whether he has such letters
   or has them not, it is suitable that he who holds and receives his
   letters should make it appear then that he has held the church
   pertaining to him peaceably.  But if he has referred any question, let
   the cause be decided by the episcopal judges, whether those whom the
   primates have appointed for them, or the neighbouring bishops whom they
   have chosen by common consent.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXX.

   Let no one seize for himself what he thinks belongs to him:  but let
   the bishops judge or whom the Primate will give, or whom the
   neighbouring bishops shall give with his consent.  But whosoever has
   received letters from the primate concerning the keeping [of such
   regions and churches] merely deceives himself.

   This is Canon xij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXI.  (Greek cxxii.)

   Of those who neglect the peoples belonging to them.

   Item, it seemed good that whoever neglect to bring the places belonging
   to their see into Catholic unity should be admonished by the
   neighbouring diligent bishops, that they delay no longer to do this;
   but if within six months from the day of the convention they do
   nothing, let them pertain to him who can win them:  but with this
   proviso however, that if he to whom it seemed they naturally belonged
   can prove that this neglect was intentional and more efficacious in
   winning them than the greater apparent diligence of others; when the
   episcopal judges shall be convinced that this is the case, they shall
   restore the places to his see.  If the bishops between whom the cause
   lies are of different provinces, let the Primate in whose province the
   place is situated about which there is the dispute, appoint judges; but
   if by mutual consent they have chosen as judges the neighbouring
   bishops, let one or three be chosen:  so that if they choose three they
   may follow the sentence of all or of two.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXI.

   If any neglect what belongs to their jurisdiction, let them be
   admonished; and if they shall do nothing within a six month, let them
   be adjudged to him who can win them.  But if they have committed the
   neglect out of policy so as not to irritate the heretics, and this
   shall appear to have been the case, their sees shall be restored to
   them, by the judgment of the bishops either appointed or elected.

   This is Canon xiij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXII.  (Greek cxxiii.)

   The sentence of the elected judges ought not to be spurned.

   From the judges chosen by common consent of the parties, no appeal can
   be taken; and whoever shall be found to have carried such an appeal and
   contumaciously to be unwilling to submit to the judges, when this has
   been proved to the primate, let him give letters, that no one of the
   bishops should communicate with him until he yield.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXII.

   A judge chosen by both parties cannot be repudiated.

   This is Canon xiv. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

   Johnson.

   See Canons 76 (79) and 80 (83).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXIII.  (Greek cxxiv.)

   That if a bishop neglects his diocese he is to be deprived of
   communion.

   If in the mother cathedrals a bishop should have been negligent against
   the heretics, let a meeting be held of the neighbouring diligent
   bishops, and let his negligence be pointed out to him, so that he can
   have no excuse.  But if within six months after this meeting, if an
   execution was in his own province, and he had taken no care to convert
   them to Catholic unity, no one shall communicate with him till he does
   his duty.  But if no executor shall have come to the places, then the
   fault shall not be laid to the bishop.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXIII.

   A bishop who spurns the care of heretics, and if after being warned he
   continues for six months in his contempt, and has no care for their
   conversion, is to be excommunicated.

   This is Canon xv. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

   Johnson.

   So [i.e. "Metropoles"] I turn matrices cathedræ.  I know indeed there
   were no fixed ecclesiastical metropoles, in Africa; but they had civil
   metropoles called by that name, can. 86, (89) which see.

   Of these officers [i.e. "Executors "] see can. 97 (100).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXIV.  (Greek cxxv.)

   Of bishops who shall lie with regard to Donatists' communions.

   If it shall be proven that any bishop has lied concerning the communion
   of those [who had been Donatists], and had said that they had
   communicated when he knew it was an established fact that they had not
   done so, let him lose his bishoprick.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXIV.

   Whoso says that a man, whom he knows does not communicate, does
   communicate is to be deprived of his episcopate.

   This is Canon xvj. of Carthage, a.d. 418.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXV.  (Greek cxxvi.)

   That presbyters and clerics are not to appeal except to African Synods.

   Item, it seemed good that presbyters, deacons, or other of the lower
   clergy who are to be tried, if they question the decision of their
   bishops, the neighbouring bishops having been invited by them with the
   consent of their bishops, shall hear them and determine whatever
   separates them.  But should they think an appeal should be carried from
   them, let them not carry the appeal except to African councils or to
   the primates of their provinces.  But whoso shall think of carrying an
   appeal across seas he shall be admitted to communion by no one in
   Africa.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXV.

   A presbyter and deacons, who has been condemned by his own bishop, let
   him appeal to the neighbouring bishops:  but let them not cross the
   sea.  In Africa they shall be excommunicated.

   This is Canon xvij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

   Johnson.

   A repetition of Canon 28 (31).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXVI.  (Greek cxxvii.)

   That Virgins, even when minors, should be given the veil.

   Item, it seemed good that whatever bishop, by the necessity of the
   dangers of virginal purity, when either a powerful suitor or some
   ravisher is feared, or if she shall be pricked with some scruple of
   death that she might die unveiled, at the demand either of her parents
   or of those to whose care she has been entrusted, shall give the veil
   to a virgin, or shall have given it while she was under twenty-five
   years of age, the council which has appointed that number of years
   shall not oppose him.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXVI.

   Whosoever has veiled or shall veil a virgin before she is twenty-five
   years of age (that is give her the habit, or clothe her), being forced
   thereto on account of a powerful lover, or a ravisher, or deadly
   disease, provided those who have the charge of her so exhort, shall
   receive no damage from the synod concerning that age.

   This is Canon xviij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.  The reference to a former
   canon is to Canon j. of the second series of the canons of the Synod of
   Hippo in a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXVII.  (Greek cxxviii.)

   That bishops be not detained too long in council, let them choose three
   judges from themselves of the singular provinces.

   Item, it seemed good, lest all the bishops who are assembled at a
   council be kept too long, that the whole synod should choose three
   judges of the several provinces; and they elected for the province of
   Carthage Vincent, Fortunatian, and Clarus; for the province of Numidia
   Alypius, Augustine, and Restitutus; for the province of Byzacena, with
   the holy Senex Donatian the Primate, Cresconius, Jocundus, and Æmilian;
   for Mauritania Sitephensis Severian, Asiaticus, and Donatus; for the
   Tripolitan province Plautius, who alone was sent as legate according to
   custom; all these were to take cognizance of all things with the holy
   senex Aurelius, from whom the whole council sought that he should
   subscribe all things done by the council whether acts or letters.  And
   they subscribed:  I, Aurelius, bishop of the church of Carthage consent
   to this decree and having read it sign my name.  Likewise also signed
   they all.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXVII.

   Whenever the bishops who come to synod can remain no longer in
   attendance, let three be chosen from each province.

   This is Canon xix. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

   Johnson.

   Two Sancti Senes mentioned, who we are sure were both primates.  See
   can. 100 (104).

   See can. 14.

   And here we have an ancient precedent for synods delegating their
   authority to a committee, with the primate of all Africa at the head of
   it.

   Item, at this council there was present a legation from the Roman
   Church.

   After the consulate of the most glorious emperors Honorius for the
   XII^th. time and Theodosius for the VIII^th., Augusti, on the III.
   Calends of June, at Carthage, in the Secretarium of the restored
   basilica, when Aurelius the bishop together with Faustinus of the
   church of Potentia in the Italian province of Picenum, a legate of the
   Roman Church, Vincent of Calvita [483] (Culositanus), Fortunatian of
   Naples, Marianus Uzipparensis, Adeodatus of Simidica, Pentadius of
   Carpi, Rufinian of Muzuba, Prætextatus of Sicily, Quodvultdeus of Veri
   (Verensis), Candidus of Abbirita, Gallonian of Utica, legates of the
   proconsular province; Alypius of Tagaste, Augustine of Hippo Regia and
   Posidonius of Calama, legates of the province of Numidia; Maximian of
   Aquæ, Jocundus of Sufetula, and Hilary of Horrea-Cascilia, legates of
   the province of Byzacena; Novatus of Sitifi and Leo of Mocta, legates
   of the province of Mauritania Sitiphensis; Ninellus of Rusucarrum,
   Laurence of Icosium and Numerian of Rusgunium, legates of the Province
   of Mauritania Cæsariensis, the judges chosen by the plenary council,
   had taken their seats, the deacons standing by, and when, after certain
   things had been accomplished, many bishops complained that it was not
   possible for them to wait for the completion of the rest of the
   business to be treated of, and that they must hasten to their own
   churches; it seemed good to the whole council, that by all some should
   be chosen from each province who should remain to finish up what was
   left to be done.  And it came about that those were present whose
   subscriptions testify that they were present.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [483] Not Calusita.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXVIII.  (Greek cxxix.)

   That those out of communion should not be allowed to bring accusation.

   It seemed good to all, as it had been decreed by the former councils,
   concerning what persons were to be admitted to bring accusations
   against clerics; and since it had not been expressed what persons
   should not be admitted, therefore we define, that he cannot properly be
   admitted to bring an accusation, who had been already excommunicated,
   and was still lying under that censure, whether he that wished to be
   the accuser were cleric or layman.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome OF Canon CXXVIII.

   One excommunicated is not to give witness.

   The Council of Carthage of 419 had at its first session on May 25th
   done thus much.  But when it met again on the 30th of the same month,
   it continued the code.  The introduction in regard to this new session
   is this introduction.  The Canons then enacted were original, viz.
   numbers 128, 129, 130, 131, 132 and 133.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXIX.  (Greek cxxx.)

   That slaves and freedmen and all infamous persons ought not to bring
   accusation.

   To all it seemed good that no slaves or freedmen, properly so called,
   be admitted to accusation nor any of those who by the public laws are
   debarred from bringing accusation in criminal proceedings.  This also
   is the case with all those who have the stain of infamy, that is
   actors, and persons subject to turpitudes, also heretics, or heathen,
   or Jews; but even all those to whom the right of bringing accusation is
   denied, are not forbidden to bring accusation in their own suits.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXIX.

   A slave, and a freedman, and he who before was accused of any of these
   crimes on account of which he is not admitted in court, and a player,
   and a heathen, and a heretic, and a Jew.

   [There is no verb to finish the sentence.  However, this is intended as
   a continuation of the epitome of the former canon, the words to be
   supplied being "are not to give witness."]

   Johnson.

   See Can., Const., 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXX.  (Greek cxxxi.)

   That he who has failed to prove one charge shall not be allowed to give
   evidence to another.

   So, too, it seemed good that as often as many crimes were laid to
   clerics by their accusers, and one of the first examined could not be
   proved, [484] they should not be allowed to go on giving evidence on
   the other counts.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXX.

   He who makes many accusations and proves nothing [is not to give
   witness].
     __________________________________________________________________

   [484] The Latin here is evidently corrupt.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXI.  (Greek CXXXII.)

   Who should be allowed to give evidence.

   They who are forbidden to be admitted as accusers are not to be allowed
   to appear as witnesses, nor any that the accuser may bring from his own
   household.  And none shall be admitted to give witness under fourteen
   years of age.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXI.

   And whoso is not past fourteen years of age [is not to give witness].
   An accuser is not to produce witnesses from his own house.

   Johnson.

   See Can. 129.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXII.  (Greek cxxxiii.)

   Concerning a bishop who removes a man from communion who says he has
   confessed to the bishop alone his crime.

   It also seemed good that if on any occasion a bishop said that someone
   had confessed to him alone a personal crime, and that the man now
   denies it; let not the bishop think that any slight is laid upon him if
   he is not believed on his own word alone, although he says he is not
   willing to communicate with the man so denying through a scruple of his
   own conscience.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXII.

   If a bishop says "someone has confessed to me alone a crime," if the
   someone denies it, he [i.e. the bishop] is not easily to be believed.

   N.B.  The word used for "someone" in the Epitome is pelas, which
   ordinarily means a "neighbour" but may mean "any one."  Vide Liddell
   and Scott.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXIII.  (Greek cxxxiv.)

   That a bishop should not rashly deprive anyone of communion.

   As long as his own bishop will not communicate with one excommunicated,
   the other bishops should have no communion with that bishop, that the
   bishop may be more careful not to charge anyone with what he cannot
   prove by documentary evidence to others.

   (Greek cxxxv.)

   Bishop Aurelius said:  According to the statutes of this whole
   assembled council, and the opinion of my littleness, it seems good to
   make an end of all the matters of the whole of the before-manifested
   title, and let the ecclesiastical acts receive the discussion of the
   present day's constitution.

   And what things have not yet been expressed ("treated of" in the Greek)
   we shall write on the next day through our brethren, Bishop Faustinus
   and the Presbyters Philip and Asellus to our venerable brother and
   fellow-bishop Boniface; and they gave their assent in writing.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXIII.

   If a bishop deprives of communion an unconvicted man, he shall likewise
   be deprived of communion with his fellows.

   Johnson.

   Never was a more impartial law made, especially when all the
   legislators were bishops except two.  There were 217 bishops, and two
   priests, being legates from the bishop of Rome.

   The Greeks make a canon of the ratifications, and reckon no more than
   135.  Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, subscribes first, and after him 217
   bishops, then Asellus and Philippus, priests, legates of the church of
   Rome.  And it does not appear that any other priests were present in
   any of the councils, mentioned in the body of this code; but there is
   several times notice taken of the deacons who stood by.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXIV.  (Continuation of cxxxv. in the Greek.)

   Here beginneth the letter directed from the whole African Council to
   Boniface, bishop of the City of Rome, by Faustinus the bishop, and
   Philip and Asellus the presbyters, legates of the Roman Church.

   To the most blessed lord, and our honourable brother Boniface,
   Aurelius, Valentine of the primatial See of Numidia, and others present
   with us to the number of 217 from the whole council in Africa.

   Since it has pleased the Lord that our humility should write concerning
   those things which with us our holy brethren, Faustinus a fellow-bishop
   and Philip and Asellus, fellow presbyters, have done, not to the bishop
   Zosimus of blessed memory, from whom they brought commands and letters
   to us, but to your holiness, who art constituted in his room by divine
   authority, we ought briefly to set forth what has been determined upon
   by mutual consent; not indeed those things which are contained in the
   prolix volumes of the acts, in which, while charity was preserved, yet
   we loitered not without some little labour of altercation, deliberating
   those things in the acts which now pertain to the cause.  However the
   more gratefully would he have received this news as he would have seen
   a more peaceful ending of the matter, my lord and brother, had he been
   still in the body!  Apiarius the presbyter, concerning whose
   ordination, excommunication, and appeal no small scandal arose not only
   at Sicca but also in the whole African Church, has been restored to
   communion upon his seeking pardon for all his sins.  First our fellow
   bishop Urban of Sicca doubtless corrected whatever in him seemed to
   need correction.  For there should have been kept in mind the peace and
   quiet of the Church not only in the present but also in the future,
   since so many evils of such a kind had gone before, that it was
   incumbent to take care that like or even graver evils should be
   prevented thereafter.  It seemed good to us that the presbyter Apiarius
   should be removed from the church of Sicca, retaining only the honour
   of his grade, and that he should exercise the office of the
   presbyterate wherever else he wished and could, having received a
   letter to this effect.  This we granted without difficulty at his own
   petition made in a letter.  But truly before this case should be thus
   closed, among other things which we were treating of in daily
   discussions, the nature of the case demanded that we should ask our
   brothers, Faustinus our fellow bishop, and Philip and Asellus our
   fellow presbyters, to set forth what they had been enjoined to treat of
   with us that they might be inserted in the ecclesiastical acts.  And
   they proceeded to make a verbal statement, but when we earnestly asked
   that they would present it rather in writing, then they produced the
   Commonitory.  This was read to us and also set down in the acts, which
   they are bringing with them to you.  In this they were bidden to treat
   of four things with us, first concerning the appeal of bishops to the
   Pontiff of the Roman Church, second that bishops should not
   unbecomingly be sailing to court, thirdly concerning the treating the
   causes of presbyters and deacons by contiguous bishops, if they had
   been wrongly excommunicated by their own, and fourthly concerning the
   bishop Urban who should be excommunicated or even sent to Rome, unless
   he should have corrected what seemed to need correction.  Of all which
   things concerning the first and third, that is that it is allowed to
   bishops to appeal to Rome and that the causes of clerics should be
   settled by the bishops of their own provinces, already last year we
   have taken pains to insinuate, in our letter to the same bishop Zosimus
   of venerable memory, that we were willing to observe these provisions
   for a little while without any injury to him, until the search for the
   statutes of the Council of Nice had been finished.  And now we ask of
   your holiness that you would cause to be observed by us the acts and
   constitutions of our fathers at the Council of Nice, and that you cause
   to be exercised by you there, those things which they brought in the
   commonitory:  that is to say, If a bishop shall have been accused,
   etc.  [Here follows Canon vii. of Sardica.]

   Item concerning presbyters and deacons.  If any bishop has been quickly
   angered, etc.  [Here follows Canon xvii. of Sardica.]

   These are the things which have been inserted in the acts until the
   arrival of the most accurate copies of the Nicene Council, which
   things, [485] if they are contained there (as in the Commonitory, which
   our brethren directed to us from the Apostolic See alleged) and be even
   kept according to that order by you in Italy, in no way could we be
   compelled either to endure such treatment as we are unwilling to
   mention or could suffer what is unbearable: [486]   but we believe,
   through the mercy of our Lord God, while your holiness presides over
   the Roman Church, we shall not have to suffer that pride (istum typhum
   passuri).  And there will be kept toward us, what should be kept with
   brotherly love to us who are making no dispute.  You will also perceive
   according to the wisdom and the justice which the most Highest has
   given thee, what should be observed, [487] if perchance the canons of
   the Council of Nice are other [than you suppose].  For although we have
   read very many copies, yet never have we read in the Latin copies that
   there were any such decrees as are contained in the commonitory before
   mentioned.  So too, because we can find them in no Greek text here, we
   have desired that there should be brought to us from the Eastern
   Churches copies of the decrees, for it is said that there correct
   copies of the decrees are to be found.  For which end we beg your
   reverence, that you would deign yourself also to write to the pontiffs
   of these parts, that is of the churches of Antioch, Alexandria, and
   Constantinople, [488] and to any others also if it shall please your
   holiness, that thence there may come to us the same canons decreed by
   the Fathers in the city of Nice, and thus you would confer by the help
   of the Lord this most great benefit upon all the churches of the West.
   For who can doubt that the copies of the Nicene Council gathered in the
   Greek empire are most accurate, which although brought together from so
   diverse and from such noble Greek churches are found to agree when
   compared together?  And until this be done, the provisions laid down to
   us in the Commonitory aforesaid, concerning the appeals of bishops to
   the pontiff of the Roman Church and concerning the causes of clerics
   which should be terminated by the bishops of their own provinces, we
   are willing to allow to be observed until the proof arrives and we
   trust your blessedness will help us in this according to the will of
   God.  The rest of the matters treated and defined in our synod, since
   the aforesaid brethren, our fellow bishop Faustinus, and the presbyters
   Philip and Asellus are carrying the acts with them, if you deign to
   receive them, will make known to your holiness.  And they signed. [489]
     Our Lord keep thee to us for many years, most blessed brother.
   Alypius, Augustine, Possidius, Marinus and the rest of the bishops
   (217) also signed.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXIV.

   Urban, the bishop of Siccas, is either to be excommunicated or else
   summoned to Rome unless he corrects what should be corrected by him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [485] The text here is very uncertain.  I follow Allies.

   [486] It is evident that the Latin text here is corrupt in more places
   than one.  There would seem to be no doubt that for Migne's reading quæ
   sibi, the Greek translators had quæ si ibi and accordingly rendered it
   hatina ean ekei, and so the text stands in Labbe and Cossart.  The
   following sentence is also clearly in a somewhat altered form from its
   original.

   [487] L. and C. insert here wrongly a nisi.

   [488] This order of naming the sees is worthy of note.

   [489] So in the Greek; the Latin reads Et alia manu.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXV.  (Not numbered in the Greek.)

   Here begin the rescripts to the African Council from Cyril bishop of
   Alexandria in which he sends the authentic proceedings of the Nicene
   Council, [490] translated from the Greek by Innocent the presbyter:
   these letters with the same Nicene council were also sent through the
   aforementioned presbyter Innocent and by Marcellus a subdeacon of the
   Church of Carthage, to the holy Boniface, bishop of the Roman Church,
   on the sixth day before the calends of December in the year 419. [491]

   To the most honourable lords, our holy brethren and fellow bishops,
   Aurelius, Valentinus, as well as to the whole holy synod met in
   Carthage, Cyril salutes your holiness in God.

   I have received with all joy at the hands of our son, the presbyter
   Innocent, the letters of your reverence so full of piety, in which you
   express the hope that we will send you most accurate copies of the
   decrees of the holy Fathers at the Synod held at Nice the metropolis of
   Bithynia from the archives of our church; with our own certificate of
   accuracy attached thereto.  In answer to which request, most honourable
   lords and brethren, I have thought it necessary to send to you, with
   our compliments, by our son, Innocent the presbyter, the bearer of
   these, most faithful copies of the decisions of the synod held at Nice
   in Bithynia.  And when ye have sought in the history of the church, you
   will find them there also.  Concerning Easter, as you have written, we
   announce to you that we shall celebrate it on the xviii^th [492] before
   the calends of May of the next indiction.  The subscription.  May God
   and our Lord preserve your holy synod as we desire, dear brethren.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXV.

   According to your written request, we have sent to your charity most
   faithful copies of the authentic decrees of the Synod which was held at
   Nice, a city of Bithynia.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [490] The Greek adds "and the canons."

   [491] No year is given in the Greek nor in Migne's Latin.

   [492] Bruns says "all the books" read "xvij. Kal.," but, as a fact,
   Easter was "xiv. Kal." that year.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXVI.  (Not numbered in the Greek but with a new heading.)

   Here beginneth the letter of Atticus, bishop of Constantinople to the
   same.

   To our holy lords, and rightly most blessed brethren and fellow
   bishops, Aurelius, Valentine, and [493] to the other beloved ones met
   together in the Synod held at Carthage, Atticus the bishop.

   By our son Marcellus the subdeacon, I have received with all
   thanksgiving the writings of your holiness, praising the Lord that I
   enjoyed the blessing of so many of my brethren.  O my lords and most
   blessed brethren, ye have written asking me to send you most accurate
   copies of the canons enacted at the city of Nice, the metropolis of
   Bithynia, by the Fathers for the exposition of the faith.  And who is
   there that would deny to his brethren the common faith, or the statutes
   decreed by the Fathers.  Wherefore by the same son of mine, Marcellus,
   your subdeacon, who was in great haste, I have sent to you the canons
   in full as they were adopted by the Fathers in the city of Nice; and I
   ask of you that your holy synod would have me much in your prayers.
   The subscription.  May our God keep your sanctity, as we desire, most
   holy brethren.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [493] So in the Greek, vel in Latin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXVII.  (Continuation of the last in the Greek.)

   Here begin the examples of the Nicene Council, sent on the sixth day
   before the calends of December in the year 419, [494] after the
   consulate of the most glorious emperor Honorius for the XII^th time,
   and Theodosius for the IX^th time, [495] Augustuses, to Boniface the
   bishop of the City of Rome.

   We believe in one God etc....the Catholic and Apostolic Church
   anathematizes them. [496]

   To this symbol of the faith there were also annexed copies of the
   statutes of the same Nicene Councils from the aforenamed pontiffs, in
   all respects as are contained above; which we do not think it necessary
   to write out here again.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXVII.

   The Canons of the Synod of Nice are sent, as they were decreed by the
   Fathers, in accordance with your letters.

   [Here follows the Nicene Creed in full.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [494] No year in the Greek nor in Migne's Latin.

   [495] Bruns notes with Justellus and Hardouin and the Codd. Hisp. this
   should read viii. for ix.

   [496] In the Greek the creed is not given here in full, but as
   follows:  "We believe in one God the Father; and then the holy creed as
   written in the first synod."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Canon CXXXVIII.  (Not numbered in the Greek.)

   Here beginneth the epistle of the African synod to Pope Celestine,
   bishop of the City of Rome.

   To the lord and most beloved and our honourable brother Celestine,
   Aurelius, Palatinus, Antony, Totus, Servusdei, Terentius, Fortunatus,
   Martin, Januarius, Optatus, Ceticius, Donatus, Theasius, Vincent,
   Fortunatian, and the rest of us, assembled at Carthage in the General
   Council of Africa.

   We could wish that, like as your Holiness intimated to us, in your
   letter sent by our fellow presbyter Leo, your pleasure at the arrival
   of Apiarius, so we also could send to you these writings with pleasure
   respecting his clearing.  Then in truth both our own satisfaction, and
   yours of late would be more reasonable; nor would that lately expressed
   by you concerning the hearing of him then to come, as well as that
   already past, seem hasty and inconsiderate.  Upon the arrival, then, of
   our holy Brother and fellow-Bishop Faustinus, we assembled a council,
   and believed that he was sent with that man, in order that, as he
   [Apiarius] had before been restored to the presbyterate by his
   assistance, so now he might with his exertions be cleared of the very
   great crimes charged against him by the inhabitants of Tabraca.  But
   the due course of examination in our council discovered in him such
   great and monstrous crimes as to overbear even Faustinus, who acted
   rather as an advocate of the aforementioned person than as a judge, and
   to prevail against what was more the zeal of a defender, than the
   justice of an inquirer.  For first he vehemently opposed the whole
   assembly, inflicting on us many injuries, under pretence of asserting
   the privileges of the Roman Church, and wishing that he should be
   received into communion by us, on the ground that your Holiness,
   believing him to have appealed, though unable to prove it, had restored
   him to communion.  But this we by no means allowed, as you will also
   better see by reading the acts.  After however, a most laborious
   inquiry carried on for three days, during which in the greatest
   affliction we took cognizance of various charges against him, God the
   just Judge, strong and long suffering, cut short by a sudden stroke
   both the delays of our fellow-bishop Faustinus and the evasions of
   Apiarius himself, by which he was endeavouring to veil his foul
   enormities.  For his strong and shameless obstinacy was overcome, by
   which he endeavoured to cover, through an impudent denial, the mire of
   his lusts, and God so wrought upon his conscience and published, even
   to the eyes of men, the secret crimes which he was already condemning
   in that man's heart, a very sty of wickedness, that, after his false
   denial he suddenly burst forth into a confession of all the crimes he
   was charged with, and at length convicted himself of his own accord of
   all infamies beyond belief, and changed to groans even the hope we had
   entertained, believing and desiring that he might be cleared from such
   shameful blots, except indeed that it was so far a relief to our
   sorrow, that he had delivered us from the labour of a longer inquiry,
   and by confession had applied some sort of remedy to his own wounds,
   though, lord and brother, it was unwilling, and done with a struggling
   conscience.  Premising, therefore, our due regards to you, we earnestly
   conjure you, that for the future you do not readily admit to a hearing
   persons coming hence, nor choose to receive to your communion those who
   have been excommunicated by us, because you, venerable Sir, will
   readily perceive that this has been prescribed even by the Nicene
   council.  For though this seems to be there forbidden in respect of the
   inferior clergy, or the laity, how much more did it will this to be
   observed in the case of bishops, lest those who had been suspended from
   communion in their own Province might seem to be restored to communion
   hastily or unfitly by your Holiness.  Let your Holiness reject, as is
   worthy of you, that unprincipled taking shelter with you of presbyters
   likewise, and the inferior clergy, both because by no ordinance of the
   Fathers hath the Church of Africa been deprived of this authority, and
   the Nicene decrees have most plainly committed not only the clergy of
   inferior rank, but the bishops themselves to their own Metropolitans.
   For they have ordained with great wisdom and justice, that all matters
   should be terminated in the places where they arise; and did not think
   that the grace of the Holy Spirit would be wanting to any Province, for
   the bishops of Christ (Sacerdotibus) wisely to discern, and firmly to
   maintain the right:  especially since whosoever thinks himself wronged
   by any judgment may appeal to the council of his Province, or even to a
   General Council [i.e. of Africa] unless it be imagined that God can
   inspire a single individual with justice, and refuse it to an
   innumerable multitude of bishops (sacerdotum) assembled in council.
   And how shall we be able to rely on a sentence passed beyond the sea,
   since it will not be possible to send thither the necessary witnesses,
   whether from the weakness of sex, or advanced age, or any other
   impediment?  For that your Holiness should send any on your part we can
   find ordained by no council of Fathers.  Because with regard to what
   you have sent us by the same our brother bishop Faustinus, as being
   contained in the Nicene Council, we can find nothing of the kind in the
   more authentic copies of that council, which we have received from the
   holy Cyril our brother, Bishop of the Alexandrine Church, and from the
   venerable Atticus the Prelate of Constantinople, and which we formerly
   sent by Innocent the presbyter, and Marcellus the subdeacon through
   whom we received them, to Boniface the Bishop, your predecessor of
   venerable memory.  Moreover whoever desires you to delegate any of your
   clergy to execute your orders, do not comply, lest it seem that we are
   introducing the pride of secular dominion into the Church of Christ
   which exhibiteth to all that desire to see God the light of simplicity
   and the day of humility.  For now that the miserable Apiarius has been
   removed out of the Church of Christ for his horrible crimes, we feel
   confident respecting our brother Faustinus, that through the
   uprightness and moderation of your Holiness, Africa, without violating
   brotherly charity, will by no means have to endure him any longer.
   Lord and brother, may our Lord long preserve your Holiness to pray for
   us. [497]

   Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXVIII.

   Those excommunicated by us, ye are not be willing to admit afterwards
   to communion, according to the decree of the Nicene Synod.  For
   Apiarius, who was restored by you, has resisted the Synod, and treated
   it with scorn, and at length has been converted and confessed himself
   guilty with sighs and tears.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [497] This translation is by Allies.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Council of Constantinople held under Nectarius.

   a.d. 394.

   Elenchus.

   Introductory Note.

   Extracts from the Acts.

   Ancient Epitome and Notes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introductory Note.

   The acts of this Council are found in Balsamon, page 761 of the Paris
   edition, with Hervetus's translation.  Labbe [498] has taken Balsamon's
   text and inserted it into his Collection, from which the following
   translation is made.  There is another version extant in Leunclavius,
   Jus Græco-Roman. p. 247.

   On September the twenty-ninth of the year 394, a magnificent church,
   dedicated to SS. Peter and Paul, built by the munificence of Rufinus
   the Prætoreal prefect, and situated at a place called "the Oaks," a
   suburb of Chalcedon, was consecrated.  Most scholars have adopted
   Tillemont's suggestion that this was the occasion which brought the
   patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch to Constantinople, and that
   occasion was taken advantage of to hold a synod with regard to the
   dispute as to the see of Bostra.  At this council, in accordance with
   the canon of the Second Ecumenical Council, adopted only a dozen years
   before, Constantinople took the first place and its bishop presided,
   but so strong was the hold of Alexandria that three centuries
   afterwards the Quinisext Synod speaks of this council as held "under
   Nectarius and Theophilus."  In passing it may not be amiss to remark
   that St. Gregory of Nyssa and Theodore of Mopsuestia, and Flavian were
   present at this council!  Well may Tillemont [499] exclaim, "It is
   remarkable to see Theophilus there with Flavian, although they were not
   in communion with each other."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [498] Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. II., col. 1151.

   [499] Tillemont.  Mémoires, ix., 592.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Council of Constantinople Under Nectarius of Constantinople and
   Theophilus of Alexandria.

   a.d. 394.

   (Found in Beveridge, Synodicon.  Tom. I., p. 678; Labbe and Cossart,
   Concilia, Tom. II., col. 1151.  Both taken from Balsamon.)

   In the consulate of our most religious and beloved-of-God Emperors,
   Flavius Arcadius Augustus, for the third time, and Honorius for the
   second time, on the third day before the calends of October, in the
   baptistery of the most holy church of Constantinople, when the most
   holy bishops had taken their seats [here follow the names], Nectarius,
   the bishop of Constantinople, said:  Since by the grace of God this
   synod has met in this holy place, if the synod of my holy brethren and
   fellow ministers in holy things thinks good, since I see our brothers
   Bagadius and Agapius, who contend between themselves about the
   bishopric of Bostra, are also present, let these begin to set forth
   their mutual rights.  And after some things had been done by them for
   the sake of this cause, and it had been shewn that the afore-named
   Bagadius was deposed by only two bishops, both of whom were dead,
   Arabianus, bishop of Ancyra, said:  Not on account of this judgment,
   but fearing henceforth for my whole life, I desire the holy Synod to
   make a decree, whether or no, a bishop can be deposed by only two
   bishops, and whether the Metropolitan is absent or not, without
   prejudice to the present cause.  For I fear that some, taking their
   power from these acts, may dare to attempt such things.  I wish
   therefore your response.

   Nectarius, the bishop of Constantinople, said:  The most religious
   bishop Arabianus hath spoken most laudably.  But since it is impossible
   to go backward in judgment, let us, without condemning that which is
   past, establish things for the future.  Arabianus, bishop of Ancyra,
   said:  The synod of blessed fathers who met at Nice condemns what has
   taken place, for it orders that not less than three shall ordain, nor
   even so without the metropolitan.  But of the future I, full of fear,
   have made this question.  I would wish therefore that you would say
   clearly and without delay or doubt, that a bishop could not, according
   to the decree of the Synod of Nice, lawfully be ordained or deposed by
   two men.

   And, after some further debate, Theophilus, the bishop of Alexandria,
   said:  Against those who have gone forth, no sentence of indignation
   can be pronounced, since those to be condemned were not present.  But
   if any one were to consider those who are to be deposed in future, it
   seems to me that not only these ought to assemble, but so far as
   possible all the other provincials, that by the sentence of many there
   may be rendered a more accurate condemnation of him who is present and
   is being judged, and who deserves deposition.  Nectarius, the bishop of
   Constantinople, said:  Since, the controversy is concerning legitimate
   institutions and decrees, it follows that nothing must be decreed on
   account of personal causes.  Wherefore as the most holy bishop
   Arabianus has said, wishing to make the future certain, the sentence of
   the most holy bishop Theophilus hath consistently and considerately
   decreed that for the future it shall be lawful not even for three, far
   less for two bishops to depose him who is examined as a defendant:  but
   by the sentence of the greater synod and of the bishops of the
   province, according to the Apostolic Canons.  Flavian, the bishop of
   Antioch, said:  What things the most holy bishop Nectarius, and the
   most holy bishop Theophilus have set forth are clearly right.  And all
   the ecclesiastics agreed with these.

   Notes.

   Ancient Epitome.

   In future when a defendant is examined, he ought not to be deposed by
   two or three bishops:  but by the sentence of the greater Synod and of
   his own provincials, as also the Apostolic Canons provide.

   Balsamon.

   As Bagadius, the bishop of Bostra, had been deposed by only two
   bishops, the matter was considered in the synod at Constantinople,
   whether that deposition had been rightly decreed.  Agapius, the elect,
   laying claim to it under the decision.  And it was decreed that the
   deposition was not canonical, since not two but a number should judge
   of those accusations which are made against bishops.  But know that
   this constitution has no force to-day, for by the twelfth canon of the
   synod of Carthage, which is much later, crimes charged against bishops
   are to be judged of by twelve bishops.  Read that canon, and know that
   this synod was held in the time of the Emperor Arcadius, while that of
   Carthage was in the days of Theodosius the younger.

   Zonaras explains that by the words "have gone forth" in the speech of
   Theophilus of Alexandria is to be understood have died.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Council of Carthage held under Cyprian.

   a.d. 257.

   Elenchus.

   Introductory Note.

   The remains of the Acts.

   Notes, with St. Cyprian's Epistle to Januarius, et al.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introductory Note.

   It is commonly supposed by the commentators that what follows is the
   "Canon of St. Cyprian" referred to in the Second canon of the Synod in
   Trullo.  Johnson [500] thinks that that canon comes down to us as Canon
   XXXIX. of the Apostolic Canons.  Baronius [501] agrees with Asseman
   [502] in thinking that from hatred to Rome the Greeks adopted the
   theory of the non-validity of heretical baptism.  "But," as Hefele
   [503] well remarks, "in that case they would have contradicted
   themselves."

   Zonaras remarks:  "This is the most ancient of all the synods.  For
   that which was held at Antioch in Syria concerning Paul of Samosata was
   more ancient than the others, being holden in the time of the Roman
   Emperor Aurelius, but this one is still earlier.  For the great Cyprian
   finished his martyr course in the time of the Emperor Decius:  but
   there was a long interval between Aurelian and Decius.  For many
   emperors reigned after the death of Decius, to whom at last Aurelian
   succeeded on the throne.  Therefore this is by far the most ancient of
   all synods.  In it moreover above eighty-four bishops were gathered
   together, and considered the question as to what was to be done about
   the baptism of those who came to the Church after abandoning their
   heresies, and of schismatics who returned to the Church."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [500] Johnson.  Clergyman's Vade Mecum.  Notes in loc.

   [501] Baronius.  Annal. ad ann., 692.

   [502] Asseman.  Bib. Jur. Orient.  Tom. I., p. 414.

   [503] Hefele.  Hist. Councils, Vol. V., p. 224, note 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Synod held at Carthage over which presided the Great and Holy
   Martyr Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage.

   a.d. 257.

   (Found in Beveridge, Synodicon, Tom. I., p. 365, and in Labbe and
   Cossart, Concilia, Tom. I., col. 786.)

   When very many bishops were met together at Carthage on the Calends of
   September from the province of Africa, Numidia and Mauritania, with the
   presbyters and deacons (the greater part of the people being likewise
   present) and when the holy letters of Jubaianus to Cyprian had been
   read, and Cyprian's answers to Jubaianus, concerning heretical
   baptisms, as well as what the same Jubaianus afterwards wrote to
   Cyprian,

   Cyprian said:  Ye have heard, my dearly beloved colleagues, what our
   fellow bishop Jubaianus has written to me, taking counsel of my
   littleness concerning the illicit and profane baptisms of heretics, and
   the answer which I made him; being of the same opinion as we have been
   on former occasions, that heretics coming to the Church should be
   baptized and sanctified with the Church's baptism.  Moreover there has
   been read to you also the other letter of Jubaianus, in which answering
   for his sincere and pious devotion to our letter, not only he agrees
   therewith but offered thanks that he has been so instructed by it.  It
   only remains therefore that we, each one of us, one by one, say what
   our mind is in this matter, without condemning any one or removing any
   one from the right of communion who does not agree with us.

   For no one [of us [504] ] has set himself up [to be] bishop [of
   bishops], [505] or attempted with tyrannical dread to force his
   colleagues to obedience to him, since every bishop has, for the license
   of liberty and power, his own will, and as he cannot be judged by
   another, so neither can he judge another.  But we await the judgment of
   our universal Lord, our Lord Jesus Christ, who one and alone hath the
   power, both of advancing us in the governance of his Church, and of
   judging of our actions [in that position].

   [The bishops then one by one declared against heretical baptism. [506]
   Last of all (col. 796)]:

   Cyprian, the Confessor and Martyr of Carthage, said:  The letter which
   was written to Jubaianus, my colleague, most fully set forth my
   opinion, that heretics who, according to the evangelical and apostolic
   witness, are called adversaries of Christ's and anti-Christs, when they
   come to the Church, should be baptized with the one (unico) baptism of
   the Church, that they may become instead of adversaries friends, and
   Christians instead of Antichrists.

   Notes.

   Zonaras.

   These are the opinions therefore of the fathers, which assembled in
   council with the great Cyprian:  but they do not apply to all heretics
   nor to all schismatics.  For the Second Ecumenical Council, as we have
   just said [i.e. in the Preface he has placed to the acts of the synod.
   Vide L. and C., Conc., Tom. i., col. 801] makes an exception of some
   heretics, and give its sanction to their reception without baptism,
   only requiring their anointing with the holy chrism, and then
   anathematizing at the same time their own and all heresies.

   Balsamon does not print the acts of the Council at all but only the
   letter of St. Cyprian (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. I., col.
   799.)  I have not thought it worth while to place here the remarks of
   the eighty-six bishops, hos me anankaiai, hoia mede energousai, to
   quote Zonaras's words.

   Binius.

   The allusion here is to the decree of Stephen, who was wont, according
   to the custom of his elders, to be styled "Bishop of bishops," and
   because he had acrimoniously threatened excommunication to all not
   agreeing with him.

   On the disputed historical fact as to whether St. Cyprian died in or
   out of the communion of the See of Rome the reader will do well to
   consult Puller, The Primitive Saints and the See of Rome.

   I place here St. Cyprian's Seventieth Epistle in the Oxford Translation
   (Epistle of St. Cyprian, pp. 232 et seqq.).  This letter is addressed
   to Januarius, Satterninus, etc., and is headed in Beveridge's Synodicon
   "Canon I."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [504] These words are omitted in Zonaras's Greek!  The very gist of the
   matter for the Easterns.

   [505] These words are omitted in Zonaras's Greek!  The very gist of the
   matter for the Easterns.

   [506] These will be found translated in full in the Oxford "Library of
   the Fathers," Vol. 17.  "St. Cyprian's Epistles," p. 286; also in the
   American reprint of the "Ante-Nicene Fathers," Vol. V. "Hippolitus,
   Cyprian, etc.," p. 565.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Epistle LXX.

   Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, etc., to their brethren Januarius, etc.
   Greeting.

   When we were together in council, dearest brethren, we read the letter
   which you addressed to us respecting those who are thought to be
   baptized by heretics and schismatics, whether, when they come to the
   one true Catholic Church, they ought to be baptized.  Wherein, although
   ye yourselves also hold the Catholic rule in its truth and fixedness,
   yet since, out of our mutual affection, ye have thought good to consult
   us, we deliver not our sentence as though new but, by a kindred
   harmony, we unite with you in that long since settled by our
   predecessors, and observed by us; thinking, namely, and holding for
   certain, that no one can be baptized without the Church, in that there
   is one Baptism appointed in the holy Church, and it is written, the
   Lord himself speaking, "They have forsaken me, the Fountain of living
   water, and hewed them out broken cisterns that can hold no water."
   Again, holy Scripture admonishes us, and says, "Keep thee from the
   strange water, and drink not from a fountain of strange water."  The
   water then must first be cleansed and sanctified by the priest, that it
   may be able, by Baptism therein, to wash away the sins of the baptized,
   for the Lord says by the prophet Ezekiel, "Then will I sprinkle clean
   water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your filthiness, and
   from all your idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give
   you, and a new spirit will I put within you."  But how can he cleanse
   and sanctify the water, who is himself unclean, and with whom the
   Spirit is not? whereas the Lord says in Numbers, "And whatsoever the
   unclean person toucheth shall be unclean."  Or how can he that
   baptizeth give remission of sins to another, who cannot himself free
   himself from his own sins, out of the Church?

   Moreover, the very interrogatory which is put in Baptism, is a witness
   of the truth.  For when we say, "Dost thou believe in eternal life, and
   remission of sins through the holy Church?" we mean, that remission of
   sins is not given, except in the Church; but that, with heretics, where
   the Church is not, sins cannot be remitted.  They, therefore, who claim
   that heretics can baptize, let them either change the interrogatory, or
   maintain the truth; unless indeed they ascribe a Church also to those
   who they contend have Baptism.

   Anointed also must he of necessity be, who is baptized, that having
   received the chrism--that is, unction, he may be the anointed of God,
   and have within him the grace of Christ.  Moreover, it is the Eucharist
   through which the baptized are anointed, the oil sanctified on the
   altar.  But he cannot sanctify the creature of oil, who has neither
   altar nor church.  Whence neither can the spiritual unction be with
   heretics, since it is acknowledged that the oil cannot be sanctified
   nor the Eucharist celebrated among them.  But we ought to know and
   remember that it is written, "Let not the oil of a sinner anoint my
   head;" which the Holy Ghost forewarned in the Psalms, lest any,
   quitting the track, and wandering out of the path of truth, be anointed
   by heretics and adversaries of Christ.  Moreover, when baptized, what
   kind of prayer can a profane priest and a sinner offer? in that it is
   written, "God heareth not a sinner; but if any man be a worshipper of
   God, and doeth his will, him he heareth."

   But who can give what himself hath not? or how can he perform spiritual
   acts, who hath himself lost the Holy Spirit?  Wherefore he is to be
   baptized and received, who comes uninitiated to the Church, that within
   he may be hallowed through the holy; for it is written, "Be ye holy,
   for I am holy, saith the Lord."  So that he who has been seduced into
   error and washed without should, in the true Baptism of the Church, put
   off this very thing also; that he, a man coming to God, while seeking
   for a priest, fell, through the deceit of error, upon one profane.  But
   to acknowledge any case where they have baptized, is to approve the
   baptism of heretics and schismatics.

   For neither can part of what they do be void and part avail.  If he
   could baptize, he could also give the Holy Ghost.  But if he cannot
   give the Holy Ghost because, being set without, he is not with the Holy
   Ghost, neither can he baptize any that cometh:  for that there is both
   one Baptism, and one Holy Ghost, and one Church, founded by Christ the
   Lord upon Peter, through an original and principle of unity; so it
   results, that since all among them is void and false, nothing that they
   have done ought to be approved by us.  For what can be ratified and
   confirmed by God, which they do whom the Lord calls his enemies and
   adversaries, propounding in his Gospel, "He that is not with me, is
   against me; and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth."  And the
   blessed Apostle John also, keeping the commandments and precepts of the
   Lord, has written in his Epistle, "Ye have heard that Antichrist shall
   come; even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is
   the last time.  They went out from us, but were not of us; for if they
   had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us."  Whence
   we, too, ought to infer and consider, whether they who are the
   adversaries of the Lord, and are called Antichrists, can give the grace
   of Christ.  Wherefore we who are with the Lord, and who hold the unity
   of the Lord, and according to this vouchsafement administer his
   priesthood in the Church, ought to repudiate and reject and account as
   profane, whatever his adversaries and Antichrists do; and to those who,
   coming from error and wickedness, acknowledge the true faith of the one
   Church, we should impart the reality of unity and faith by all the
   sacraments of Divine grace.

   We bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

