v SLO6COSO LOLI 8 


TIMOR i <a 














SON en ena Cette aa 


7 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2006 with funding from 
Microsoft Corporation 


https://archive.org/details/apostolicfathersO2unknuoft 








COLL. CHRISTI REGIS 
BIB, M AJ. 
TORONTON 








f 


HE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 







PART Il. 


ἂν CLEMENT OF ROME. 


A REVISED TEXT 


WITH INTRODUCTIONS, NOTES, DISSERTATIONS, 
AND TRANSLATIONS. 


BY THE LATE 


J. B. LIGHTFOOT,. D.D., D.C.L., LL.D., 
LORD BISHOP OF DURHAM. 


COLL. CHRIS!) « wis 
BIB, MAJ. 


i. TORONTON 
VOL. 1. 


London : BR 


MACMILLAN AND CO. 
AND NEW YORK. 60 


1890 Aor 
[All Rights reserved.) IND 5 


15,913 “ Li 







Cambridge : 
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 








aay Σ node Ἂ 
OD GHA ποιύλ τ 
τα : wy : vy Shy baa) τς ἀπ ae 






ἀπ 






ὁ alt 
ΤΣ κῃ 

























TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


SPE Fe 28S a τὸ 
i 


SECOND VOLUME. 


Pye 


aoe tT 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT. 





PAGE 
INTRODUCTION. I—4 
The authorities for the text. Other sources of evidence. Symbols used. 
TEXT AND NOTES. 5—188 


THE SO-CALLED SECOND EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT. 


INTRODUCTION. , IgI—210 
The attribution to Clement in the manuscripts [191]. External evidence 
against this [192, 193]. The designation ‘to the Corinthians’ [193, 194]. 
_ Internal evidence. Not an Epistle, but a homily [194—197]. Probably 
: delivered in Corinth [197—199]. Harnack’s theory of its Roman origin 
_ considered [199—201]. Limits of date [201—204]. Theories of authorship. 
(i) Bryennios’ theory, Clement of Rome [204—206]. (ii) Hilgenfeld’s 
| theory, Clement of Alexandria [206, 207]. (iii) Harnack’s theory, the 
f Clement mentioned in Hermas [207, 208]. Analysis [208—210]. 
; TEXT AND NOTES. 211—261 
_ THE LACUNA IN THE ALEXANDRIAN MANUSCRIPT. 263—267 


_ CORRIGENDA IN THE COLLATION OF THE CONSTANTINOPOLITAN MANU- 
SCRIPT. 268 
TRANSLATIONS. 


1, THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT ΤῸ THE CORINTHIANS. 271—305 
2, AN ANCIENT HOMILY, ᾿ 306—316 


vl TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 
PAGE 
INTRODUCTION. 317, 318 


Interesting problems presented by his personality and life. The dis- 
covery of the Philosophumena. His relation to our main subject through 
his intimate connexion with (i) the early history of the Roman Church, 
(ii) the earliest western list of Roman bishops. 


ιν. ANCIENT REFERENCES TO HIPPOLYTUS. 318—365 


1 Hippolytus [318—324]. 2 Chair of Hippolytus [324—326]. 3 Eu- 
sebius [326, 327]. 4 Liberian Chronographer [328]. 5 Epiphanius [328]... 
6 Apollinaris? [328]. 7 Damasus [328, 329]. 8 Hieronymus [329—33!]. 
9 Rufinus [331]. 10 Prudentius [332—338] 11 Palladius [338]. 12 Theo- 
doret [338, 339]. 13 Gelasius [340]. 14 Andreas of Czesarea [340]. 15 Li- 
ber Pontificalis [340—342]. 16 Cyrillus of Scythopolis [343]. 17 Gregory of 
Tours [343]. 18 Eustratius of Constantinople [343]. 19 Stephanus Gobarus 
[343]. 20 Leontius of Byzantium [343]. 21 Chronicon Paschale [344]. 
22 Concilium Lateranense [344]. 23 Anastatius Apocrisiarius [344, 
345]. 24 Anastatius Sinaita [345]. 25 Pseudo-John of Damascus [345]- 
26 Germanus of Constantinople [345]. 27 Pseudo-Chrysostom [346]. 
28 Georgius Syncellus [346]. 29 Nicephorus [346]. 30 Georgius Hamar- 
tolus [347]. 31 Photius [347—349] 32 CEcumenius [349]. 33 Zonaras 
[349]. 34 Suidas [349]. 35 Nicephorus Callistus [349, 350]. 36 Ebed- 
Jesu [350]. 37 Inscriptions relating to reliques [351, 352]. 38 Itineraries 
[352—354]. 39 Western Service Books [354, 355]. 40 Calendars and 
Martyrologies [355, 356]. 41 Florus-Beda (356, 357} 42 Ado of Vienne 
[357-360]. 43 Menza (361, 362]. 44 S. Petrus Damianus [362]. 
45 Passio Sancti Sixti Laurentii Hippolyti [363, 364]. 46 Acta SS. 
Cyriaci Hippolyti Aureae etc. [364, 365]. 


2. MODERN LITERATURE. ᾿ 365—370 


3. NAMESAKES OF 5. HIPPOL YTUS. 7 370—377 


Points of contact with the story of the son of Theseus [370]. Five other 
namesakes, real or imaginary persons [371]. (1) Hippolytus the martyr 
of Antioch [371, 372]. (2) Hippolytus the Alexandrian connected with 
Dionysius [372]. (3) Hippolytus the Greek captain of brigands [373—376]. 
(4) Hippolytus the soldier, the warder of S. Laurence [376]. (5) Hippolytus 
of Thebes [377]. 


4. GAIUS OR HIPPOLYTUS. 377388 


Was there such a person as Gaius? [377]. Works ascribed to him [377]. 
The ‘Refutation of all Heresies’ proved not his, but Hippolytus’ [378]. 
Yet the author of the ‘Refutation’ must have written all the works ascribed 
to Gaius, except the ‘Dialogue with Proclus’ [378—380]. The ‘Dialogue’ 
too by Hippolytus. Gaius simply the name of the orthodox disputant, 
wrongly considered the author [381, 382]. All facts predicated of Gaius 
are predicable of Hippolytus [382, 383]. Testimony of the Letter of the 
Smyrneans [383]. The evidence of Eusebius (383, 384]- Presumption 


tal te tie δ΄. 















TABLE OF CONTENTS. vii 


PAGE 
that Hippolytus wrote against Montanism [384—386]. The argument from 


style [386]. Objections met [386, 387]. The ‘ Heads against Gaius’ [388]. 

5. THE LITERARY WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 388—405 
Introduction [388]. (1) Biblical and Exegetical [389—395]. (2) Theo- 

logical and Apologetic [395—399]- (3) Historical and Chronological [399]. 

(4) Heresiological [400—403]. Spurious Hippolytean works [403—405]. 

6. THE MURATORIAN FRAGMENT. 405—413 
Metrical passages embedded in Irenzeus [405—407]. Verse employed for 

theological teaching and for lists of the scriptures [407]. The Muratorian 

Canon, history, date and country [407] A translation from a Greek 

treatise in verse [408— 411]. The notice of Hermas common to the Mura- 

torian Canon and the Liberian Catalogue, and Salmon’s inference [411, 412]. 


The treatise probably by Hippolytus [412]. Included among the titles on 
the Chair [412, 413]. Its date [413]. 


7. THE COMPENDIUM AGAINST ALL THE HERESIES. 413—418 
8. THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 418 


9. TABLE OF THE LITERARY WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 419—421 


10, EARLY AND MIDDLE LIFE OF HIPPOLYTUS. 
His connexion with Irenzeus [422]. With Origen [423]. 


11. WAS HIPPOLYTUS A NOVATIAN? 


The allegation of Prudentius derived from Damasus’ inscription [424]. 
Damasus’ statement avowedly based on hearsay [425]. Contemporary 
ignorance of Hippolytus’ history [425]. Considerations on the other side; 
(i) the silence of Cyprian and the Liberian Catalogue, (ii) the chronology 
[425—427]. 

12. THE SEE OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

Ignorance of early writers on this point [427, 428]. His allocation to 
Bostra based on a blunder [428]. Le Moyne’s inference untenable [420]. 
His association with the see of Portus Eastern in origin [429, 430]. 


Theories of Bunsen and Déllinger [430—432]. Most probably ‘bishop of 
the Gentiles,’ with Portus as head-quarters [433, 434)]- 


13. HIPPOLYTUS THE PRESBYTER. 


Unique position of Hippolytus among contemporaries [435]. The title 


‘presbyter’ represents not office, but dignity [435]. To whom applied [435]. 
Subsequently misunderstood [436]. 


422, 423 


424—427 


427—434 


435» 436 


14. LATER VEARS, BANISHMENT, AND DEATH. 


The pontificates of Zephyrinus and Callistus [436]. Peace of the Church, 
internal and external, under Urbanus [437]. Literary activity of Hippo- 
lytus [437]. Death of Alexander Severus succeeded by the persecution 
under Maximin [437, 438]. Banishment of Pontianus and Hippolytus 
to Sardinia [438, 439]. Their death, and deposition [439, 440]. 


436—440 


lana ν τς 


Vill TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


~ PAGE 
15. THE STATUE OF HIPPOLYTUS. 440—442 


16. POSTHUMOUS HONOURS AND SANCTUARIES. 442—468 

(1) The cemetery of Hippolytus in the Ager Veranus [442]. His 
sanctuary there [443—445]- Evidence of Prudentius [445]. The Romanus 
commemorated. by Prudentius [446—451]. The sanctuary and festival 
described by Prudentius [451—453]. Gradual decadence of this shrine [454, 
455] The adjacent cemetery of S. Laurence [455]. Importance and 
architectural history of the basilica of S. Laurence [456—458]. Reliques 
of Hippolytus transferred thither [459, 460]. Consequent transformation in 
the personality of Hippolytus [460]. Hippolytus the gaoler substituted for 
Hippolytus the divine [460—463]. Subsequent history of the cemetery of 
Hippolytus [463, 464]. (2) The sanctuary on the Vicus Patricius [464, 465]. 
(3) The sanctuary at Portus [466]. (4) The castle and commemoration at 
Fossombrone [466, 467]. Reverence paid to Hippolytus outside Italy, 
especially in France [467, 468]. 


177 SPURIOUS ACTS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 


Acts of the Laurentian Cycle. 408—474 
Acts of the Portuensian Cycle. 4747-477 


APPENDIX. 


1. 5, PETER IN ROME. 481—502 
2. THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 503—512 


INDICES. 


1. INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL PASSAGES. 515-517 
. INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 518—532 








THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


TO 


THE CORINTHIANS. 


Aber 


ΙΣ 


es: 








HE authorities for the text are three in number, two Greek manu- 
scripts and a Syriac version. 

(1) Codex Alexandrinus (A), where the Epistles of Clement 
are added to the New Testament; an uncial manuscript probably 
belonging to the fifth century. It is fully described above, 1. p. 116 
sq. It is much blurred and worn, and a leaf has disappeared 
towards the end of the First Epistle. Thus it omits from ὃ 57 ἀνθ᾽ 
ὧν yap ἠδίκουν to the end of ὃ 63. In the Second Epistle it breaks 
off at ὃ 12 οὔτε ἄρσεν οὔτε θῆλυ τοῦτο, the end of the manuscript 
being lost. The so-called v ἐφελκυστικὸν is almost uniformly in- 
serted. All deviations from this authority in my text are noted in 
the apparatus criticus beneath. The lacunae in this manuscript are 
not stated, except where a various reading is concerned; but a 
complete list is given at the end of the Epistles. 

(2) Codex Constantinopolitanus (C), a cursive manuscript dated 
A.D. 1056, and containing the whole of the Two Epistles. It is 
described fully above, 1. p. 121 sq. The v ἐφελκυστικὸν is syste- 
matically omitted, though there are one or two exceptions. All the 
variations of this manuscript likewise are recorded beneath, with the 
exception of the v ἐφελκυστικὸν which it seemed unnecessary to 
notice. 

(3) Syriac Version (S), where the Epistles of Clement are found 
incorporated among the Epistles of the New Testament in the 
Philoxenian (Harclean) version. ‘The extant manuscript is dated 
A.D. 1170. ‘This authority also is described fully in the introduc- 
tion, I. p. 129 sq. How far this version may be accepted as evidence 
for the text, and to what extent it seemed advisable to record 
the variations from the Greek, I have there stated with sufficient 

) precision. 

| The relations of our three authorities to each other, and the value 
to be assigned to each, are considered at length in the general intro- 
duction. 


i—2 





4 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT. 


Besides these authorities (the manuscripts and the version) we have 
two other sources of evidence ; (1) Clement quotes very largely from 
the Lxx, and the text of the Lxx therefore may be used as a testimony. 
But discretion must be exercised since the degree of accuracy in quot- 
ing must be a matter of experience ; and we cannot even assume, where 
there are variations, that the reading which agrees with the Lxx text 
gives the actual words of our author, a tendency to restore the actual 
form of the original being noticeable in transcribers ; (2) Clement him- 
self is frequently quoted by later fathers, especially by his namesake 
Clement of Alexandria. But here again discretion is needed, for the 
fathers—notably the Alexandrian Clement—often quote very loosely 
and from memory. 


Where our chief authority (A) deserts us, it is necessary to be espe- 
cially careful in dealing with the others. On this account I have given 
the variations of the Syriac version in greater fulness in these parts 
than elsewhere ; as this is the only check on possible errors in the one 
Greek manuscript (C) which we possess here. In these same parts I 
have uniformly inserted the v ἐφελκυστικόν, though wanting in C, be- 
cause it would certainly have had a place in A, and therefore presumably 
represents the original text of Clement. 


A very few words only are necessary to explain the notation. The 
authorities are designated as above A, C, 5. Where an authority omits 
any word or words, this is signified by ‘om.’; where it is defective by 
mutilation or otherwise, so that we cannot tell the reading, this is ex- 
pressed by ‘def.’ Where the reading is doubtful, as for instance when 
it is impossible to say what Greek text the Syriac version represents, the 
abbreviation is ‘dub.’ The abbreviations ‘app.’ and ‘prob.’ stand for 
‘apparently ’ and ‘probably’. The square brackets [ ] in the text imply 
that it is doubtful whether the words or letters so enclosed ought to 
stand as part of the original text. The word ‘Clem’ in the textual 
notes signifies Clement of Alexandria; and, where necessary, the re- 
ference to the page of Potter’s edition is added. 

















Pe er ee 


TPOC KOPINOIOYC. 


‘H *EKKAHCIA τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡ παροικοῦσα ‘Pwunv 


Trpoc KopiN@ioyc] For the titles of this epistle in the several authorities 


see I. pp. 117, 122, 131. 


‘THE CHURCH OF ROME to the 
CHURCH OF CORINTH, elect and con- 
secrate ; greeting in Christ Jesus.’ 

On the form of the address, as 
connected with the question of the 
authorship, see the introduction, I 
Ρ. 352 Sq. 

The writer’s name is suppressed 
here, as it seems also to have been 
suppressed in another letter of the 
Church of Rome to the Church of 
Corinth written more than half a 
century later during the episcopate 
of Soter; see Dionys. Corinth. in 
Euseb. H. £. iv. 23. 

This address is imitated in the 
openings of three early Christian 
documents at least ; (1) The Zfzstle 
of Polycarp, see 1. p. 149; (2) The 
Letter of the Smyrneans, giving an 
account of Polycarp’s martyrdom, 
see Jgnat. and Polyc. τ. p. 610 sq ; 
(3) The Afostolic Constitutions. For 
other openings which it has influenced 
(though in a less degree), see the note 
On παροικοῦσα below. 

I. παροικοῦσα] ‘sojourning in. 
(1) The primary idea in this word is 
transitoriness. The distinction be- 
tween πάροικος a temporary and κάτ- 
otxos a Permanent resident appears 
from Philo Sacr. Ad. et Cain § τὸ 
(I. p. 170) 6 yap τοῖς ἐγκυκλίοις μόνοις 


ἐπανέχων παροικεῖ σοφίᾳ, ov κατοικεῖ, 
de Conf. ling. § 17 (I. p. 416) κατῴ- 
κησαν ὡς ἐν πατρίδι, οὐχ ὡς ἐπὶ ξένης 
παρῴκησαν, Greg. Naz. Ογαΐ. xiv (I. 
Ρ. 271) τίς τὴν κάτω σκηνὴν καὶ τὴν 
ἄνω πόλιν (διαιρήσει); τίς παροικίαν 
καὶ κατοικίαν; Orat. vii (I. p. 200) ἐκ 
τῆς παροικίας εἰς τὴν κατοικίαν μετα- 
σκευαζόμενοι : comp. Gen. xxxvi. 44 
(XXXVil. 1) κατῴκει δὲ Ἰακὼβ ἐν τῇ γῇ οὗ 
παρῴκησεν ὃ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ ἐν γῇ Χαναάν, 
Heb. xi. 9, Luke xxiv. 18. Thus πάρ- 
OLKOS, παροικεῖν, παροικία, are said of 
the captivities of Egypt (Acts vii. 6 
from LXX, ΧΙ, 17) and of Babylon 
(Theoph. ad Aut. iii. 25, 28). See 
especially the uses of παροικεῖν, κατοι- 
κεῖν, in reference to the migrations of 
Israel, in Judith v.7—10. Of these 
captivities the present earthly condi- 
tion of the Christian people is the 
antitype (Heb. iv. 1). 

(2) Connected with this primary 
conception is the secondary idea of 
non-citizenship, In the inscriptions 
‘the sojourners’ are opposed to ‘the 
citizens,’ C. 7. G. 3595 of re πολῖται 
καὶ of πάροικοι πάντες (comp. 20. 1625, 
1631, 2906, 3049). The Christians are 
no citizens on earth. They dwell in 
the world as aliens, ξένοι, παρεπίδημοι, 
πάροικοι, I Pet. 1. 17, ii, 11 ; comp. 
Heb. xi. 13. So too Clem. Rom. ii. 


6 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


o ΄- 5 ~ ’ , 
Th ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ Θεοῦ τῆ παροικούση Κόρινθον, κλη- 
ἐ ἐ 


΄ “ “ \ “ 4 
τοῖς, ἡγιασμένοις ἐν θελήματι Θεοῦ διὰ τοῦ Κυρίου 


3 παντοκράτορος] A; τοῦ παντοκράτορος C (comp. Ap. Const. I. 1). 


§ 5 καταλείψαντες τὴν παροικίαν τοῦ 
κόσμου τούτου (comp. C. 1. G. 9474 
τοῦ βίου τούτου τὴν παροικίαν), Ep. ad 
Diogn. 5 πατρίδας οἰκοῦσιν ἰδίας ἀλλ᾽ 
ὡς πάροικοι᾽ μετέχουσι πάντων ὡς πο- 
λῖται καὶ πάνθ᾽ ὑπομένουσιν ὡς ἕξένοι᾽ πᾶ- 
σα ξένη πατρίς ἐστιν αὐτῶν καὶ πᾶσα 
πατρὶς ξένη, where the writer is de- 
scribing the Christians. A good 
illustration of this sense of παροικεῖν 
is Orig. c. Ceds. iii. 29 ai δὲ τοῦ Χριστοῦ 
ἐκκλησίαι, συνεξεταζόμεναι ταῖς ὧν παρ- 
οἰκοῦσι δήμων ἐκκλησίαις, ὡς φωστῆρές 
εἰσιν ἐν κόσμῳ, tb. 30 ἐκκλησίας τοῦ 
Θεοῦ παροικούσας ἐκκλησίαις τῶν καθ᾽ 
ἑκάστην πόλιν δήμων. Compare also 
the parable in Hermas V7s. 1.1. In 
the prologue to Ecclesiasticus οἱ ἐν 
τῇ παροικίᾳ are the Jews of the dis- 
persion, so that παροικία is almost 
equivalent to διασπορά; and, as the 
latter word is transferred to the 
Christian people, the spiritual Israel 
(1 Pet. i. 1 παρεπιδήμοις διασπορᾶς), 50 
is the former. Hence the form of 
address here, which appears also 
Polyc. Phil. τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ Θεοῦ τῇ 
παροικούσῃ Φιλίππους, Mart. Polyc. ἡ 
παροικοῦσα Σμύρναν x.t-A.. Dionys. Co- 
rinth. in Euseb. H. Ε΄. iv. 23 τῇ παροι- 
κούσῃ Voprivay, Epist. Gail. in Euseb. 
4.Ε..ν. τ οἱ ἐν Βιέννῃ καὶ Λουγδούνῳ τῆς 
Γαλλίας παροικοῦντες δοῦλοι Χριστοῦ. 
From this the substantive παροικία 
came to be used in a concrete sense, 
‘the body of aliens,’ for the Christian 
brotherhood in a town or district. 
The earliest instances which I have 
observed are Mart. Polyc.inscr. πάσαις 
ταῖς κατὰ πάντα τόπον τῆς ἁγίας καὶ 
καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας παροικίαις, Dionys. 
Corinth. [Ὁ] in Euseb. H. £. iv. 23 
ἅμα ταῖς λοιπαῖς κατὰ Κρήτην παροικίαις, 
Iren. in Euseb. .Χ7. Z. ν. 24 εἰρήνευον 


5 αἰφνι- 


τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν παροικιῶν ἐν αἷς ἐτηρεῖτο,. 
Apollon. in Euseb. .Χ7. £. v. 18 ἡ ἰδία 
παροικία αὐτὸν ὅθεν ἦν οὐκ ἐδέξατο : 
whence farochia, parish. It seems 
not strictly correct to say that παροι- 
kia was equivalent to the later term 
διοίκησις ; for παροικία, though it is 
sometimes a synonyme for διοίκησις 
(e.g. Conc. Ancyr. Can. 18), appears to 
have been used much more generally. 
The explanation often given of παροι- 
kia, as though it denoted the aggre- 
gate of Christian communities in the 
neighbourhood of a large town, re- 
ceivesnocountenancefrom the earliest 
usage of πάροικος, etc. ; for the prepo- 
sition is not local but temporal, and 
denotes not proximity but ¢ransito- 
viness. For the accusative after παροι- 
κεῖν see the note on Polyc. PAz/. inscr. 

I. κλητοῖς κιτ.λ.] Taken from the 
salutation in 1 Cor. i. 1, 2, ἡγιασμένοις 
ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, κλητοῖς ἁγίοις. Cle- 
ment not unnaturally echoes the lan- 
guage of S. Paul’s Epistle to the 
Corinthians, even where he does not 
directly quote it. Similarly the Epi- 
stle of Ignatius to the Ephesians pre- 
sents parallels to S. Paul’s Epistle to 
the same church, especially in the 
opening salutation. The same rela- 
tion again exists between Polycarp’s 
Epistle to the Philippians and the 
corresponding letter of S. Paul. For 
the meaning of ἡγιασμένοις, ‘ conse- 
crated to be God’s people,’ see the 
notes on τοῖς ἁγίοις Phil. i. 1. 

3. χάρις K.7.A.] χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη 
is the common salutation in 5. Paul, 
excepting the Pastoral Epistles. With 
the addition of πληθυνθείη however it 
occurs only in the two Epistles of 
S. Peter, from whom probably Cle- 
ment derived the form, as the First 








ἢ 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


7 


~ ΄σ ~ 7 ~ ’ ‘ 
ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ. χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ παντο- 


κράτορος Θεοῦ διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ πληθυνθείη. 


I. 


δίους] αιἰφνηδιουσ A. γενομένα51] C ; 
Epistle is frequently quoted by him. 
In Jude 1 we have ἔλεος ὑμῖν καὶ 
εἰρήνη καὶ ἀγάπη πληθυνθείη. 

παντοκράτορος] The LXX rendering 
of ΓΊΝΩ ΚΝ in the expression ‘ the Lord 
of Hosts’ (see Stanley, Zewish Church 
II. p. 87), apparently not a classical 
word. In the New Testament it 
occurs once only out of the Apoca- 
lypse, 2 Cor. vi. 18, where S. Paul is 
quoting from the Lxx. So again 
§§ 2, 32 (LXX), 56, 60, 62 (comp. § 8 
παντοκρατορικῷ), Polyc. Phe. inscr., 
Herm. Vis. iii. 3 (Sim. v. 7), Mart. 
Polyc. 14. See also Pearson Exfo- 
sition of the Creed p. 78 sq (ed. 
Chevallier) for its position and signi- 
ficance in the Latin Creed. As a 
Latin translation of παντοκράτωρ, ‘om- 
nipotens’ is the survival of the fittest, 
its defunct rivals being ‘ omnitenens,’ 
‘omnipollens,’ etc. Conversely the 
Latin ‘omnipotens’ is sometimes 
translated by παντοδύναμος for παν- 
τοκράτωρ ; comp. Caspari Quellen 5. 
Gesch. ad. Taufsymbols 111. pp. vi, 24, 
204 sq, 209 ---212. The two occur to- 
gether in the Liturgy of S. James, 
ἅγιος εἶ, παντοκράτωρ, παντοδύναμε 
(Swainson’s Greek Liturgies Ὁ. 270 
sq). 

I. ‘We should have written sooner, 
but our own troubles have hindered 
us. We are grieved to hear that one 
or two headstrong ring-leaders have 
fanned the flame of discord among 
you. This was not your wont in 
former days. Your firm faith, your 
sober piety, your large hospitality, 
your sound knowledge, were the ad- 
miration of all. Authority was duly 
respected by you. Your young men 


\ \ 
Διὰ τὰς αἰφνιδίους καὶ ἐπαλλήλους γενομένας 


aced eas A. S has a present; comp. § 9. 


were modest ; your wives were quiet 
and orderly.’ 

5. τὰς αἰφνιδίους «.7.A.] This lan- 
guage accurately describes the perse- 
cution which the Roman Christians 
endured under Domitian. Theirtreat- 
ment by this emperor was capricious, 
and the attacks upon them were re- 
peated. While the persecution of 
Nero was one fierce and wholesale 
onslaught in which the passions of the 
multitude were enlisted on the em- 
peror’s side, Domitian on the other 
hand made use of legal forms and 
arraigned the Christians from time 
to time on various paltry charges ; see 
above, I. p. 81, p. 350 sq. Apollonius 
in Philostr. Vit. Afol/. vii. 4 distin- 
guishes two kinds of tyrants of which 
Nero and Tiberius respectively are 
the types—the one passionate and 
reckless (ὁρμώσης καὶ ἀκρίτου), the 
other stealthy and treacherous (ὑπο- 
καθημένης), the one acting with vio- 
lence, the other using forms of 
justice. Obviously he places the 
contemporary tyrant Domitian in 
this second class. Again Domitian 
is described by Suetonius (Domit, 
11) in language closely resembling 
Clement’s, ‘non solum magnae sed 
et callidae znopinataegue saevitiae.’ 
Compare the accounts in Euseb. 
H.E. iii. 17 sq, Chron. an. 95, Dion 
Cass. Ixvii. 14, Suet. Domit. 12, 15. 
So Mart. Ign. 1 speaks of οἱ πολλοὶ 
ἐπὶ Δομετιανοῦ διωγμοί (though this 
refers especially to Antioch). These 
and other passages referring to the 
persecution of Domitian are given in 
full above, I. p. 104 sq. In one of 
these attacks the writers namesake, 


8 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT {x 


ἡμῖν συμφορὰς καὶ περιπτώσεις, ἀδελφοί, βράδιον νομί- 
ζομεν ἐπιστροφὴν πεποιῆσθαι περὶ τῶν ἐπιζητουμένων 
παρ᾽ ὑμῖν πραγμάτων, ἀγαπητοί, τῆς τε ἀλλοτρίας 
καὶ ξένης τοῖς ἐκλεκτοῖς τοῦ Θεοῦ, μιαρᾶς καὶ ἀνοσίου 


1 ἡμῖν] AS; καθ᾽ ἡμῶν C. 


διον] βραδειον A. 


and patron (as I venture to think), 
Flavius Clemens, a kinsman of the 
emperor, fell a victim; see I. 33 sq. 
Thus the notice here accords with 
external testimony which places the 
Corinthian feuds to which this letter 
refers in the reign of Domitian; see 
the introduction, I. p. 347. Volkmar 
(Theol. Fahrb. 1856, p. 286 sq, and 
elsewhere), who assigns a much later 
date to this epistle, is obliged to refer 
the notice here to the sufferings of 
the Christians under Trajan; but 
there is no evidence that this perse- 
cution extended to Rome. Our epistle 
therefore was probably written to- 
wards the close of Domitian’s reign 
or on the accession of Nerva (about 
A.D. 95 or 96). Other notices of time 
in the body of the letter agree with 
this result; see above, I. p. 348 sq. 

ἐπαλλήλους} ‘ successive, repeated, 
a comparatively late but common 
word, ¢g. Philo zz Flacc. 14 (11. p. 
534 M.) ras συνεχεῖς καὶ ἐπαλλήλους 
κακώσεις, Plut. Pomp, 25 κινδύνοις 
ἐπαλλήλοις καὶ πολέμοις ; see Lobeck 
Paral. p. 471. It is restored indeed 
by Hermann in Soph. 4 77. 57, but this 
restoration is very doubtful, and the 
word there must have the sense ‘ re- 
ciprocal.’ For ἐπαλλήλους γενομένας 
comp. Alciphr. ZZ. 1. 23 χιὼν πυκνὴ 
καὶ ἐπάλληλος φερομένη. Other- 
wise we might read ἐπαλλήλως, which 
occurs £pist. Gall. § 14 in Euseb. 
A E. vt. . 

I. νομίζομεν]! The whole passage 


περιπτώσει5] A; περιστάσεις C; lapsus et 
damna S, which evidently represents περιπτώσεις (see I. p. 136). 
ἀγαπητοί S; om. ὦ, See below ὃ 4, where S makes the same change. 


ἀδελφοί] A; 
βρά- 


3 παρ᾽ ὑμῖν πραγμάτων] A; πραγμάτων παρ᾽ ὑμῖν C; 


will mean ‘ Owing to the sudden and 
repeated calamities and reverses 
which have befallen us, we consider 
we have been somewhat slow to pay 
attention to the questions of dispute 
among you. The reader must be 
cautioned against the rendering a- 
dopted in some translations, English 
and Latin ; ‘those things which you 
enquired of us,’ ‘the points respecting 
which you consulted us,’ ‘ea quae 
fuerant quaesita a vobis.” This 
rendering involves a historical mis- 
statement. The expression contains 
no allusion to any letter or other ap- 
plication from the Corinthians to the 
Romans. Clement does not write 
παρ᾽ ὑμῶν, but map’ ὑμῖν; and τὰ ém- 
(nrovpeva means simply ‘the matters 
of dispute,’ not ‘desiderata,’ as it is 
sometimes rendered, ἐπιζήτημα being 
‘a question.’ It would appear that 
the Roman Christians had not been 
directly consulted by the Church of 
Corinth, but having heard of the 
feuds by common report (δ 47 αὕτη ἡ 
ἀκοὴ) wrote this letter unsolicited. 

4. ξένης] Doubtless the right read- 
ing; comp. Clem. Hom. vi. 14 ὡς ἀλη- 
θείας ἀλλοτρίαν οὖσαν καὶ ξένην. No 
sense can be made of ξένοι. The 
doubling of epithets (ἀλλοτρίας καὶ 
ξένης) is after Clement’s manner, 
especially in this opening chapter ; 
e.g. μιαρᾶς καὶ ἀνοσίου, προπετῆ καὶ 
αὐθάδη, πανάρετον καὶ βεβαίαν, etc. 

5. πρόσωπα] Not simply ‘Zersons’ 
but ‘ringleaders’; comp. ὃ 47, and 





1] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 9 


/ a) 2 ἢ rd ΄ \ > , 
στάσεως, ἣν ONTYa πρόσωπα προπετὴ Kat αὐθάδη 


, > ΄ > ,ὔ 7 ε \ 
ὑπάρχοντα εἰς τοσοῦτον ἀπονοίας ἐξέκαυσαν, WOTE TO 


\ \ ’ \ ΄σ > , > ’ 
σεμνὸν καὶ περιβόητον καὶ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἀξιαγα- 


πήητον ὄνομα ὑμῶν μεγάλως βλασφημηθῆναι. τίς γὰρ 


ὃ / \ eon \ eee, \ , 
παρέπι ἡμῆσας Tpos υμας τῆν WAVAPETOV και βεβαίαν 


dub. 8. ἀγαπητοί] AC; om. 8. 


4 ξένης] CS; ἕξενοισ A. 8 βλασ- 


φημηθῆναι] A; βλασφημεῖσθαι C; ut laederetur or laedatur (INDI) S, which 


perhaps represents βλαφθῆναι. 


see the note on Ign. Magn. 6. The 
authors of these feuds are again men- 
tioned. as few in number, ὃ 47 dv ἐν 
ἢ δύο πρόσωπα στασιάζειν πρὸς τοὺς 
πρεσβυτέρους. 

6. εἰς τοσοῦτον κιτ.λ.] ‘have kindled 
to such a pitch of recklessness’ ; comp. 
ὃ 46 εἰς τοσαύτην ἀπόνοιαν ἐρχόμεθα. 
Editors have taken offence at the 
expression, but its awkwardness is 
no sufficient reason for altering the 
text; comp. ὃ 45 εἰς τοσοῦτο ἐξήρισαν 
θυμοῦ. Otherwise ὑπὸ ἀπονοίας might 
be read. In ἀπόνοια shamelessness 
rather than /odly is the prominent 
idea, so that the ἀπονενοημένος is de- 
scribed by Theophrastus (Char. xiii) 
as one wholly devoid of self-respect. 

τὸ σεμνὸν κιτ.λ.} So ὃ 47 τὸ 
σεμνὸν τῆς περιβοήτου φιλαδελφίας: 
comp. Ign. Eph. 8 ἐκκλησίας τῆς δια- 
Bonrov τοῖς αἰῶσιν. 

8. ὄνομα ὑμῶν] ‘your reputation’ or 
‘character’ or ‘worth. See the note 
on Ign. Ephes. 1 τὸ πολυαγάπητον 
ὄνομα ὃ κέκτησθε φύσει. The addition 
of the pronoun seems to require this 
sense, and the epithets as well as 
the whole context, suggest it. On 
the other hand the expression βλασ- 
φημεῖν τὸ ὄνομα, where there is no 
qualifying pronoun or adjective, 
means ‘to speak evil of, ‘to blas- 
pheme the Name,’ 1.6. of Christ or of 
God; e.g. 2 Clem. 13 ἵνα τὸ ὄνομα δι 
ἡμᾶς μὴ βλασφημῆται, Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iii. 6 (p. 532) δι ods καὶ τὸ 


ὄνομα βλασφημεῖται. For this abso- 
lute use of τὸ ὄνομα, which is not 
infrequentin earlier Christian writers, 
see the note on Ign. Ephes. 3, and 
comp. Phil. ii. to (with my note). 
It might be thought that τὸ ὄνομα 
ὑμῶν here would mean ‘the name of 
Christ which you bear’; but this 
would have been expressed other- 
wise, e.g. James ii. 7 βλασφημοῦσιν 
TO καλὸν ὄνομα τὸ ἐπικληθὲν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς, 
Herm. Sim. viii. 6 ἐπαισχυνθέντες τὸ 
ὄνομα Κυρίου τὸ ἐπικληθὲν ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς. 
It is hardly necessary to add that 
βλασφημεῖν is frequently used of 


‘ calumniating or maligning human 


beings; e.g. Rom. xiv. 16 μὴ βλασ- 
φημείσθω ὑμῶν τὸ ἀγαθόν (comp. iii. 


8). 

τίς γὰρ κιτιλ] The whole pas- 
sage as far as ἐπορεύεσθε is quoted by 
Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 17 (p. 610) vat 
μὴν ἐν τῇ πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπιστολῇ ὁ 
ἀπόστολος Κλήμης καὶ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν τύπον 
τινὰ τοῦ γνωστικοῦ ὑπογράφων λέγει, 
Tis γὰρ κιτιλ. 

9. παρεπιδημήσας] This ‘bimaris 
Corinthus’ was a natural halting 
place on the journey between Rome 
and the East, as we see in the case 
of S..Paul and his companions, and 
somewhat later of Hegesippus (Eus. 
H. E. iv. 22). Diogenes is repre- 
sented as visiting it (Dion Chrys. 
Orat. viii. p. 151 ed. Emper) ὅτι πλεῖ- 
στοι ἄνθρωποι ἐκεῖ συνίασι. ..καὶ ὅτι ἡ 
πόλις ὥσπερ ἐν τριόδῳ τῆς Ἑλλάδος 


Io THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [r 


ὑμῶν πίστιν οὐκ ἐδοκίμασεν; τήν TE σώφρονα καὶ 
ἐπιεικῆ ἐν Χριστῷ εὐσέβειαν οὐκ ἐθαύμασεν ; καὶ τὸ 
μεγαλοπρεπὲς τῆς φιλοξενίας ὑμῶν ἦθος οὐκ ἐκήρυξεν; 
καὶ τὴν τελείαν καὶ ἀσφαλῆ γνῶσιν οὐκ ἐμακάρισεν; 
ἀπροσωπολήμπτως γὰρ πάντα ἐποιεῖτε, καὶ τοῖς νομί- 5 
μοις τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐπορεύεσθε, ὑποτασσόμενοι τοῖς ἡγου- 
μένοις ὑμῶν καὶ τιμὴν τὴν καθήκουσαν ἀπονέμοντες 


1 ὑμῶν πίστιν] AC; πίστιν ὑμῶν Clem 610. 2 ἐπιεικῆ ἐν] CS Clem; 
επιεικὴηνν A. 3 οὐκ] AC; om. 8. 4 ἀσφαλῆ] ασφαλην A. 5 ἀπροσ- 
ὡπολήμπτως)] A; ἀπροσωπολήπτως C Clem (edd.). ἐποιεῖτε] emovecrar A. 
τοῖς vouluos] τοισνομοισ A; in lege (NDYOID) S; ἐν τοῖς νόμοις C; ἐν τοῖς 
νομίμοις Clem, which is approved by Wotton and others. The rendering of S 
shows nothing as regards the reading; for (1) the preposition would be required in 
any case; (2) the singular is explained by the accidental omission of ridud; 
(3) νόμιμον is elsewhere translated by ND193 (νόμος) in this version (comp. 88 3; 40). 





ἔκειτο. So also it is called the περί- 
maros or ‘lounge’ of Greece ; see [Dion 
Chrys. ] xxxvii. p. 522 with the context, 
ὡς ἕνα τῶν πολλῶν καὶ κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν 
καταιρόντων εἰς Κεγχρέας ἔμπορον ἣ 
θεωρὸν ἣ πρεσβευτὴν ἢ διερχόμενον. 
Hence there was an abundant de- 
mand for hospitality there ; see below 
on § 10 φιλοξενίαν, ὃ 35 ἀφιλοξενίαν. 

mavaperov] Not found either in LXx 
or New Testament, but a favourite 
word with Clement: see §§ 2, 45, 57, 
60, with the note on ὃ 57. He de- 
lights in such compounds, e.g. παμ- 
peyeOns, mavayws, παμπληθής, παντε- 
πόπτης. 

2. ἐπιεικῇ] ‘forbearing. This yield- 
ing temper, this deference to the 
feelings of others, was the quality es- 
pecially needed at such atime. For 
ἐπιείκεια comp. S§ 13, 56, 58, 62, and 
see Philippians iv. 5. It was emi- 
nently a characteristic of Clement 
himself; see I. p. 97. 

τὸ μεγαλοπρεπὲς «.t.A.] For the 
reproof lurking under this allusion 
to their past hospitality, see the note 
on ἀφιλοξενίαν § 35. 

4. γνῶσιν] Here used generally. 


For the more special sense see the 
note on § 48. 

5. ἀπροσωπολήμπτως] For this ad- 
verb see 1 Pet. i. 17, Barnab. 4. For 
the forms, -λήμπτως, -λήπτως, see 
Winer’s Grammar p.53(ed. Moulton). 
For an instance of the capricious 
orthography of both our MSS comp. 
§ 12 συλλη[μ]ψομένους, συλλη[μ]φ- 
θέντας. 

τοῖς νομίμοις] ‘by the ordinances’ ; 
so ὃ 3 ἐν τοῖς νομίμοις τῶν mpoo- 
ταγμάτων αὐτοῦ πορεύεσθαι, ὃ 40 τοῖς 
νομίμοις τοῦ δεσπότου ἀκολουθοῦντες, 
Hermas Vis. i. 3 ἐὰν τηρήσωσιν τὰ 
νόμιμα τοῦ Θεοῦ. The phrase τοῖς 
νομίμοις πορεύεσθαι Occurs LXX Lev. 
xviii. 3, xx. 23, and ἐν τοῖς νομίμοις 
πορεύεσθαι Jer. xxvi (xxxiii). 4, Ezek. 
v. 6, 7, xx. 18. For the dative, de- 
noting the rule or standard, see Ga- 
latians v. 16, 25, vi. 16. 

6. τοῖς ἡγουμένοις] i.e. the officers 
of the Church, as ὃ 21 τοὺς προηγου- 
μένους ἡμῶν : comp. Heb. xiii. 7 μνη- 
povevere τῶν ἡγουμένων ὑμῶν οἵτινες 
ἐλάλησαν ὑμῖν τὸν λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ, and 
again xiii. 17, 24; Hermas Vs. ii. 2, 
iii. 9 οἱ προηγούμενοι τῆς ἐκκλησίας. 





ΣΝ τῶν δός" 


1] TO THE CORINTHIANS. II 


΄ “πὶ ῇ , , \ 
τοῖς παρ᾽ ὑμῖν πρεσβυτέροις: νέοις TE μέτρια Kal σεμνὰ 


~ lA > ΄σ 
νοεῖν ἐπετρέπετε: γυναιξίν τε ἐν ἀμώμῳ καὶ σεμνῇ 
ε 


\ ε ~ / , > ~ , 
το καὶ ayvn συνειδήσει πάντα ἐπιτελεῖν παρηγγέελλετε, 


/ / \ » ΄ a ΄: 
στεργούσας καθηκόντως τοὺς ἄνδρας ἑαυτῶν" ἔν τε τῷ 


, ΄ ~ / ‘ ‘ \ ἫΝ 
κανονι τῆς ὑποταγῆς ὑπαρχούσας Ta κατα τον οἶκον 


σεμνῶς οἰκουργεῖν ἐδιδάσκετε, πάνυ σωφρονούσας. 


I have adopted νομίμοις from Clem, but ἐν is not wanted (see the explanatory 
note) and was probably his own insertion. 6 ἐπορεύεσθε] CS Clem; πορευ- 
εσθαι A. 7 ὑμῶν] AS; om. C. καθήκουσαν καθίκουσαν A. 

8 ὑμῖν] AS; ἡμῖν C. : 9 ἀμώμῳ καὶ σεμνῇ καὶ ἁγνῇ}] AC; ἁγνῇ καὶ 
ἀμώμῳ S (certainly omitting καὶ σεμν), but the transposition of ἁγνῇ and ἀμώμῳ 
may be due to the convenience of translation ; see above, I. p. 137- 13 ol- 
κουργεῖν] A; οἰκουρεῖν (but apparently y has been erased) C; curam-gerentes 


operum (studiose agentes in operibus) S. See the lower note. 


Similarly οἱπροϊστάμενοι ὑμῶν, t Thess. 
v.12. The reference therefore is not 
to civil officers, as some take it; and 
Ἴ the πρεσβυτέροις in the next clause 
_ refers to age, not to office, as the 
a following νέοις shows. The ‘pres- 
zi byters’ or ‘elders,’ properly so called, 
΄ are exhausted in τοῖς ἡγουμένοις, but 
these are not the only seniors to 
’ whom reverence is due, and Clement 
accordingly extends the statement so 
_ 85 to comprise all older men, thus 
preparing the way for the mention of 
‘the young’ also asaclass. Similarly 
ὃ 21, where, as here, προηγούμενοι, 
πρεσβύτεροι, νέοι, γυναῖκες, occur in 
succession. There is the same diffi- 
culty about the use of πρεσβύτεροι in 
_ connexion with νεώτεροι in I Pet. v. 
ὶ 1 sq, Polyc. Phil. 5, 6. 
Ι 
ἢ 



















9. ἐπετρέπετε] ‘ye enjoined, as 
| ¢@g. in Plat. Legg. p. 784 Cc, Xen. 
_ Anab, vi. 5. 11 (see Kiihner’s note). 
ο΄ γυναιξίν τε κιτ.λ.] See Polyc. Phil. 
4 ἔπειτα καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας κιτ.λ., where 
_ Polycarp follows Clement’s language 
here and in § 21. 

II. στεργούσας] It should probably 
be taken with the foregoing clause, 
and I have altered the punctuation 


accordingly. For the change from the 
dative (γυναιξὶν) to the accusative 
(orepyovoas) comp. Mark vi. 39 ἐπ- 
éragev αὐτοῖς ἀνακλιθῆναι πάντας, Acts 
XV. 22 ἔδοξεν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις κοτιλ. 
ἐκλεξαμένους ἄνδρας ἐξ αὐτῶν πέμψαι, 
and see Jelf’s Gram. §§ 675, 676. 

ἔν τε τῷ κανόνι k.7.d.] i.e. ‘not over- 
stepping the line, not transgressing 
the limits, of obedience’; e.g. ὃ 41 μὴ 
παρεκβαίνων τὸν ὡρισμένον τῆς λει- 
τουργίας αὐτοῦ xavova. On the me- 
taphor of κανών, ‘a measuring line, 
see Galatians vi. 16, and the note on 
§ 7> below. 

13. olxoupyeiv] ‘to ply their work 
in the house’ The classical forms 
are οἰκουρός, οἰκουρεῖν, and these pre- 
vail even at the Christian era and 
much later; e.g. Philo de Spec. Leg. 
31 (IL p. 327) θηλείαις (ἐφαρμόζει) 
olxoupia, de E-xecr. 4 (11. p. 431) yuvai- 
cas σώφρονας οἰκουροὺς καὶ φιλάνδρους, 
and the illustrative passages in Wet- 
stein on Tit. ii. 5. But in Tit. ii, 5 
σώφρονας, ayvas, οἰκουργούς, ἀγαθάς, 
ὑποτασσομένας τοῖς ἰδίοις ἀνδράσιν, 
which passage Clement may have 
had in his mind, the great prepon- 
derance of the best authorities have 


12 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT {11 


II. Πάντες τε ἐταπεινοφρονεῖτε, μηδὲν ἀλαζο- 


, e 
VEVOMEVOL, ὑποτασσόμενοι 


οἰκουργούς, not oixovpovs; and this 
reading the ablest recent editors 
(Tischendorf, Tregelles, Westcott 
and Hort) have adopted. In this 
passage of Clement also A has οἰκ- 
ovpyovs, and so apparently it was 
read originally in C, but the y has 
been erased. Bryennios says ‘vew- 
τέρα χεὶρ ἀπήλειψε τὸ γ᾽ But judg- 
ing by the photograph, I should 
imagine that it was impossible to say 
who erased the letter—whether the 
original scribe or some later cor- 
rector. I am disposed to think that 
the original scribe wrote down οἰκουρ- 
yous, following an older MS which he 
had before him, and then after his 
wont (see above, I. p. 126 sq) corrected 
it into the more classical form. At 
all events there is a tendency in the 
later scribes and correctors to re- 
turn to the more classical form, as we 
see from the later corrections of AC 
in Tit. ii. 5. The Syriac here is 
IYI |PYNII, the same rendering 
being given in the Peshito and Har- 
clean in Tit. ii. 5. It seems to repre- 
sent oixovpyovs rather than olxoupous, 
the first element of the word (οἶκος) 
having been already exhausted in 
the translation of the preceding ra 
κατὰ τὸν οἶκον and therefore not 
needing repetition. Perhaps how- 
ever it may be intended to combine 
the ideas of -ουργεῖν and -ουρεῖν. The 
same verb is more commonly a ren- 
dering of μεριμνᾶν or ἐπιμελεῖσθαι. 

II. ‘Submission and contentment 
were the rule of your lives. The 
teaching of God was in your breasts ; 
the passion of Christ before your eyes. 
Peace and good-will reigned among 
you. Spiritual graces and incessant 
prayers distinguished you. You loved 
the brethren ; you bore no malice to 
any; you loathed faction; you re- 


- x c “ 
μᾶλλον ἢ ὑποταάσσοντες, 


joiced in doing good. The ordinan- 
ces of God were graven on your 
hearts.’ 

2. ὑποτασσόμενοι x.t-A.] See Ephes. 
v. 21, Phil. ii. 3, Rom. xii. 10, 16, and 
i Pet. 6,1) 

3. ἥδιον κιτ.λ.] Doubtless a refer- 
ence to our Lord’s words recorded 
Acts xx. 35, μακάριόν ἐστιν μᾶλλον 
διδόναι ἢ λαμβάνειν ; see below, § 13, 
where the context of the passage is 
echoed. It was no new command- 
ment however, though instinct with 
a new meaning. Maxims similarly 
expressed had been uttered by the 
two opposite schools of philosophy, 
starting from different principles and 
speaking with different motives. For 
the Epicureans see Plut. Mor. p. 
778 C’Emixoupos τοῦ εὖ πάσχειν τὸ εὖ 
ποιεῖν οὐ μόνον κάλλιον ἀλλὰ καὶ ἥδιον 
εἶναί φησι, and for the Stoics, Seneca 
Epist. \xxxi. § 17 ‘Errat si quis bene- 
ficium accipit libentius quam reddit’ 
(both quoted by Wetstein on Acts 
l.c.). 

τοῖς éodios κιτ.λ.} i.e. ‘the provi- 
sion which God has supplied for the 
journey of life.’ Similarly Seneca 
Epist. \xvii. § 3 ‘Quia quantulum- 
cumque haberem, tamen plus jam 
mihi superesset viatici quam viae,’ 
Epictet. Diss. iii. 21. 9 ἔχοντάς τι 
ἐφόδιον τοιοῦτον εἰς τὸν βίον, Plut. 
Mor. p. 160 Β ὡς μὴ μόνον τοῦ ζῆν 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ ἀποθνήσκειν τὴν τροφὴν 
ἐφόδιον οὖσαν ; comp. Dionys. Corinth. 
in Euseb. H. 3. iv. 23 ἐκκλησίαις 
πολλαῖς ταῖς κατὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν ἐφόδια 
πέμπειν. It is the same sentiment 
as 1 Tim. vi. 8, ἔχοντες διατροφὰς καὶ 
σκεπάσματα τούτοις ἀρκεσθησόμεθα. 
The idea of sfiritual sustenance 
seems to be out of place here, though 
ἐφόδια not unfrequently has this sense. 
For this and other reasons the words 





11] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 13 


a , na ~ 7 ~ ~ 
ἥλιον διδόντες ἢ λάμβάνοντεο, τοῖς ἐφοδίοις τοῦ Θεοῦ 


3 τοῦ Θεοῦ] A; τοῦ Χριστοῦ CS. 


τοῖς ἐφ. τοῦ Θ. ἀρκ. must be connected 
with the preceding clauses, so that 
the new idea is introduced by καὶ 
προσέχοντες. The Syriac version in- 
deed attaches καὶ προσέχοντες to the 
preceding sentence, but it manipu- 
lates the words following, as if it had 
read τούς re λόγους... ἐνεστερνισμένοι 
(om. ἦτε). 

τοῦ Θεοῦ] The reading rod Χρισ- 
τοῦ is accepted by Bryennios and 
Hilgenfeld (ed. 2) on the authority 
of C. On the other hand Harnack 
retains τοῦ Θεοῦ ; while Donaldson 
hesitates between the two readings. 

As regards external evidence, the 
balance is fairly even. If the view 
maintained above (I. pp. 124 sq, 139 
sq, 142 sq) of the relative value of 
our authorities be correct, A is en- 
titled to as great weight as CS to- 
gether. Moreover the obvious doc- 
trinal motive, which in C has led to 
the deliberate substitution of λόγος 
for πνεῦμα in another place (ii. ὃ 9), 
must deprive it of much value in 
the present case. On the other hand 
it is urged with probability that, as 
Photius (4767. 126) complains of 
Clement’s language in this epistle 
ὅτι ἀρχιερέα καὶ προστάτην τὸν Κύριον 
ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐξονομάζων οὐδὲ 
τὰς θεοπρεπεῖς καὶ ὑψηλοτέρας ἀφῆκε 
περὶ αὐτοῦ φωνάς, he cannot have had 
τοῦ Θεοῦ in his text. But, as the 
declaration of Christ’s divinity lurks 
under the reference of the pronoun 
αὐτοῦ, it might very easily have es- 
caped the notice of Photius who in 
the course of this single embassy 
read as large a number of books as 
would have sufficed many a man not 
ill-informed for a life-time. Even 
if the inference were more certain, 
this evidence would not go far, for 
Photius is a late writer. 





On the other hand Gaius (or rather 
Hippolytus) early in the third century 
inthe Little Labyrinth(H. E.v.28; see 
Routh Re/. Sacr. 11. p. 129) mentions 
Clement with Justin, Miltiades, and 
Tatian, besides ‘several others,’ a- 
mong those ἐν ols θεολογεῖται ὁ 
Χριστός. Routh (p. 145) supposes 
Clement of Rome to be meant (as 
also does Bunsen, Aizffol. I. p. 440), 
because the author of the Little 
Labyrinth refers distinctly to works 
written ‘defore the time of Victor’ 
who became bishop about A.D. 189 
or 190, and indeed the whole argu- 
ment turns on this point. To this it 
may be added that Hippolytus after- 
wards (p. 131) uses an expression re- 
sembling the language of the Roman 
Clement here, 6 εὔσπλαγχνος Θεὸς 
καὶ Κύριος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς οὐκ 
ἐβούλετο... ἀπολέσθαι μάρτυρα τῶν 
ἰδίων παθῶν, and that Clement of 
Alexandria (who is the alternative) 
can only have died a few years (ten 
or at most twenty) before the passage 
was written. On the other side it 
may be urged that the order of the 
names, Ἰουστίνου καὶ Μιλτιάδου καὶ 
Ῥατιανοῦ καὶ Κλήμεντος καὶ ἑτέρων πλει- 
ὄνων, points to the Alexandrian Cle- 
ment ; but this is not conclusive, since 
in the very next sentence the chrono- 
logical order of Melito and Irenzus, 
is inverted, ra yap Eipnvaiov τε καὶ 
Μελίτωνος καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τίς ἀγνοεῖ 
βιβλία; The question therefore must 
remain undecided; though the rea- 
sons in favour of the Roman Clement 
seem to preponderate. As it is very 
improbable that so early a writer as 
Hippolytus should have recognised 
as genuine any other writings a- 
scribed to Clement of Rome, his judg- 
ment must have been founded upon 
this epistle. 


, aero 


14 


The external evidence therefore is 
far from conclusive; and if any de- 
cision on the reading is possible, it 
must be founded upon internal evi- 
dence. But here the considerations 
which present themselves are numer- 
ous. 

(1) As a question of accidental 
error in transcription, the probability 
is evenly balanced; for xv instead of 
θυ, and 6v instead of χυ, are equally 
common with scribes. 

(2) On the other hand, if we have 
a deliberate alteration, the chances 
that Χριστοῦ would be substituted 
for Θεοῦ are, I think, greater than the 
chances of the converse change. 
Such language as αἷμα Θεοῦ, παθήματα 
Θεοῦ, and the like, though common 
in the second and third centuries, 
became highly distasteful in later 
ages; and this from various motives. 
The great Athanasius himself pro- 
tests against such phrases, c. Afol/in. 
ii. 13, 14 (I. p. 758) πῶς οὖν yeypapare 
ὅτι Θεὸς ὁ διὰ σαρκὸς παθὼν καὶ ava- 
στάς ;.. οὐδαμοῦ δὲ αἷμα Θεοῦ δίχα σαρ- 
κὸς παραδεδώκασιν αἱ γραφαὶ ἢ Θεὸν διὰ 
σαρκὸς παθόντα καὶ ἀναστάντα. And how 
liable to correction such expressions 
would be, we may infer from the long 
recension of the Ignatian Epistles, 
where the original language of the 
writer is deliberately altered by the 
interpolator, who appears to have 
lived in the latter half of the fourth 
century (Zphes. τ ἐν αἵματι Θεοῦ, where 
Χριστοῦ is substituted for Θεοῦ ; Rom. 
6 τοῦ πάθους Tod Θεοῦ pov, where this 
interpolator softens down the lan- 
guage by inserting Χριστοῦ before 
τοῦ Θεοῦ pov, while others substitute 
τοῦ Κυρίου μου or τοῦ Χριστοῦ). At 
this time the heresy to which such 
expressions seemed to give counte- 
nance was Apollinarianism. At a 
later date, when the Monophysite 
controversy arose, there would be a 
still greater temptation on the part of 
an orthodox scribe to substitute τοῦ 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [11 


Χριστοῦ for τοῦ Θεοῦ. The language 
of Anastasius of Sinai (Hodeg. 12, 
13, p. 97 sq) shows that these pas- 
sages of earlier writers (he mentions 
among others Ign. Rom. 6) were con- 
stantly alleged in favour of Mono- 
physite doctrine, and he himself has 
some trouble in explaining them 
away. Writing against these same 
heretics Isidore of Pelusium (£7. i. 
124) Says Θεοῦ πάθος οὐ λέγεται, Χρισ- 
τοῦ γὰρ τὸ πάθος γέγονε κιτιλ. On the 
other hand, it might be said that the 
Monophysites themselves would be 
under a temptation to alter xv into 
θυ; and accordingly Bryennios sup- 
poses that in this passage the reading 
of A is due to the Monophysites (or, 
as he adds, perhaps to the Alexan- 
drian divines). This does not seem 
very likely. (a) In the first place, it 
would be a roundabout and precari- 
ous way of getting a testimony in 
favour of their doctrine. If τοῦ Χρισ- 
τοῦ (thus assumed to be the original 
reading) had been in direct connexion 
with τὰ παθήματα, a change in this 
direction would not be improbable ; 
but it would never have occurred to 
any one to alter τοῖς ἐφοδίοις τοῦ 
Χριστοῦ into τοῖς ἐφοδίοις τοῦ Θεοῦ, 
because there happened to be the ex- 
pression ra παθήματα αὐτοῦ in the 
next sentence, so that αὐτοῦ would 
naturally be referred to the genitive 
after τοῖς éhodios. It would have 
been much simpler to change αὐτοῦ 
into τοῦ Θεοῦ at once. (ὁ) Secondly, 
the dates are not favourable to this 
supposition. The MS which has Θεοῦ 
is assigned by the most competent 
authorities to the fifth century, and 
by some of them to the earlier half 
of the century (see above, I. p. 117); 
and, though not impossible, it is 
not probable that the Monophysite 
controversy would have influenced 
the transcription of the MS at this 
date. On the other hand Photius, 
our earliest authority for rod Χριστοῦ 
(supposing that his evidence be ac- 


11] 


cepted), wrote four centuries later, 
when there had been ample time for 
such manipulation of the text. But, 
besides the doctrinal motive which 
might have suggested the change 
from Θεοῦ to Χριστοῦ, there may also 
have been an exegetical reason. The 
word ἐφόδιον, viaticum, was used espe- 
cially of the eucharistic elements (e.g. 
Lit. D. Mare. p. 29, Lit. D. Lacob. p. 
75, Neale), and there would be a na- 
tural desire to fix this sense on S. 
Clement here. 

(3) The probability that such lan- 
guage as ra παθήματα τοῦ Θεοῦ should 
have been used by an early Chris- 
tian writer can hardly be questioned. 
These early writers occasionally used 
language so strong in expressing 
their belief of our Lord’s divinity, as 
almost to verge on patripassianism; 
so Ign. Ephes. 1 ἀναζωπυρήσαντες ἐν 
αἵματι Θεοῦ, Ign. Rom. 6 ἐπιτρέψατέ 
μοι μιμητὴν εἶναι τοῦ πάθους τοῦ Θεοῦ 
pov, Melito (Routh Re/. Sacr. 1. p. 
122) 6 Θεὸς πέπονθεν ὑπὸ δεξιᾶς Ἰσ- 
ραηλίτιδος, Test. xit Patr. Levi 4 
ἐπὶ τῷ πάθει τοῦ ὑψίστου (a very 
ancient writing ; see Galatians p. 307 
sq), Tatian ad Graec. 13 τοῦ πεπον- 
θότος Θεοῦ, Tertull. de Carn. Chr. 5 
‘passiones Dei,’ ad Uvor. ii. 3 ‘ san- 
guine Dei’ (and so elsewhere Ter- 
tullian speaks of ‘God crucified, 
‘God dead,’ ‘the flesh of God, ‘the 
murderers of God’; see de Carn. 
Chr. 5, adv. Mare. ii. 16, 27, v. 5), 
Anc. Syr. Doc. p. ὃ (ed. Cureton) 
‘God was crucified for all men,’ etc. 
And similar passages from writers of 
these and the succeeding generations 
might be multiplied. See Abbot l.c. 
Ῥ. 340 sq, Otto Corp. Apol. Christ. 
IX. p. 445. The nearest parallel in 
the New Testament is Acts xx. 28, 
τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ Θεοῦ ἣν περιεποιή- 
σατο διὰ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ ἰδίου ; but 
even if τοῦ Θεοῦ be the correct read- 
ing (as possibly it is), the form of ex- 
pression is far less strong than in 
these patristic references. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


18 


(4) It is more to the purpose to 
urge that, though such language is 
not uncommon in other writers, it has 
no parallel in Clement; that he else- 
where speaks of the blood ‘ of Christ’ 
(S§ 7, 21, 49) and describes it'as ‘ pre- 
cious to God His Father’ (§ 7); and 
that throughout this epistle he applies 
the term Θεὸς to the Father as distin- 
guished from Christ. This argument 
has considerable weight, but must 
not be overstrained. The Catholic 
doctrine of the Person of Christ ad- 
mits both ways of speaking. Writers 
like Tertullian, who use the most ex- 
travagant and unguarded language 
on the other side, are commonly and 
even in the same context found speak- 
ing of Christ as distinct from God; 
and the exact proportions which the 
one mode of speaking will bear to 
the other in any individual writer 
must be a matter of evidence. It is 
clear from the newly discovered end- 
ing (δ 58 ᾧῇ yap ὁ Θεὸς κιτ.λ.) that he 
could have had no sympathy with 
Ebionite views of the Person of 
Christ. Moreover, in the passage 
especially quoted (§ 7) one authority, 
which probably preserves the right 
reading, omits Θεῷ. And after all the 
alternative remains which Abbot is 
disposed to favour (p. 343), that Cle- 
ment wrote αὐτοῦ negligently, not re- 
membering that τοῦ Θεοῦ had imme- 
diately preceded and referring it in 
his own mind to Christ. 

(5) It remains to enquire whether 
the connexion is more favourable to 
τοῦ Θεοῦ Or τοῦ Χριστοῦ. This will 
depend partly on the connexion of 
the sentences. If the punctuation 
given in my text be retained, τοῦ 
Θεοῦ is almost necessary ; for ra ἐφό- 
δια then refers to the ordinary means 
of subsistence. Hilgenfeld reads and 
punctuates τοῖς ἐφοδίοις τοῦ Χριστοῦ 
ἀρκούμενοι καὶ προσέχοντες, under- 
standing by the term ‘spiritual sus- 
tenance.’ This seems to me to give 
an awkward sense (for the mention 




















16 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [11 


, 4 \ / ~ 
ἀρκούμενοι: Kal προσέχοντες Tous λόγους αὐτοῦ ἐπι- 


a Fr. 3 ΄ “ \ \ 
μελῶς ἐνεστερνισμένοι NTE τοῖς σπλάγχνοις, καὶ τὰ 


παθήματα αὐτοῦ ἦν πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ὑμῶν. 


Οὕτως εἰ- 


ρήνη βαθεῖα καὶ λιπαρὰ ἐδέδοτο πᾶσιν καὶ ἀκόρεστος 


, > ΠῚ of. \ / / (Wee 
mobos eis ἀγαθοποιίαν, καὶ πλήρης πνεύματος αγίου § 


2 ἐνεστερνισμένοι] C3 εστερνισμενοι A. 
5 πλήρης... ἔκχυσις .. ἐγίνετο] AC; plenae effusiones..,erant S,— 


dero A. 


4 λιπαρὰ ἐδέδοτο] λειπαραεδε- 


as if πλήρεις ἐκχύσεις... ἐγίνοντο, for the plural here cannot be explained by vibui. 


of ‘contentment’ is then somewhat 
out of place) and an unnatural punc- 
tuation (for καὶ προσέχοντες then be- 
comes a clumsy addition). 

I. τοὺς λόγους] For the accusative 
after προσέχοντες compare e.g. Exod. 
Xxxiv. II πρόσεχε σὺ πάντα ὅσα ἐγὼ 
ἐντέλλομαί σοι, Is. i. 10 προσέχετε νό- 
pov Θεοῦ, Neh. ix. 34 οὐ προσέσχον 
τὰς ἐντολάς (ν.].) σου καὶ τὰ μαρτύριά 
σου. 

2. ἐνεστερνισμένοι] ‘ye took them to 
heart, i.e. τοὺς λόγους, which is the 
accusative to ἐνεστερνισμένοι as well 
as to προσέχοντες ; SO § 12 εἰσδεξα- 
μένη αὐτοὺς ἔκρυψεν. For ἐνστερνί- 
ξεσθαι compare Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 
(p. 123) τὸν σωτῆρα ἐνστερνίσασθαι, 
Euseb. Mart. Pal. ὃ μείζονα τοῦ σώ- 
ματος τὸν λογισμὸν ἐνεστερνισμένη, 70. 
11 μνήμας αὐτῶν (τῶν γραφῶν) ἐνεστέρ- 
νιστο, 2b. Laud. Const. 5 ὃ 5 τῶν ἐκεῖ 
φώτων ἄλεκτον πόθον ἐνεστερνισμένος, 
A post. Const. procem. ἐνεστερνισμένοι 
τὸν φόβον αὐτοῦ, 7b. v. 14 ἐνστερνισά- 
μενος αὐτόν. There seems to be no 
such word as orepviter Oa, and there- 
fore ἐνεστερνισμένοι must be read. If 
ἐστερνισμένοι Could stand, Cotelier’s 
explanation would probably be cor- 
rect, ‘Clementi ἐστερνισμένοι sunt, 
qui Latinis pectorosi, homines lati 
capacisque pectoris (2 Cor. vi. 11), 
as the analogy of σπλαγχνίζεσθαι 
suggests ; and later critics seem to 
be wrong in making it equivalent to 
ἐνεστερνισμένοι, which owes its trans- 


itive sense to the preposition. 

τὰ παθήματα αὐτοῦ x.t.A.] Compare 
Gal. iii. 1 οἷς κατ᾽ ὀφθαλμοὺς Ἰησοῦς 
Χριστὸς προεγράφη ἐσταυρωμένος, of 
which Clement’s expression is per- 
haps a reminiscence. In this passage 
it has been proposed to read μαθή- 
para for παθήματα ; and the confusion 
of μαθητής, παθητής, in Ign. Polyc. 
7, and μαθήματα, παθήματα, in Ign. 
Smyrn. 5, shows that the interchange 
would be easy. This emendation was 
originally adopted to meet the diffi- 
culty of the expression ‘ the sufferings 
of God.’ Among others it found an 
advocate in the late Ezra Abbot 
(Bibliotheca Sacra, April 1876, p. 313 
sq) in a learned paper on Acts xx. 
28. But it has obtained some favour 
even since the discovery of thealterna- 
tive reading rod Χριστοῦ. Yet (1) The 
parallels quoted in the note on τοῦ 
Θεοῦ prove that no alteration is need- 
ed, since ra παθήματα αὐτοῦ would be 
a natural expression to a writer of 
this age; (2) The reading μαθήματα 
would destroy the propriety of the 
expressions in the parallel clauses as 
read in the MS, ἐνεστερνισμένοι refer- 
ring to τοὺς λόγους and πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν 
to τὰ παθήματα, ‘the words in your 
hearts, the sufferings before youreyes’; 
(3) While ra παθήματα is a common 
expression in the New Testament, 
being used especially to denote the 
sufferings of Christ, the word μάθημα 
does not once occur either there or 


1] , TO THE CORINTHIANS. 17 


/ > \ ’ | Aes / ς / a 
κχυσις ἐπὶ πάντας ἐγίνετο: μεστοί TE ὁσίας βουλῆς 
Ὶ > “ / > 3 ~ “4 > / 
ν ἀγαθῇ προθυμίᾳ per’ εὐσεβοῦς πεποιθήσεως ἐξετεί- 
on - \ Α 7 7 
ATE τὰς χεῖρας ὑμῶν πρὸς τὸν παντοκράτορα Θεόν, 
¢ ri \- , , af 7 , 
κετεύοντες αὐτὸν ἱλέως γενέσθαι, εἴτι ἄκοντες ἡμαρ- 
i ~ ε \ \ ε \ 7 
ETE. ἀγὼν ἦν ὑμῖν ἡμέρας TE καὶ νυκτὸς ὑπερ πασης 


6 ὁσία] AS; θείας C: see the lower note. 


A. éferelvare] A; ἐξετείνετε CS. 
note. ἄκοντες] AC; ἑκόντες 8. 


1 the Apostolic fathers ; and in the 
nly passage in the LXx where it is 
und (Jer. xiii. 21) there is a v.l. 
τθητὰς (for μαθήματα), which ap- 
roaches more nearly to the original 
lebrew ; (4) Though ra μαθήματα τοῦ 
cov might stand, still ai διδαχαὶ τοῦ 
εοῦ (or some similar expression) 
ould be more natural. 
3. εἰρήνη βαθεῖα] 4 Macc. iii. 20 
ιθεῖαν εἰρήνην διὰ τὴν εὐνομίαν ἡμῶν 
χον, Hegesipp.in Euseb. 27. £. iii. 32 
νομένης εἰρήνης βαθείας ἐν πάσῃ ἐκ- 
ησίᾳ, Athenag. Suppl. 1 ἡ σύμπασα 
κουμένη τῇ ὑμετέρᾳ συνέσει βαθείας 
γήνης ἀπολαύουσιν, Liturg. S. Basil. 
165 (Neale) βαθεῖαν καὶ ἀναφαίρετον 
γήνην, Euseb. Vit. Const. ii. 61. 
5. ἀγαθοποιΐαν] ‘ beneficence’ ; again 
st below and §§ 33, 34: comp. 1 Pet. 
. 19, Test. χίΐ Patr. Jos. 18. The 
lied words occur several times in 
Peter: ἀγαθοποιεῖν 1 Pet. ii. 15, 20, 
. 6, 17; ἀγαθοποιός, τ Pet. ii. 14. 
hile καλοποιΐα regards the abstract 
aracter of the action, ἀγαθοποιΐα 
oks to its results and more especi- 
ly to its effect on others. 
6. ὁσία] For the confusion of 
1oc and θεῖος comp. §§ 14, 21, and 
e above I. pp. 138, 140. For ὁσίας 
e ὃ 45 ἐν ὁσίᾳ καὶ ἀμώμῳ προθέσει, 
6 διὰ τῆς ὁσίας παιδείας αὐτοῦ ; for 
las, ὃ 40 τὰ βάθη τῆς θείας γνώσεως. 
1ere might possibly be a question 
lich of the two words should be read 
re: but (1) we have a combination 


CLEM. II, 


7 πεποιθήσεως] πεποιηθησεωσ 
9 ἱλέως] A; ἵλεων C: see the lower 
ἡμάρτετε] AC; peccabatis (ἡμαρτάνετε) S. 


of two authorities (including the best) 
against one; and (2) the other in- 
stances show that the tendency is to 
change ὅσιος into θεῖος, and not con- 
versely. 

9. ἱλέως γενέσθαι) The adverb 
ἱλέως is recognised by Hesychius, but 
no instances are given in the lexicons. 
As it appears only to occur in the 
expression ἱλέως γίνεσθαι (Bull. de 
Corr. Hellén. Xi. p. 453 (1887) μήτε 
οἱ θεοὶ ἱλέως αὐτῷ γένοιντο, 2 Macc. ii. 
22, vii. 37, x. 26), it is probably a 
grammatical mistake of the later lan- 
guage, the true construction being 
forgotten and the word being erro- 
neously treated as an adverb (ἱλέως 
instead of ἵλεως). In this passage it 
may be due to the transcriber and 
not to Clement himself. At all events 
our MS (A) in the three passages of 
2 Maccabees has ἱλέως, where the 
common text has a proper grammati- 
cal construction ἵλεω γενομένου, ἵλεω 
γενέσθαι, ἵλεω γενόμενον. In Herm. 
Vis. ii. 2, Sim. ix. 23, we have the ex- 
pression ἵλεως γίνεσθαι, but the con- 
text fails to show whether ἵλεως is 
treated as an adverb or an adjective. 
E. A. Sophocles Lex. s.v. gives an 
instance of the adverb ἱλέως from 
Moschion, and the inscription above 
quoted proves it to be a possible 
word. 

10. ἀγὼν ἦν κιτ.λ.] Comp. Col. ii. 1. 

ἡμέρας te καὶ νυκτὸς] Hilgenfeld 
calls attention to the fact that the 


2 





18 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [11 


τῆς ἀδελφότητος, εἰς τὸ σώζεσθαι μετὰ δέους καὶ 
συνειδήσεως τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῶν ἐκλεκτών αὐτοῦ" εἰλι- 
κρινεῖς καὶ ἀκέραιοι ἦτε καὶ ἀμνησίκακοι εἰς ἀλλήλους" 
πᾶσα στάσις καὶ πᾶν σχίσμα βδελυκτὸν ὑμῖν: ἐπὶ τοῖς 


΄ ~ “ ~ \ ’ 
παραπτώωμασιν τοῖς πλησίον ἐπενθεῖτε: Ta ὑστερήματα 


I μετὰ δέους] Ο; per’ ἐλέους (ελαιουσ A) AS. 
3 ἀκέραιοι] axeper A. 


veo A. 


2 εἰλικρινεῖς] ειλεικρι- 
ἀμνησίκακοι] ( ; αμαμνησικακοι A. 


So I read the μ with Tischendorf, but previous editors gave it αναμνησικάκοι. 


4 βδελυκτὸν] A; add. ἣν C, and so probably S. 


writer elsewhere has the same order 
‘day and night’ §§ 20, 24, and argues 
thence ‘scriptorem non e Judaeis, qui 
noctem anteponunt, sed e gentilibus, 
Romanis quidem, ortumesse.’ This ar- 
gument is more specious than sound. 
Thus in the Apocalypse the order is 
always ‘ day and night,’ iv. 8, vii. 15, 
xii, 10, xiv. II, xx. 10; in S. Paul al- 
ways ‘night and day,’ 1 Thess. ii. 9, 
iii. 10, 2 Thess. iii. 8,1 Tim. v. 5, 2 
Tim. i. 3; while by S. Luke either 
order is used indifferently in both the 
Gospel (ii. 37, xviii. 7) and the Acts 
(ix. 24, xx. 31, XXVi. 7). 

1. ἀδελφότητος] A word peculiar to 
S. Peter in the New Testament; 1 
Pet. ii. 17, v. 9. So Polyc. Phil. 10 
‘fraternitas,’ where the Greek is not 
extant; Herm. and. 8. 

pera δέους] I have ventured to 
adopt this reading, as other recent 
editors have done, on the inferior au- 
thority of C (meta Acoye for mete- 
Aeoyc), because it rescues the passage 
from a difficulty and so commends it- 
self. Bythis combination μετὰ δέους καὶ 
συνειδήσεως the whole clause is trans- 
ferred from God to the believer, and 
συνειδήσεως becomes intelligible. With 
the whole expression comp. Liturg. 
D. Facob. p. 55 (Neale) δὸς ἡμῖν, Κύ- 
pte, μετὰ παντὸς φόβου καὶ συνειδήσεως 
καθαρᾶς προσκομίσαι κιτλ. For the 
idea of fear as an agent in the work 
of salvation see Phil, ii, 12; and for 


5 Tots πλησίον] A; τῶν 


the expression pera δέους Heb. xii. 28 
λατρεύωμεν εὐαρέστως τῷ Θεῷ μετὰ ev- 
λαβείας καὶ δέους (the correct reading), 
an epistle which has largely influ- 
enced Clement’s language elsewhere. 
For the use of συνείδησις here comp. 
§ 34 συναχθέντες τῇ συνειδήσει. It de- 
notes inward concentration and as- 
sent. Zahn (Gdtt. Gel. Anz. Nov. 8, 
1876) still retains the reading per’ ἐλέ- 
ous, explaining it of brotherly kindness 
shown towards offenders, and pro- 
poses συναθλήσεως for συνειδήσεως. He 
might have quoted “2057. Const. ii. 13 
ἔπειτα μετὰ ἐλέους Kal οἰκτιρμοῦ καὶ 
προσλήψεως οἰκειοῦ ὑπισχνούμενος av- 
τῷ σωτηρίαν for this sense. Lipsius 
(Fenaer Literaturz. Jan. 13, 1877) 
accepts pera δέους, but holds by his 
conjecture συνδεήσεως (Academy, July 
9, 1870), though it is now rendered 
unnecessary. Donaldson (7heo/. Rev. 
Jan. 1877) suggests pera τελείας συν- 
ἐλεύσεως. 

2. συνειδήσεως] If the reading 
ἐλέους be retained, συνειδήσεως must 
mean ‘with the consent of God,’ but 
this is hardly possible. I had ac- 
cordingly hazarded the conjecture 
evdoxnoews (EyAOKHCEWC for ογνει- 
AHcewc), which is less violent than 
συναινέσεως, συνείξεως, συνδεήσεως, and 
other emendations. This conjecture 
struck me before I was aware that 
Davis had suggested συνευδοκήσεως, 
of which word I cannot find any in- 


ee eee 











10 





11] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


3 “ af > 7 > / or “5 ’ > 
αὐτῶν ἴδια εἐΚρινέτε" QMETAMEANTOL TE ETL Tacn aya~ 


19 


54 “ > a ΕἾ > ᾿ ΨΥ 4 
θοποιΐᾳ, ΕΤΟΙΜΟΙ EIC TIAN ΕΡΓΟΝ ἄγδθον TH TAVAPETW 
καὶ σεβασμίῳ πολιτείᾳ κεκοσμημένοι πάντα ἐν τῷ ὄβω 

μίς , μημένοι παντα ἐν τῷ φόβαᾳ 

“ ΄- \ ᾿ς Ἁ 7 
αὐτοῦ ἐπετελεῖτε: τὰ προστάγματα Kal τὰ δικαιώματα 


ΤᾺ , | ‘ a ' ς a , 
του Κυρίου ἐπὶ TA TAATH τῆς KApAiAc ὑμῶν ἐγέγραπτο. 


πλησίον C; vicinorum ὃ. 
αἰτοιμοι A. 


I, p. 126). 


stance. The clause would then mean 
‘of His mercy and good pleasure’: 
comp. ὃ 9 ἱκέται γενόμενοι τοῦ ἐλέους 
καὶ τῆς χρηστότητος αὐτοῦ. The lexi- 
cons supply a few instances of the 
form εὐδόκησις (e.g. Diod. xv. 6, Dion. 
Hal. iii. 13), which also occurs below 
§ 40 (see the note). In the N. T. the 
allied word εὐδοκία is generally said 
of God; Matt. xi. 26 (Luke x. 21), 
Eph. i. 5,9, Phil. ii. 13. If however 
we accept δέους (see the last note), no 
emendation is needed. 

τὸν ἀριθμὸν κιτ.λ.] See the note on 
§ 59, where the same expression oc- 
curs. So too in our Burial Service, 
‘shortly to accomplish the number 
of Thine elect.’ 

εἰλικρινεῖς καὶ ἀκέραιοι] For εἰλικρι- 
νεῖς, See Philippians 1. το ; for ἀκέραιοι, 
Philippians ii, 15. : 

3. ἀμνησίκακοι] So we have ἀμνη- 
σικάκως below, § 62. Comp. Jest. xit 
Patr. Zab. 8 ἀμνησίκακοι γίνεσθε, Clem. 
Alex. Stvom. vii. 14 (p. 883) ἀμνησί- 
κακον εἶναι διδάσκει, Hermas Mand. ix. 
αὐτὸς ἀμνησίκακός ἐστι, and so Strom. 
ii. 18 (p. 398) δι᾿ ἀμνησικακίας. 

5. τοῖς πλησίον] A brachylogy for 
τοῖς τῶν πλησίον. Jacobson quotes 
Eur. Hec. 996 μηδ᾽ ἔρα τῶν πλησίον. 

6. ἀμεταμέλητοι κ.τ.λ.} 1.6. ‘When 
you had done good, you did not wish 
it undone ; when there was an oppor- 
tunity of doing good, you seized it.’ 
The latter clause ἕτοιμοι κιτιλ. is from 
Titus iii. 1 πρὸς πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν ἑτοί- 


6 ἴδια] C; δια A; ἰδίᾳ 8. 
8 σεβασμίῳ] A, and so apparently S; σεβασμιωτάτῃ C (see 
9 ἐπετελεῖτε] επετελειται A. 


7 ἕτοιμοι] 


μους εἶναι : comp. 2 Cor. ix. 8, and see 
below § 34 with the note. 

8. πολιτείᾳ] ‘the graces of your 
heavenly citizenship’; see Phil. i. 27, 
Ephes. ii. 12, 19. For πολιτεία, πο- 
λιτεύεσθαι, see S§ 3, 6, 21, 44, 51, 54. 

9. αὐτοῦ] i.e. τοῦ Θεοῦ, understood 
from τῇ παναρέτῳ καὶ σεβασμίῳ πο- 
λιτείᾳ; comp. ὃ 54 τὴν ἀμεταμέλητον 
πολιτείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ. 

τὰ προστάγματα]! The two words 
occur together frequently in the Lxx: 
see esp. Mal. iv. 4, and comp. 1 Sam, 
Xxx. 25, Ezek. xi. 20, xviii. 9, xx. II, 
etc. 

10. ἐπὶ τὰ πλάτη κιτ.λ.] Taken from 
the Lxx of Prov. vii. 3, ἐπίγραψον δὲ 
ἐπὶ τὸ πλάτος τῆς καρδίας gov, where 
πλάτος corresponds to the Hebrew mb 
‘a tablet.’ The phrase is repeated in 
the LXxX with slight modifications in 
Prov. xxii. 20, and in some copies 
also in Prov. iii. 3; but there is 
nothing corresponding in the Hebrew 
of Prov. xxii. 20. Wotton’s state- 
ment that πλάτος occurs in this sense 
‘passim’ in the LXX is erroneous. 
From this LXX reading the expres- 
sion τὸ πλάτος τῆς καρδίας is not un- 
common in the Christian fathers (e.g. 
Iren. i, praef. 3, and other passages 
quoted by Wotton), and τὰ πλάτη 
was doubtless written by Clement 
here. But it seems not improbable 
that the expression arose from a very 
early corruption of the ΤΧΧ text (a 
confusion of πλάτος and πλακός), since 


22 


20 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [π| 


ΤΙ]. 
> / \ / ” \ ” \ 
ἐπετελέσθη TO γεγραμμένον: “Edaren kai ἔπιεν kal 
€TAATYNOH KAl ἐπδχύνθη Kal ἀπελάκτισεν ὁ HPATTHMENOC. 

/ , " \ / 
Ἔκ τούτου Gidos καὶ φθόνος, [καὶ] ἔρις Kal στασις, 


Πᾶσα δόξα καὶ πλατυσμὸς ἐδόθη ὑμῖν, καὶ 


διωγμὸς καὶ ἀκαταστασία, πόλεμος καὶ αἰχμαλωσία. 
οὕτως ἐπηγέρθησαν oi ἄτιμοι ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐντίμογο, οἱ ἄδοξοι 
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐνδόξους, οἱ ἄφρονες ἐπὶ τοὺς φρονίμους, οἱ 
νέοι ἐπὶ TOYC πρεοσβυτέρογο. διὰ τοῦτο πόρρω ἄπεοτιν 


1 ἐδόθη] δοθη A. 3 ἀπελάκτισεν] CS, Deut. xxxii. 15; απεγαλακτι- 
σεν A. 4 καὶ &ps}] A; ἔρις (om. καὶ) CS. 8 drectw] A; est 5 
(which probably represents ἄπεστιν); ἀπέστη C, which is nearer to the Lxx of Is. 


πλάξ is the natural equivalent of mb 
and is frequently used elsewhere in 
the LXxx to translate it. 5. Paul’s 
metaphor in 2 Cor, iii. 3 is derived 
from the original of Prov. vii. 3. 

III. ‘But, like Jeshurun of old, 
you waxed wanton with plenty. Hence 
strife and faction and open war. 
Hence the ignoble, the young, the 
foolish, have risen against the highly- 
esteemed, the old, the wise. Peace 
and righteousness are banished. The 
law of God, the life after Christ, are 
disregarded. You have fostered jea- 
lousy, whereby death entered into the 
world.’ 

I. πλατυσμός] ‘enlargement, room 
to move in, i.e. freedom and plenty, 
opposed to θλίψις, στενοχωρία, avay- 
kn; as 2 Sam, xxii. 20 προέφθασάν pe 
ἡμέραι θλίψεώς μου καὶ ἐγένετο Κύ- 
ρίος ἐπιστήριγμά μου καὶ ἐξήγαγέν με 
εἰς πλατυσμὸν καὶ ἐξείλετό pe, Ps. 
cxvil. 5 ἐκ θλίψεως ἐπεκαλεσάμην τὸν 
Κύριον καὶ ἐπήκουσέν μου εἰς πλατυσ- 
pov: comp. Ps. xvii. 20, cxvili. 45, 
Ecclus, xlvii. 12. See also the oppo- 
sition of ἐν εὐρυχώρῳ and στενοχω- 
ρεῖσθαι, Hermas Mand. v. 1 ἐν εὐρυ- 
χώρῳ κατοικοῦν ἀγαλλιάσεται. Hence 
the Latin use of d/atare, dilatatio. 

2. ἔφαγεν κιτ.λ.] A very free quota- 
tion from the Lxx of Deut. xxxii. 14, 


15, καὶ αἷμα σταφυλῆς ἔπιεν (v. 1. ἔπιον) 
οἶνον" καὶ ἔφαγεν Ἰακὼβ καὶ ἐνεπλήσθη 
καὶ ἀπελάκτισεν ὁ ἠγαπημένος, ἐλιπάνθη, 
ἐπαχύνθη, ἐπλατύνθη. It diverges still 
more from the original Hebrew. 
Justin Dial. 20 (p. 237 B) quotes the 
same passage, but his quotation has 
no special resemblances to that of 
Clement. 

4. Gros κιτιλ.] The words occur in 
an ascending scale: frst the inward 
sentiment of division (ζῆλος develop- 
ing into φθόνος) ; next, the outward 
demonstration of this (ἔρις develop- 
ing into στάσις) ; Jastly, the direct 
conflict and its results (διωγμός, ἀκα- 
ταστασία, πόλεμος, αἰχμαλωσία). 

ὥλος καὶ φθόνος] These words oc- 
cur together also below, §§ 4, 5: 
comp. Gal. v. 20, 21, Zest. xii Patr. 
Sym. 4 ἀπὸ παντὸς ζήλου καὶ φθόνου. 
For the distinction between them see 
Trench WV. 7. Sym. ser. 1 ὃ xxvi, and 
Galatians \.c. Ζῆλος is ‘rivalry, am- 
bition,’ the desire of equalling or 
excelling another. It does not ne- 
cessarily involve the wish to deprive 
him of his advantages, which is im- 
plied in φθόνος ; but, if unduly che- 
rished, it will lead to this; ὃ 4 διὰ 
ζῆλος Δαυεὶδ φθόνον ἔσχεν, Plat. Me- 
nex. Ῥ. 242 A πρῶτον μὲν ζῆλος ἀπὸ 
(nrov δὲ φθόνος, AEsch. Agam. 939 








111] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 21 


ε ͵ \ > / > “ / « \ 

H AIKAIOCYNH καὶ εἰρήνη, ἐν τῷ ἀπολείπειν ἕκαστον TOV 
͵ὔ ΄ ol \ ΄. / ; > ΄. ΕῚ ΄σ 

το φόβον τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ ἐν TH πίστει αὐτοῦ ἀμβλυωπῆσαι 


\ bia , a , a , 
μηδὲ ἐν τοῖς νομίμοις τῶν προσταγμάτων αὐτοῦ πορεύ- 


εσθαι μηδὲ πολιτεύεσθαι κατὰ τὸ καθῆκον τῷ Χριστῷ, 


δον > ~ 
ἄλλα ἕκαστον βαδίζειν κατὰ Tas ἐπιθυμίας τῆς καρδίας 


΄- ~~ 5 ~ » ΄ 
αὐτοῦ τῆς πονηρᾶς, ζῆλον ἄδικον καὶ ἀσεβῆ ἀνειληφό- 


> e \ ’ ae > ‘ , 
15 Tas, δι᾿ οὗ Kal θάνατος ΕΙἸΟσῆλθεν EIC TON KOCMON. 


lix. 14 ἀφέστηκεν, given in the lower note; see above, I. p. 124 sq. 
λείπειν] απολειπὶ A; ἀπολιπεῖν C, and so probably S. 


9 ἀπο- 
10 πίστει] πιστι 


Α. 13 ἀλλὰ] AC, but Bryennios prints ἀλλ᾽, as if this were the reading 


of C. 


ὁ δ᾽ ἀφθόνητός γ᾽ οὐκ ἐπίζηλος πέλει, 
Arist. Rhet. ii. 4 ὑφ᾽ ὧν ζηλοῦσθαι 
βούλονται καὶ μὴ φθονεῖσθαι. 

5. ἀκαταστασία] ‘tumult’; comp. 
Luke xxi. 9 πολέμους καὶ ἀκαταστασίας, 
2 Cor. xii. 20 ἔρις, ζῆλος.. ἀκαταστα- 
cia, James iii. 16 ὅπου γὰρ ζῆλος καὶ 
ἐρίθεια, ἐκεῖ ἀκαταστασία κ.τ.λ. 

6. οἱ ἄτιμοι κ.τ.λ.] Is. iii. 5 προσ- 
κόψει τὸ παιδίον πρὸς τὸν πρεσβύτην, 
ὁ ἄτιμος πρὸς τὸν ἔντιμον. 

8. πόρρω ἄπεστιν x.t.d.] Is. lix. 14 
καὶ ἡ δικαιοσύνη μακρὰν ἀφέστηκεν. 

10. ἀμβλυωπῆσαι)] ‘grown dim- 
sighted’. The Atticists condemned 
ἀμβλυωπεῖν and preferred ἀμβλυώτ- 
rev; Thom. Mag. p. 39. The word 
and the form ἀμβλυωπεῖν are as old 
as Hippocrates, Progu. 1. p. 38 (ed. 
Foes.). In the LXx it occurs 1 Kings 
_ xiv, 4 (displaced and found between 
xii. 24 and xii.25in B). But in most 
places where it occurs there is a v. 1. 
ἀμβλυώττειν. Comp. a Gnostic writer 
in Hippol. Ref v. 16 (p. 133 ad fin.). 

12. τὸ καθῆκον τῷ Χριστῷ] The ex- 
pression has a close parallel in Phil. 
i. 27 ἀξίως τοῦ εὐαγγελίου τοῦ Χριστοῦ 
-πολιτεύεσθε, from which perhaps it is 
taken. The emendations suggested 
(Χριστιανῷ or ἐν Χριστῷ for Χριστῷ) 
are therefore unnecessary. 

14. ζῆλον x.7.A.] Comp. § 45 ἄδικον 


τῆς καρδίας] CS; om. A. 


15 καὶ] AC; om. 8. 


(prov ἀνειληφότων. 

15. καὶ θάνατος κιτ.λ.} From Wisd. ii. 
24 φθόνῳ δὲ διαβόλου θάνατος εἰσῆλθεν 
εἰς τὸν κόσμον ; comp. Rom. v.12. The 
following passage of Theophilus con- 
nects the quotation from the Book of. 
Wisdom with Clement’s application 
of it: ad Autol. ii. 29 (p. 39) ὁ Sara- 
vas...ep ᾧ οὐκ ἴσχυσεν θανατῶσαι 
αὐτοὺς φθόνῳ φερόμενος, ἡνίκα ἑώρα 
τὸν "Αβελ εὐαρεστοῦντα τῷ Θεῷ, ἐνερ- 
γήσας εἰς τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν καλού- 
μενον Κάϊν ἐποίησεν ἀποκτεῖναι τὸν 
ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν ἔΑβελ, καὶ οὕτως 
ἀρχὴ θανάτου ἐγένετο εἰς τόνδε τὸν κόσ- 
μον K.T.A, 

IV. ‘Said I not truly that death 
came into the world through jea- 
lousy? It was jealousy which prompt- 
ed the first murder and slew a 
brother by a brother’s hand ; jealousy 
which drove Jacob into exile, which 
sold Joseph as a bondslave, which 
compelled Moses to flee before his 
fellow-countryman and before Pha- 
raoh, which excluded Aaron and 
Miriam from the camp, which swal- 
lowed up Dathan and Abiram alive, 
which exposed David to the malice 
not only of foreigners but even of the 
Israelite king.’ 

The idea of jealousy bringing death 
into the world had a prominent place 


22 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [1v 


IV. [Γέγραπται yap οὕτως" Kai ἐγένετο μεθ᾽ time- 
pac, ἤνεγκεν Kain ἀπὸ TON κδρπῶν TAC γῆς Oycian τῷ Θεῷ, 
kai Ἄβελ ἤνεγκεν Kal ἀὐτὸς ἀπὸ τῶν πρωτοτόκων τῶν προ- 
Βάτων Kal ἀπὸ τῶν οτεάτων ἀγτῶν. κὰὶ ἐπεῖδεν ὁ Θεὸς 
ἐπὶ Ἄβελ Kal ἐπὶ τοῖς δώροις Αὐτοῦ, ἐπὶ Aé Κάϊν καὶ ἐπὶ 
Taic θγοίδιο ἀὐτοῦ οὐ Mpocécyen. Kal ἐλγπήθη Κάϊν λίδν 
KAl CYNETECEN τῷ προοώπῳ δύτοῦ, Kal εἶπεν ὁ Θεὸς πρὸς 
Kain, ἵνὰ τί περίλγπος ἐγένου; Kai ἵνὰ τί CYNETTECEN’ TO 

1 οὕτως] AS; om. Ὁ. 2 τῷ Θεῷ] AS; τῷ κυρίῳ C, with the LXx. 

3 προβάτων] AC; add. αὐτοῦ S, with Lxx. 4 ἐπεῖδεν] επιδὲ A. 7 τῷ 
προσώπῳ] A with the Lxx; τὸ πρόσωπον CS, in accordance with what follows. 





9 ἐὰν] A; ἂν C. 


in the teaching of the Ophites as re- 
ported by Iren. i. 30. 9, ‘Ita ut et dum 
fratrem suum Abel occideret, primus 
selum et mortem ostenderet’: and Ire- 
nzeus himself also speaks of the ζῆλος 
of Cain, iii. 23. 4, iv. 18. 3 (see the 
last passageespecially). Mill supposes 
that the idea was borrowed from 
Clement. As regards the Ophites 
however it is more probable that 
they derived it from a current inter- 
pretation of the name Κάϊν : comp. 
Clem. Hom. iii. 42 τὸν μὲν πρῶτον 
καλέσας Κάϊν, ὃ ἑρμηνεύεται ζῆλος, ὃς 
καὶ ζηλώσας ἀνεῖλεν τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ 
Αβελ. In a previous passage (iii. 25) 
this pseudo-Clement calls Cain ἀμ- 
φοτερίζον ὄνομα, because διχῆ ἔχει τῆς 
ἑρμηνείας τὴν ἐκδοχήν, ἑρμηνεύεται γὰρ 
καὶ κτῆσις (MIP) καὶ ζῆλος (NIP) κ-τιλ. 
The interpretation κτῆσις is adopted 
by Philo de Cherud. 15 (1. p. 148), de 
Sacr. Ab, et Ca. 1 (I. p. 163), guod Det. 
pot. ins. 10 (I. p. 197), εἴς.) and by 
Josephus Azz. 1. 2. 1. 

I. καὶ ἐγένετο KT.A.] Gen. iv. 3—8, 
quoted almost word for word from 
the Lxx. The divergences from the 
Hebrew text are very considerable. 

7. τῷ προσώπῳ] The case is diffi- 
cult to account for, except as a very 
early transcriber’s error in the LXxX ; 


11 ἄρξεις αὐτοῦ] A; αὐτοῦ ἄρξεις C. S has the same 


for the form of the Hebrew is the 
same here as in the following verse, 
where it is translated συνέπεσεν τὸ 
πρόσωπον, and the dative though in- 
telligible is awkward. 

9. οὐκ ἐὰν ὀρθῶς κιτ.λ.] The mean- 
ing of the original is obscure, but the 
LXX translation which Clement here 
follows must be wrong. The words 
ὀρθῶς διέλῃς stand for mnp> 2.) 
(‘doest good, at the door’), which the 
translators appear to have under- 
stood ‘doest right to open’; unless 
indeed they read mn) for MN, as 
seems more probable (for in the older 
characters the resemblance of ὃ and 
5 is very close). At all events it 
would seem that they intended διέλῃς 
to refer to apportioning the offerings 
(comp. Lev. i. 12, where it represents 
mms and is used of dividing the 
victim): and they might have under- 
stood the offence of Cain to consist 
in reserving to himself the best and 
giving God the worst: see Philo 
Quaest. in Gen. i. ὃ 62—64 (1. p. 43 
sq, Aucher), de Agric. 29 (I. p. 319), 
and de Sacr. Ab. et Ca. 13, 20 sq, 
(I. p. 171 sq, 176 sq), in illustration 
of this sense. The Christian fathers 
however frequently give it a directly 
moral bearing, explaining ὀρθῶς μὴ 





tv] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


23 


πρόσωπόν COY; οὐκ ἐὰν ὀρθῶς προςενέγκῃο ὀρθῶο AE μὲ 


, ao ες , ul 4 > ‘ > nm 
το AlEAHC, HMAPTEC; FCYYACON’ πρός CE H ATIOCTPOMH AayTOY, 


Kal ΟΥ̓ ἄρξεις ayToy. 


MON AYTOY' διέλθωμεν εἶς TO TEAION. 


kal εἶπεν Κάϊν πρὸς Ἄβελ TON AdeA- 


Kal ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ 


εἶνδι AYTOYC ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ ANECTH Κάϊν ἐπὶ Ἄβελ TON AdeA- 
\ > a eer ͵ 2 ’ “ / 
MON AYTOY KAl ἀπέκτεινεν AYTON. Ὁρᾶτε, ἀδελφοί, ζῆλος 


το καὶ φθόνος ἀδελφοκτονίαν κατειργάσατο. 


διὰ ζῆλος 


ε \ ε ΄ > \ > / > \ , > “~ 
Oo πατήρ ἡμων Ιακωβ ἀπέδρα απὸ προσώπου Ησαῦ 


order as A, but this would be most natural in the Syriac. 


12 διέλθωμεν 


AC; add. igitur (Ξ δὴ) S. This addition is found in some MSs of the Lxx. 


πεδίον] παιδιον A. 
ἀγαπητοί S; see above, §1. 
A; ὥλον Ὁ. 


διέλῃς to refer either to the obliquity 
of Cain’s moral sense or to his un- 
fairness in his relations with his bro- 
ther, e.g. Iren. iii. 23. 4 ‘Quod non 
recte divisisset eam quae erga fra- 
trem erat communionem,’ iv. 18. 3 
‘Quoniam cum zelo et malitia quae 
erat adversus fratrem divisionem ha- 
bebat in corde, ete.’, Origen Sed. zx 
Gen, (11. p. 30) οὐ διεῖλεν ὀρθῶς" τῆς 
θείας νομοθεσίας κατεφρόνησεν κ.τ.λ. 

10. ἡσύχασον] The word corre- 
sponds to the Hebrew ya" ‘lying,’ 
which the LXx have treated as an 
imperative ‘lie still’; comp. Job xi. 
19. Much stress is laid on ἡσύχασον 
by Philo de Sodr. τὸ (1. p. 400), and 
by early Christian expositors, e.g. 
Clem. Hom. iii. 25, Iren. 1]. cc. 

12. διέλθωμεν εἰς τὸ πεδίον] This 
clause is wanting in the Hebrew and 
Targum of Onkelos, but found in the 
LxXx, the Samaritan and Peshito 
versions, and the later Targums. 
Origen’s comment is interesting ; 
Sel. in Genes. (11. p. 39) ἐν τῷ Ἑβραϊκῷ 
TO λεχθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ Κάϊν πρὸς rov”ABed 
οὐ γέγραπται καὶ οἱ περὶ ᾿Ακύλαν ἔδειξαν 
ὅτι ἐν τῷ ἀποκρύφῳ φασὶν οἱ Ἑβραῖοι 
κεῖσθαι τοῦτο ἐνταῦθα κατὰ τὴν τῶν 
ἑβδομήκοντα ἐκδοχήν. These or similar 


- 


13 πεδίῳ] παιδιω A. 
15 κατειργάσατο] AS; Kareipydoavro C. 


14 ἀδελφοί] AC; 
ζῆλος] 


words are plainly wanted for the 
sense, and can only have been omit- 
ted accidentally. The Masoretes 
reckon this one of the twenty-eight 
passages where there is a lacuna in 
the text: see Fabric. Cod. Afocr. 
V. T. τ. p. 104 sq. Philo enlarges on 
the allegorical meaning of τὸ πεδίον. 

15. διὰ ζῆλος] On the two declen- 
sions of ὥλος see Winer ὃ ix. p. 78, 
A. Buttmann p. 20. Clement (or his 
transcriber) uses the masculine and 
the neuter forms indifferently. 

16. ὁ πατὴρ ἡμῶν] So ὃ 31 6 πατὴρ 
ἡμῶν ᾿Αβραάμ, ὃ 60 καθὼς ἔδωκας τοῖς 
πατράσιν ἡμῶν, ὃ 62 οἱ προδεδηλωμένοι 
πατέρες ἡμῶν (where see the note). 
From these passages it has been in- 
ferred that the writer was a Jewish 
Christian. The inference however is 
not valid; since Clement, like S. Paul 
(Gal. iii. 7, 9, 29, Rom. iv. 11, 18, 
ix. 6—8) or Justin (Dza/. 134), might 
refer to spiritual rather than actual 
parentage; comp. I Pet. iii. 6 Σάρρα... 
ἧς ἐγενήθητε τέκνα. So too Theophi- 
lus of Antioch (quoted by Jacobson), 
though himself a Gentile, speaks of 
Abraham (ad Aufol. iii. 28, comp. iii. 
24) and David (iii. 25) as ‘our fore- 
father.’ To these references add 76, 


24 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [1v 


τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ. ζῆλος ἐποίησεν ᾿Ιωσὴφ μέχρι θα- 
νάτου διωχθῆναι καὶ μέχρι δουλείας εἰσελθεῖν. ζῆλος 
φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασεν Μωῦσῆν ἀπὸ προσώπου Φαραὼ βασι- 
λέως Αἰγύπτου ἐν τῷ ἀκοῦσαι αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ ὁμοφύλου 
Tic ce KATECTHCEN κριτὴν ἢ AIKACTHN ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν; μὴ ἀνε- 
λεῖν με οὐ θέλειο, ὃν τρόπον ἀνεῖλες ἐχθὲς τὸν Αἰγύπτιον; 
διὰ ζῆλος ᾿λαρὼν καὶ Μαριὰμ ἔξω τῆς παρεμβολῆς 
ηὐλίσθησαν. ζῆλος Δαθὰν καὶ ᾿λβειρὼν ζώντας κατή- 


«“ \ \ / \ \ \ 
yayev εἰς ἅδου, διὰ TO στασιάσαι αὐτοὺς πρὸς TOV 








2 εἰσελθεῖν] A; ἐλθεῖν C, and so probably 5. 
ἄρχοντα καὶ δικαστὴν CS, with the Lxx. 


χθὲς (, 7 διὰ] CS; om. A. 
ηυλησθησαν A. 
διὰ ζῆλον C. Δανεὶδ] δαδ AC. 


iii. 20 οἱ Ἑβραῖοι, οἱ καὶ προπάτορες 
ἡμῶν, ap ὧν καὶ τὰς ἱερὰς βίβλους 
ἔχομεν K.T.A. 

5. τίς σε κιτιλ.] From the Lxx of 
Exod. ii. 14, which follows the He- 
brew closely, inserting however χθές 
(or ἐχθές). Clement has κριτὴν ἢ for 
ἄρχοντα καί, perhaps from confusion 
with Luke xii. 14 κριτὴν ἢ μεριστήν 
(the best reading, though A and some 
others have δικαστὴν ἢ μεριστήν). The 
LXxX is quoted more exactly in Acts 
vii. 27 and in Afost. Const. vi. 2. The 
life of Moses supplies Clement witha 
twofold illustration of his point ; for 
he incurred the envy not only of the 
king (ἀπὸ προσώπου Φαραώ), but also 
of his fellow-countrymen (ἐν τῷ ἀκοῦ- 
σαι αὐτὸν «.t.A.), aS in the parallel 
case of David below. 

7. ᾿Δαρὼν κιτιλ.] The Mosaic re- 
cord mentions only the exclusion of 
Miriam from the camp, Num. xii. 14, 
15. In this instance and in the next 
(Dathan and Abiram) the jealous per- 
sons are themselves the sufferers. 

9. τὸν θεράποντα κιτ.λ.] The ex- 
pression is used of Moses several 


See the lower note. 
ζῆλος] A; ζῆλον Ὁ. 
ζῆλος] S; διαζηλοσ A; διὰ ξῆλον C. 


5 κριτὴν ἢ δικαστὴν] A; 
6 ἐχθὲς] A; 

8 ηὐλίσθησαν 
10 διὰ ζῆλο7 A; 


I have followed the best Mss of the N.T. for 


times, e.g. Exod. iv. 10, xiv. 31, Num. 
xii. 7, 8, Josh. viii. 31, 33: comp. below 
§§ 43, 51, 53, Barnab. § 14, Just. Mart. 
Dial. 56 (p. 274 Ὁ), Theoph. ad Autol. 
iii. 9, 18, etc. ‘O θεράπων τοῦ Θεοῦ 
was a recognised title of Moses, as 
ὁ φίλος τοῦ Θεοῦ was of Abraham. 
10. Δαυεὶδ] Or perhaps Δαυὶδ. 
There is, so far as I know, no au- 
thority for Δαβὶδ, except in com- 
paratively recent MSS. Yet Hilgen- 
feld reads Δαβὶδ. Funk says ‘C Δαβὶδ 
ubique,’ and a similar statement is 
made by Gebhardt, being misled by 
Bryennios. The word is contracted 
in C in all its three occurrences in 
Clement; §§ 18, 52, as well as here. 
II. ὑπὸ τῶν ἀλλοφύλων] The Phi- 
listines, 1 Sam. xxi. 11, xxix. 4 sq. 
12. ὑπὸ Σαούλ] 1 Sam. xviii. 9 ‘And 
Saul eyed (ὑποβλεπόμενος LXX, A) 
David from that day and forward.’ 
V. ‘Again, take examples from 
our own generation. Look at the 
lives of the chief Apostles. See how 
Peter and Paul suffered from jea- 
lousy; how through many wander- 
ings, through diverse and incessant 


q 
3 





vy] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 25 


10 θεράποντα τοῦ Θεοῦ Μωῦσῆν. 


διὰ ζϊλος Δανεὶδ φθο- 


᾽ > ΄σ > 
νον ἔσχεν οὐ μόνον ὑπὸ τῶν ἀλλοφύλων, ἀλλὰ Kal 
« \ \ 2 
ὑπὸ (αοὺλ [ βασιλέως ᾿Ισραὴλ] ἐδιώχθη. 

a σαὶ > / 
V. (AAN ἵνα τῶν ἀρχαίων ὑποδειγμάτων παυσώ- 
of ψΑἰτὴ ἀν ᾿' > , 

μεθα, ἔλθωμεν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἔγγιστα γενομένους ἀθλητάς" 


rad ΄ ς ~ \ ~ 
15 AaBwpuev τῆς γενεᾶς ἡμῶν τὰ γενναῖα ὑποδείγματα. 


Διὰ ζῆλον καὶ φθόνον οἱ μέγιστοι καὶ δικαιότατοι 


> / / » 
στύλοι ἐδιώχθησαν καὶ ἕως θανάτου ἤθλησαν. 


AaBw- 


> ~ ΄ς \ \ / 
μεν πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἡμῶν τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς ἀποστόλους" 


the orthography of the word. 
A; ἀπὸ τοῦ Σαοὺλ Ὁ. 
των] υποδιγματων A. 


11 ὑπὸ] A; ἀπὸ (Ὁ. 
βασιλέως Ἰσραὴλ] AS; om. C. 
15 yevvaia] yevvea A. 


12 ὑπὸ Σαοὺλ] 
13 ὑποδειγμά- 
16 μέγιστοι] CS; 


ἕστο A. The word μέγιστοι was rejected by Tischendorf and several editors 
(myself included) as insufficient for the space, and some other word substituted to 
fill the lacuna of A, but the text of the other authorities removes all doubt. 


persecutions, they bore testimony to 
Christ; how at last they sealed their 
testimony with their blood, and de- 
parted to their rest and to their 
glory.’ 

14. ἔγγιστα] ‘very near,’ as com- 
pared with the examples already 
quoted. The expression must be 
qualified and explained by the men- 
tion of ἡ γενεὰ ἡμῶν just below. It 
has been shown that the close of Do- 
mitian’s reign is pointed out both by 
tradition and by internal evidence as 
the date of this epistle (I. p. 346 sq). 
The language here coincides with 
this result. It could hardly be used 
to describe events which had happen- 
ed within the last year or two, as 
must have been the case if the letter 
were written at the end of Nero’s 
reign. And on the other hand 7 
γενεὰ ἡμῶν would be wholly out of 
place, if it dated from the time of 
Hadrian, some 50 years or more after 
the death of the two Apostles. 

ἀθλητάς] See the note on Ign. 
Polye. τ. 


17. στύλοι] See the note on Gala- 
tians ii. 9, where it is used of S. Peter 
and other Apostles. The accentua- 
tion στύλοι is there discussed, and it 
has the support of C here. 

18. ἀγαθούς] So too Clem. Hom. 
i. 16 ὁ δ᾽ ἀγαθὸς Πέτρος προσπηδήσας 
κιτλ., quoted by Harnack. Editors 
and critics have indulged in much 
licence of conjecture, suggesting 
ἁγίους, πρώτους, θείους, etc., in place 
of ἀγαθούς. This has led to the state- 
ment made in .Volkmar’s edition of 
Credner’s Gesch. des N. T. Kanon p. 
51, that A reads ἃ ous (a supposed 
contraction for πρώτους). Nothing 
can be farther from the truth. The 
word ἀγαθοὺς is distinctly legible in 
full in A, and it is confirmed by the 
other authorities. Such an epithet 
may be most naturally explained on 
the supposition that Clement isspeak- 
ing in affectionate remembrance of 
those whom he had known person- 
ally. Otherwise the epithet seems 
to be somewhat out of place. 


26 


THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT [ν 


Πέτρον, ὃς διὰ ζῆλον ἄδικον οὐχ ἕνα οὐδὲ δύο ἀλλὰ 


/ / / ε΄ , 
πλείονας ὑπήνεγκεν πόνους, καὶ οὕτω μαρτυρήσας ἐπο- 


1 Πέτρον, 6s] C; ...οσ A; }είγμες 5. Before the discovery οἵ C, the lacuna of A 


was filled up [ὁ Ilérp]os or [Ilérp]os. 
seen. 
portavit (see § 14). 


I. Πέτρον x.t.A.] A passage in 
Peter of Alexandria (de Poenit. 9, see 
I. p. 164), where the two Apostles 
are mentioned in conjunction, was 
probably founded on Clement’s ac- 
count here, for it closely resembles 
his language. The same is also the 
case with a passage of Macarius 
Magnes AfZocr. iv. 14, quoted in the 
note on ὑπέδειξεν below. This juxta- 
position of S. Peter and S. Paul, 
where the Roman Church is con- 
cerned, occurs not unfrequently. 
The language of Ignatius, Rom. 4, 
seems to imply that they had both 
preached in Rome; and half a cen- 
tury later Dionysius of Corinth (Euseb. 
H. E. ii. 25) states explicitly that they 
went to Italy and suffered martyr- 
dom there κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν. This 
is affirmed also a generation later by 
Tertullian, who mentions the different 
manners of their deaths (Scorp. 15, 
de Praescr. 36) ; and soon after Gaius, 
himself a Roman Christian, describes 
the sites of their graves in the im- 
mediate neighbourhood of Rome 
(Euseb. H. £. ii. 25); see also Lac- 
tant. de Mort. Pers. 2, Euseb. Dem. 
Ev. iii. 3, p. 116. The existing Acta 
Petri et Pauli (Act. Apost. Apocr. p. 
1, ed. Tischendorf) are occupied with 
the preaching and death of the two 
Apostles at Rome; and this appears 
to have been the subject also of a 
very early work bearing the same 
name, on which see Hilgenfeld ov. 
Test. extr. Can. Rec. 1V. p. 68. This 
subject is further discussed in the 
excursus S. Peter in Rome appended 
to the first volume. 


The true reading could not have been fore- 


2 ὑπήνεγκεν] ὑπήνεγκε C; and so doubtless 5, which has 53D διέ, 
As regards A, Young read ὑπέμεινεν; but Mill and others 


But not only was this juxtaposition 
of the two Apostles appropriate as 
coming from the Roman Church; 
it would also appeal powerfully to 
the Corinthians. The latter commu- 
nity, no less than the former, traced 
its spiritual pedigree to the combined 
teaching of both Apostles; and ac- 
cordingly Dionysius (l. c.), writing 
from Corinth to the Romans, dwells 
with emphasis on this bond of union 
between the two churches: comp. 
1 Cor. 1. 12, Mi. 22. 

2. μαρτυρήσας] ‘having borne his 
testimony. The word μάρτυς was 
very early applied especially, though 
not solely, to one who sealed his tes- 
timony with his blood. It is so ap- 
plied in the Acts (xxii, 20) to S. Ste- 
phen, and in the Revelation (ii. 13) 
to Antipas. Our Lord Himself is 
styled the faithful and true μάρτυς 
(Rev. i. 5, iii. 14), and His μαρτυρία 
before Pontius Pilate is especially 
emphasized (1 Tim. vi. 13). Doubt- 
less the Neronian persecution had 
done much to promote this sense, 
aided perhaps by its frequent oc- 
currence in the Revelation. After 
the middle of the second century at 
all events μάρτυς, μαρτυρεῖν, were used 
absolutely to signify martyrdom; 
Martyr. Polyc. 19 sq, Melito in 
Euseb. H. £. iv. 26, Dionys. Corinth. 
20. ii. 25, Hegesippus 2d. ii. 23, iv. 22, 
Epist. Gall. 2d. v. 1, 2, Anon. adv. 
Cataphr. 7d. v. 16, Iren. Haer. i. 28. 
I, lil. 3. 3, 4, lil. 12. 10, iii. 18. 5, etc. 
Still even at this late date they con- 
tinued to be used simultaneously of 
other testimony borne to the Gospel, 








v] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 27 


ρεύθη εἰς τὸν ὀφειλόμενον τόπον τῆς δόξης. διὰ Cov 


professed to see the H, and Wotton accordingly says ‘proculdubio legendum est 


ὑπήνεγκεν᾽. 
hand Tischendorf sees part of an H. 


According to Jacobson ‘hodie nihil nisi Ὑττ restat’. 


On the other 


I could discern traces of a letter, but these 


might belong equally well to an € or an H. 


short of death: e.g. by Hegesippus, 
Euseb. H. £. iii. 20, 32, by Apollonius 
26. v. 18 (several times), and in a 
document quoted by Serapion 7d. v. 
19. A passage in the Epistle of the 
Churches of Gaul (A.D. 177) illustrates 
the usage, as yet not definitely fixed 
but tending to fixity, at this epoch: 
οὐχ ἅπαξ οὐδὲ δὶς ἀλλὰ πολλάκις 
μαρτυρήσαντες καὶ ἐκ θηρίων αὖθις 
ἀναληφθέντες.. οὔτ᾽ αὐτοὶ μάρτυρας éav- 
τοὺς ἀνεκήρυττον οὔτε μὴν ἡμῖν ἐπέτρε- 
Tov τούτῳ τῷ ὀνόματι προσαγορεύειν 
αὐτούς" ἀλλ᾽ εἴποτέ τις ἡμῶν de ἐπιστο- 
λῆς ἢ διὰ λόγου μάρτυρας αὐτοὺς προσ- 
εἶπεν, ἐπέπλησσον πικρῶς" ἡδέως γὰρ 
παρεχώρουν τὴν τῆς μαρτυρίας προσ- 
nyopiavy τῷ Χριστῷ τῷ πιστῷ καὶ ἀλη- 
θινῷ μάρτυρι.. «καὶ ἐπεμιμνήσκοντο τῶν 
ἐξεληλυθότων ἤδη μαρτύρων καὶ ἔλεγον" 
ἐκεῖνοι ἤδη μάρτυρες οὗς ἐν τῇ 
ὁμολογίᾳ Χριστὸς ἠξίωσεν ἀνα- 
ληφθῆναι, ἐπισφραγισάμενος av- 
τῶν διὰ τῆς ἐξόδου τὴν μαρτυρίαν" 
ἡμεῖς δὲ ὁμόλογοι μέτριοι καὶ ταπει- 
voi (Euseb. .,2. £. ν. 2). The distinc- 
tion between μάρτυς and ὁμολογητής 
(more rarely ὁμόλογος), which the 
humility of these sufferers suggested, 
became afterwards the settled usage 
of the Church; but that it was not so 
at the close of the second century 
appears from the Alexandrian Cle- 
ment’s comments on Heracleon’s 
account of ὁμολογία in Strom. iv. 9, 
p- 596; comp. also Tertull. Prax. 1 
‘de jactatione martyrii inflatus ob 
solum et simplex et breve carceris 
taedium.’ Even half a century later 
the two titles are not kept apart in 
Cyprian’s language. The Decian 
persecution however would seem to 
have been instrumental in fixing 


this distinction; see Euseb. Mart. 
Pal. τὶ πρὸ τοῦ μαρτυρίου διὰ καυτή- 
ρων ὑπομονῆς τὸν τῆς ὁμολογίας διαθ- 
λήσας ἀγῶνα. 

Thus the mere use οὗ μαρτυρεῖν in 
this early age does not in itself ne- 
cessarily imply the martyrdoms of 
the two Apostles; but on the other 
hand we need not hesitate (with 
Merivale, Hist. of the Romans Vi. p. 
282, note 2) to accept the passage 
of Clement as testimony to this fact.’ 
For (1) Clement evidently selects ex- 
treme cases of men who ἕως θανάτου 
ἤθλησαν ; (2) The emphatic position 
of μαρτυρήσας points to the more defi- 
nite meaning; (3) The expression is 
the same as that in which Hegesip- 
pus describes the final testimony, the 
martyrdom, of James (Euseb. H. £. 
iil. 23 καὶ οὕτως ἐμαρτύρησεν) and 
of Symeon (Euseb. H. £. iii. 32 καὶ 
οὕτω μαρτυρεῖ); (4) Dionysius of 
Corinth couples the two Apostles to- 
gether, as they are coupled here, say- 
ing ἐμαρτύρησαν κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν 
(Euseb. H. £. ii. 25), where martyr- 
dom is plainly meant and where pro- 
bably he was writing with Clement’s 
language in his mind. The early 
patristic allusions to the martyrdoms 
of the two Apostles have been already 
quoted in the last note. It should 
be added that S. Peter’s martyrdom 
is clearly implied in John xxi. 18, 
and that S. Paul’s is the almost in- 
evitable consequence of his position 
as described by himself in 2 Tim. iv. 
6 sq. 

3. τὸν ὀφειλόμενον τόπον] The ex- 
pression is copied by Polycarp (PAz/. 
9), where speaking of S. Paul and 
the other Apostles he says, εἰς τὸν 


28 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [v 


καὶ ἔριν Παῦλος ὑπομονῆς βραβεῖον ὑπέδειξεν, ἑπτάκις 


1 καὶ ἔριν] CS; def. A. Here again the calculation of the space has proved 
fallacious. Editors, before the discovery of CS, filled in the lacuna of A with καὶ 
ὁ or καὶ simply. βραβεῖον] βραβιον A. ὑπέδειξεν] ἔδειξεν C; tulit (por- 
ἑαυϊ Δ Ὁ S. As regards the reading of A, there is some doubt. Young printed 
ἀπέσχεν, but Mill formerly and Jacobson recently read the MS y....€N. Ac- 
cordingly Wotton and most later editors have written ὑπέσχεν. With respect to the 
Y my own observation entirely agrees with Tischendorf’s, who says ‘ post βραβιον 
membrana abscissa est neque litterae quae sequebatur vestigium superest’. Indeed 
(if I am right) there can hardly have been any such trace since the Ms was bound, 


ὀφειλόμενον αὐτοῖς τόπον εἰσὶ παρὰ τῷ 
Κυρίῳ. So Acts i. 25 τὸν τόπον τὸν 
ἴδιον (comp. Ign. Magn. 5), Barnab. 
19 τὸν ὡρισμένον τόπον, and below 
§ 44 τοῦ ἱδρυμένου αὐτοῖς τόπου. An 
elder in Irenzeus (probably Papias) 
discourses at length on the different 
abodes prepared for the faithful ac- 
cording to their deserving, Haer. v. 
36. I sq. 

I. βραβεῖον] S. Paul’s own word, 
1 Cor. ix. 24, Phil. iii. 14. See also 
Mart. Polyc. 17 βραβεῖον ἀναντίρρη- 
Tov ἀπενηνεγμένον, Tatian ad Graec. 
33 ἀκρασίας βραβεῖον ἀπηνέγκατο: and 
comp. Orac. Sib. ii. 45, 149. The 
word is adopted in a Latin dress, 
bravium or brabium, and occurs 
in Tertullian, in the translation of 
Irenzeus, and in the Latin versions 
of the Scriptures. 

ὑπέδειξεν) ‘pointed out the way to, 
taught by his example’; comp. § 6 
ὑπόδειγμα κάλλιστον ἐγένοντο ἐν ἡμῖν. 
The idea of ὑπέδειξεν is carried out 
by ὑπογραμμός below; for the two 
words occur naturally together, as in 
Lucian ἀεί. Praec. 9 ὑποδεικνὺς τὰ 
Δημοσθένους ixyn...mapadelypata παρα- 
τιθεὶς τῶν λόγων οὐ ῥάδια μιμεῖσθαι... 
καὶ τὸν χρόνον πάμπολυν ὑπογράψει τῆς 
ὁδοιπορίας: 50 ὑποδεικνύειν ἐλπίδας 
and ὑπογράφειν ἐλπίδας are converti- 
ble phrases, Polyb. ii. 70. 7, v. 36. 1. 

This conjecture ὑπέδειξεν, which I 
offered in place of the ὑπέσχεν of 
previous editors, occurred indepen- 
dently to Laurent, who had not seen 


my edition, and it was accepted by 
Gebhardt (ed. 1); though in his later 
edition Gebhardt has adopted the 
simpleverbédagéevfromC. If Milland 
Jacobson are right, this cannot have 
been the reading of A, as the initial 
Y was once visible. My reasons for 
doubting whether this was possible, at 
least in the later condition of the Ms, 
are given in the upper note. On the 
other hand ὑπέδειξεν is supported by 
a passage in the recently discovered 
work of Macarius Magnes Afocr. iv. 
14 (p. 181, Blondel), where speaking 
of S. Peter and S. Paul he says, 
ἔγνωσαν ὑποδεῖξαι τούτοις [i.e. τοῖς 
πιστεύουσιν, ποίοις ἀγῶσιν ὁ τῆς πίσ- 
Tews συγκεκρότηται στέφανος. In the 
context, which describes the labours 
and martyrdoms of these same two 
Apostles, the language of Macarius 
appears to give many echoes of this 
passage in Clement; ὑπέμειναν evce- 
Bas διδάσκοντες, τῶν ἀδικουμένων ὑπέρ- 
μαχοι, πολλὰ... τῷ κόσμῳ μηνύσαντες, 
τοῦ βίου τὸ τέλος ἀπήντησεν, μέχρι 
θανάτου.. -προκινδυνεύσωσι, τῆς εὐκλείας 
τὸν ἔπαινον, οἱ γεννάδαι, ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκου- 
μένην, βραβεῖον... κτώμενοι, τύποι ἀν- 
δρείας.... γενόμενοι, πολλὰ τῶν καλῶν 
ἀγωνισμάτων, τῆς διδαχῆς καὶ τοῦ κηρύγ- 
ματος, μαρτυρίου δόξαν, πικραῖς...βασά- 
νοις, ὑπομονῇ πολλῇ, γενναίως φέρειν. It 
seems highly probable therefore that 
the use of ὑποδεικνύναι in this some- 
what strange connexion was derived 
by him from the same source. Comp. 
also Ef. Gall. ὃ 23 in Euseb. H. £. 





v] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


29 


δεσμὰ φορέσας, φυγαδευθείς, λιθασθείς, κῆρυξ γενό- 


so that Jacobson was certainly mistaken and Mill perhaps so; but I have so far 
regarded this statement, as to offer a conjecture which respects the y. On the 
other hand the 2 at the beginning of the next line is clearly legible even in the 
photograph, though it has not been discerned by previous editors. Tisch. says ‘2 
quum paullo minus appareat, possit erasum credi’. The letter is certainly faint, 
but though I have inspected the Ms more than once, I can see no traces of erasure. 
For other reasons which have led me to prefer ὑπέδειξεν to ἔδειξεν see the lower 


note. 


v. I εἰς τὴν τῶν λοιπῶν ὑποτύπωσιν 
ὑποδεικνύων ὅτι μηδὲν φοβερὸν ὅπου 
πατρὸς ἀγάπη, μηδὲ ἀλγεινὸν ὅπου Χρισ- 
τοῦ δόξα. S. Paul himself says (Acts 
XX. 35) ὑπέδειξα ὑμῖν ὅτι κιτιλ. C is 
found in other cases to substitute the 
simple verb, where A has the com- 
pound (see I. p. 127), and would 
naturally do so here, where the 
meaning of the compound was not 
obvious. The rendering of S, which 
also translates βραβεῖον by certamen, 
corresponds fairly with ὑπέσχεν sug- 
gested by some editors ; but this was 
certainly not the reading of A. 

ἑπτάκις] In 2 Cor. xi. 23 S. Paul 
speaks of himself as ἐν φυλακαῖς πε- 
ρισσοτέρως ; but the imprisonment at 
Philippi is the only one recorded in 
the Acts before the date of the Se- 
cond Epistle to the Corinthians. 
Clement therefore must have derived 
his more precise information from 
some other source. Zeller (7 εοί. 
Fahrb. 1848, p. 530) suggests that the 
writer of this letter added the captivi- 
ties at Czesarea and at Rome to the 
five punishments which S. Paul men- 
tions in 2 Cor. xi. 24. But the πεντά- 
xis there has no reference to impri- 
sonments, which are mentioned se- 
parately in the words already quoted. 
I should not have thought it neces- 
sary to call attention to this very 
obvious inadvertence, if the statement 
had not been copied with approval 
or without disapproval by several 
other writers. 

2. φυγαδευθείς We read of S, Paul’s 


flight from Damascus (Acts ix. 25, 
2 Cor. xi. 33), from Jerusalem (Acts 
ix. 30), from Antioch of Pisidia (xiii. 
50), from Iconium (xiv. 6), from Thes- 
salonica (xvii. 10), from Beroea (xvii. 
14), and perhaps from Corinth (xx. 3). 
Some of these incidents would be 
described by φυγαδευθείς, but it is 
perhaps too strong a word_to apply 
to all. On φυγαδεύειν, which though 
found even in Attic writers was re- 
garded by purists as questionable, 
see Lobeck Phryn. p. 385. The read- 
ing ῥαβδευθείς (comp. 2 Cor. xi. 25) 
which was proposed to fill the lacuna 
in A is objectionable, because the 
form ῥαβδίζειν alone is used in the 
Lxx and O. T. (and perhaps else- 
where, in this sense). 

λιθασθείς) At Lystra (Acts xiv. 19). 
An attempt was made also to stone 
him at Iconium, but he escaped in 
time (xiv. 5). Hence he says (2 Cor. 
xi. 25) ἅπαξ ἐλιθάσθην. See Paley 
Hor, Paul. iv. ὃ 9. 

κῆρυξ] S. Paul so styles himself 
2 Tim. i. 11. Epictetus too calls his 
ideal philosopher κῆρυξ τῶν θεῶν, Diss. 
iii, 21. 13, lii. 22. 69. The Stoics, like 
the Christians, were essentially κήρυ- 
kes in their mode of action. The 
picture of Diogenes at Corinth, given 
in Dion Chrysost. Ovaz. viii, ix, might 
stand mutatis mutandis for S. Paul. 
The word is accentuated κῆρυξ (not 
κήρυξ) in C in accordance with the 
rule of the grammarians; see Chand- 
ler’s Greek Accentuation p. 181, no. 


669. 


30 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT ; [v 


oS ~ ς΄ ΄- ’ A ΄ 
μενος ἔν τε TH ἀνατολῆ καὶ ἐν TH δύσει, τὸ γενναῖον 
- ’ ν > ΄-ς ἡ » : ὃ ’ ὃ ὃ ’ 
τῆς πίστεως αὐτοὺ κλέος ἔλαβεν, ικαιοσυνὴν OL ἄξας 


ε A / \ / ΄σ ᾿ “ 
ὅλον τὸν κόσμον καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ τέρμα τῆς δύσεως ἐλθων' 


1 te] AC; om. 8. 


2 πίστεως] πισταιωσ A. 
σύνης CS, connected by punctuation in both these authorities with ἔλαβε. 


δικαιοσύνην} A; δικαιο- 
Bryen- 


nios had overlooked the reading of C in his edition, but corrects the omission 


I. τὸ γενναῖον x.r.A.| ‘ the noble re- 
nown which he had won by his faith’ ; 
i.e. his faith in his divine mission to 
preach to the Gentiles: see Credner’s 
Gesch. des N. T. Kanon (1860) p. 52. 

3. ὅλον τὸν κόσμον κ-τ.λ.} In the spu- 
rious letter of Clement to James pre- 
fixed to the Homilies it is said of S. 
Peter ὁ τῆς δύσεως τὸ σκοτεινότε- 
ρον τοῦ κόσμου μέρος ὡς πάντων 
ἱκανώτερος φωτίσαι κελευσθείς ... τὸν 
ἐσόμενον ἀγαθὸν ὅλῳ τῷ κόσμῳ μηνύ- 
σας βασιλέα, μέχρις ἐνταῦθα τῆς Ῥώμης 
γενόμενος... αὐτὸς τοῦ νῦν βίου βιαίως 
τὸ ζῆν μετήλλαξεν (δ 1, p. 6 Lagarde). 
This passage is, I think, plainly 
founded on thetrue Clement’s account 
of S. Paul here; and thus it accords 
with the whole plan of this Judaic 
writer in ¢ransferring the achieve- 
ments of S. Paul to S. Peter whom 
he makes the Apostle of the Gentiles : 
see Galatians p. 315. 

τὸ τέρμα τῆς δύσεως] ‘the extreme 
west. In the Epistle to the Romans 
(xv. 24) S. Paul had stated his in- 
tention of visiting Spain. From the 
language of Clement here it ap- 
pears that this intention was fulfilled. 
Two generations later (¢. A.D. 180) an 
anonymous writer mentions his hav- 
ing gone thither; ‘Sed et profec- 
tionem Pauli ab urbe ad Spaniam 
proficiscentis, Fragm. Murat. (pp. 
19, 40, ed. Tregelles, Oxon. 1867; or 
Westcott Hist. of Canon p. 517, ed. 
4). For the expression τὸ τέρμα τῆς 
δύσεως pointing to the western ex- 
tremity of Spain, the pillars of Her- 
cules, comp. Strab. ii. 1 (p. 67) πέρατα 


δὲ αὐτῆς (τῆς οἰκουμένης) τίθησι πρὸς 
δύσει μὲν τὰς Ἡρακλείους στήλας, ii. 4 
(p. 106) μέχρι τῶν ἄκρων τῆς ᾿Ιβηρίας 
ἅπερ δυσμικώτερά ἐστι, iii. I (p. 137) 
τοῦτό (τὸ ἱερὸν ἀκρωτήριον) ἐστι τὸ δυτι- 
κώτατον οὐ τῆς Εὐρώπης μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τῆς οἰκουμένης ἁπάσης σημεῖον περα- 
τοῦται γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν δυεῖν ἠπείρων ἡ 
οἰκουμένη πρὸς δύσιν, τοῖς τε τῆς Evpo- 
ms ἄκροις καὶ τοῖς πρώτοις τῆς Λιβύης, 
iii. 5 (p. 169) ἐπειδὴ κατὰ τὸν πορθμὸν 
ἐγένοντο τὸν κατὰ τὴν Κάλπην, νομίσαν- 
τας τέρμονας εἶναι τῆς οἰκουμένης... «τὰ 
ἄκρα, 20. (p. 170) ζητεῖν ἐπὶ τῶν κυρίως 
λεγομένων στηλῶν τοὺς τῆς οἰκουμένης 
ὅρους (these references are corrected 
from Credners Kanon p. 53), and 
see Strabo’s whole account of the 
western boundaries of the world and 
of this coast of Spain. Similarly 
Vell. Paterc. i. 2 ‘In ultimo Hispa- 
niae tractu, in extremo nostri orbis 
termino.’ It is not improbable also 
that this western journey of S. Paul 
included a visit to Gaul (2 Tim. iv. 
10; see Galatians p. 31). But for the 
patriotic belief of some English wri- 
ters (see Ussher Brit. Eccl. Ant. c. 
1, Stillingfleet Orig. Brit. c. 1), who 
have included Britain in the Apo- 
stle’s travels, there is neither evidence 
nor probability ; comp. Haddan and 
Stubbs Counc. and Eccles. Doc. 1. 
p. 22 sq. This journey westward 
supposes that 5. Paul was liberated 
after the Roman captivity related 
in the Acts, as indeed (independ- 
ently of the phenomena in the Pas- 
toral Epistles) his own expectations 
expressed elsewhere (Phil. ii. 24, 





v) 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


31 


/ \ ΄“ / ε΄ ’ 
καὶ μαρτυρήσας ἐπὶ τῶν ἡγουμένων, οὕπως ἀπηλλάγη 
΄ ‘ « ’ , a 
5 TOU κόσμου καὶ εἰς τὸν ἅγιον τόπον ἐπορεύθη, ὑπομονῆς 
’, 
γενόμενος μέγιστος ὑπογραμμός. 


Didache p. py’. 
mundo § (see the note on ii. § 19). 


Philem. 22) would suggest. Those 
who maintain that this first Roman 
captivity ended in his martyrdom 
are obliged to explain τὸ τέρμα τῆς 
δύσεως of Rome itself. But it is in- 
credible that a writer living in the 
metropolis and centre of power and 
civilization could speak of it as ‘the 
extreme west,’ and this at a time 
when many eminent Latin authors 
and statesmen were or had been 
natives of Spain, and when the com- 
mercial and passenger traffic with 
Gades was intimate and constant. 
(For this last point see Friedlander 
Sittengesch. Roms 11. p. 43, with his 
references.) On the other hand Phi- 
lostratus says that, when Nero ban- 
ished philosophers from Rome, Apol- 
lonius of Tyana τρέπεται ἐπὶ τὰ ἑσπέ- 
ρια τῆς γῆς (iv. 47), and the region 
which he visited is described imme- 
diately afterwards (v. 4) ra Γάδειρα 
κεῖται κατὰ τὸ τῆς Εὐρώπης τέρμα 
(quoted by Pearson Minor Theol. 
Works 1. p. 362). This is the natural 
mode of speaking. It is instructive 
to note down various interpretations 
of ἐπὶ τὸ τέρμα τῆς δύσεως which have 
been proposed : (1) ‘to his extreme 
limit towards the west’ (Baur, Schen- 
kel); (2) ‘to the sunset of his labours’ 
(Reuss); (3) ‘to the boundary be- 
tween the east and west’ (Sehrader, 
Hilgenfeld) ; (4) ‘to the goal or centre 
of the west’ (Matthies) ; (5) ‘before 
(ὑπὸ for ἐπὶ) the supreme power of 
the west’ (Wieseler, Schaff). Such 
attempts are a strong testimony to 
the plain inference which follows from 


3 ἐπὶ] The word is distinctly legible in AC, and therefore 
the conjecture ὑπό (see below) is inadmissible. 


5 τοῦ κόσμου] AC; ab hoc 


ἐπορεύθη] AC; susceptus est (ἐπήρθη ἣ 8. 


the passage simply interpreted. 

4. ἐπὶ τῶν ἡγουμένων] ‘before rulers’ ; 
comp. § 37 τοῖς ἡγουμένοις ἡμῶν...τοῦ 
βασιλέως καὶ τῶν ἡγουμένων, ὃ 51 of 
ἡγούμενοι Αἰγύπτου, § 55 πολλοὶ βασι- 
λεῖς καὶ ἡγούμενοι, ὃ 61 τοῖς τε ἄρχουσιν 
καὶ ἡγουμένοις ἡμῶν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. The 
names of Nero and Helius (Dion 
Cass. lxiii. 12), of Tigellinus and Sa- 
binus (the pretorian prefects A.D. 
67), etc., have been suggested. In the 
absence of information it is waste of 
time to speculate. Clement’s lan- 
guage does not imply that the Apo- 
stle’s μαρτυρία ἐπὶ τῶν ἡγουμένων took 
place in the extreme west (as Hil- 
genfeld argues), for there is nothing 
to show that ἐπὶ τὸ τέρμα κιτιλ. and 
μαρτυρήσας ἐπὶ τῶν ἡγουμένων are in- 
tended to be synchronous. Indeed 
the clause καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ τέρμα τῆς δύσεως 
ἐλθὼν seems to be explanatory of the 
preceding δικαιοσύνην διδάξας ὅλον τὸν 
κόσμον, and the passage should be 
punctuated accordingly. 

6. ὑπογραμμός] ‘a copy, an example, 
as for instance a pencil drawing to be 
traced over in ink or an outline to be 
filled in and coloured. The word oc- 
curs again §§ 16, 33; comp. 2 Macc. 
ii. 28, 29, 1 Pet. ii. 21, Polyc. Pid. 8, 
Clem. Hom. iv. 16. The classical 
word is ὑπογραφή. For an explana- 
tion of the metaphor see Aristot. Gen. 
An. ii. 6 (I. p. 743) καὶ yap of γραφεῖς 
ὑπογράψαντες ταῖς γραμμαῖς οὕτως éva- 
λείφουσι τοῖς χρώμασι τὸ ζῶον. The 
sister art of sculpture supplies ἃ simi- 
lar metaphor in ὑποτύπωσις, the first 
rough model, 1 Tim. i. 16, 2 Tim. i. 1 3. 


32 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [vi 


VI. Τούτοις τοῖς ἀνδράσιν ὁσίως πολιτευσαμένοις 


συνηθροίσθη πολὺ πλῆθος ἐκλεκτῶν, οἵτινες πολλαῖς 
> 


5. ΟΥ̓ \ / \ f / 
αἰκίαις καὶ βασάνοις, διὰ ζῆλος παθόντες, ὑπόδειγμα 


3 ζῆλος] A; ζῆλον C, and so again in the next line. 
5 Δαναΐδες καὶ Δίρκαι] A ; δαναΐδες καὶ δείρ καὶ C ; danaides et 


χθισαι A, 


4 διωχθεῖσαι] διω- 


dircae S. 1am not prepared to say now that the word is written AaHaidec as I 


VI. ‘But besidés these signal in- 
stances, many less distinguished 
saints have fallen victims to jea- 
lousy and set us a like example of 
forbearance. Even feeble women 
have borne extreme tortures without 
flinching. Jealousy has separated 
husbands and wives: it has over- 
thrown cities, and uprooted nations.’ 

2. πολὺ πλῆθος] The reference 
must be chiefly, though not solely, 
to the sufferers in the Neronian per- 
secution, since they are represented 
as contemporaries of the two Apo- 
stles. Thus ἐν ἡμῖν will mean ‘among 
us Roman Christians,’ and the αἰκίαι 
καὶ βάσανοι are the tortures described 
by Tacitus Ann. xv. 44. The Ro- 
man historian’s expression ‘multi- 
tudo ingens’ is the exact counterpart 
to Clement’s πολὺ πλῆθος. 

πολλαῖς αἰκίαις κιτ.λ.] ‘dy or amid 
many sufferings’ Previous editors 
have substituted the accusative, ποὰ- 
has αἰκίας ; but, as the dative is fre- 
quently used to denote the means, 
and even the accessories, the circum- 
stances (see Madvig Gr. Synt. § 39 
sq), I have not felt justified in alter- 
ing the reading. In this case διὰ 
ὥλος παθόντες will be used absolute- 
ly, and πολλαῖς αἰκίαις x.7.A. will ex- 
plain ὑπόδειγμα ἐγένοντο. 

5. Aavaides καὶ Δίρκαι] This read- 
ing is supported by all our authori- 
ties, with minor corruptions, and I 
have therefore replaced it in the text, 
though not without misgiving. If it 
be not correct, the error must have 
existed in the archetypal Ms from 


which our three extant authorities 
were derived. But such testimony, 
though very strong, is not decisive, 
since we find this common ancestor 
at fault in other places; see above, 
I. p. 145. If correct, it must refer to 
those refinements of cruelty, patron- 
ized by Nero and Domitian but not 
confined to them, which combined 
theatrical representations with judi- 
cial punishments, so that the offender 
suffered in the character of some hero 
of ancient legend or history. For the 
insane passion of Nero, more espe- 
cially, for these and similar scenic 
exhibitions, see Sueton. Vero 11, 12; 
and for illustrations comp. Fried- 
lander Sittengeschichte Roms Ul. p. 
234 sq. Thus one offender would 
represent Hercules burntin the flames 
on (Eta (Tertull. Afo/. 15 ‘qui vivus 
ardebat Herculem induerat’); ano- 
ther, Ixion tortured on the wheel (de 
Pudic, 22 ‘puta in axe jam incendio 
adstructo’). We read also of crimi- 
nals who, having been exhibited in 
the character of Orpheus (Martial. 
Spect. 21) or of Daedalus (2d. 8) or of 
Atys (Tertull. Afo/. 15), were finally 
torn to pieces by wild beasts. The 
story of Dirce, tied by the hair and 
dragged along by the bull, would be 
very appropriate for this treatment ; 
but all attempts to make anything of 
the legend of the Danaids entirely 
fail. Arnold (Meronische Christenver- 
folgung p. 38, 1888) cuts the knot by 
suggesting that additions were made 
to the original legend of the Danaids 
for the purposes of the amphitheatre ; 





vi] 


/ > TF > ec oa 
καλλιστον ἐγένοντο ἐν ἡμῖν. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


33 
διὰ ζῆλος διωχθεῖσαι 


5 γυναῖκες, tAavaides καὶ Δίρκαι, αἰκίσματα δεινὰ καὶ 


formerly read it (H and ν being frequently indistinguishable where the Ms is creased 
and blurred), and I was certainly in error as regards the division of the lines in my 


first edition. 


_ just as in these scenic exhibitions 





Orpheus was torn to pieces by a bear 
(Martial Sfect. 21). But after all 
the difficulty still remains, that the 
mode of expression in Clement is 
altogether awkward and unnatural 
on this hypothesis. Harnack, who 
however expresses himself doubtfully 
on the reading, quotes Heb. x. 32 
πολλὴν ἄθλησιν ὑπεμείνατε παθημάτων, 
τοῦτο μὲν ὀνειδισμοῖς τε καὶ θλίψεσιν 
θεατριζόμενοι, but here θεατριζό- 
μενοι is best explained by 1 Cor. iv. 
9. θέατρον ἐγενήθημεν τῷ κόσμῳ k.T.d., 
where no literal scenic representation 
is intended. Laurent explains the 
words by saying that the punishment 
of the Danaids and of Dirce ‘in pro- 
verbium abiisse videtur.’ But he can 
only quote for the former és τὸν τῶν 
Δαναΐδων πίθον ὑδροφορεῖν Lucian Zim. 
18, which is hardly to the point, as it 
merely denotes labour spent in vain. 
Clement of Alexandria indeed (Strom. 
iv. 19, p. 618) mentions the daughters 
of Danaus with several other exam- 
ples of womanly bravery among the 
heathens, and in the earlier part of 
the same chapter he has quoted the 
passage of his Roman namesake 
(§ 55) relating to Esther and Judith; 
but this does not meet the difficulty. 
It has been suggested again, that 
these may have been actual names 


of Christian women martyred at 


Rome: but the names are perhaps 
improbable in themselves, and the 
plurals cannot well be explained. 
Having regard to the difficulties 
of this expression I am disposed 
still to favour the acute emendation 


_ of Wordsworth (on Theocritus xxvi. 





CLEM, II. 


1) which I placed in the text in my 
first edition, γυναῖκες, νεάνιδες, παιδί- 
σκαι, as highly probable and giving 
an excellent sense; ‘ Women, tender 
maidens, even slave-girls’: comp. 
August. Serm. cxliii (V. p. 692 sq) 
‘Non solum viri sed etiam mu/dieres 
et pueri et Pue//ae martyres vicerunt,’ 
Leo Serm. Ιχχὶν (I. p. 294) ‘ Non so- 
lum viri sed etiam _/oeminae nec tan- 
tum impubes pueri sed etiam /enerae 
virgines usque ad effusionem sui 
sanguinis decertarunt’; quoted by 
Wordsworth (l.c.). To these illustra- 
tions add Minuc. Fel. 37 ‘viros cum 
Mucio vel cum Aquilio aut Regulo 
comparo? pueri et mulierculae nos- 
trae cruces et tormenta, feras et 
omnes suppliciorum terriculas, in- 
spirata patientia doloris inludunt.’ 
For the meaning of παιδίσκη in Hel- 
lenistic Greek see the notes Galatians 
iv. 22. 

Tischendorf calls it ‘liberrima con- 
jectura.’ So it is, but there is a free- 
dom which justifies itself; and the 
corruption is just such as might have 
occurred at an early date, when the 
epistle was written on papyrus. I have 
been informed by Mr Basil H. Cooper, 
through a common friend, that he 
proposed this very same emendation 
in the Monthly Christian Spectator, 
January, 1853, p. 16. He assured 
me that it had occurred to him inde- 
pendently; and that, till quite re- 
cently, he believed the credit which 
had been assigned to another to be 
due to himself, and wrote to this 
effect to the Western Times as lately 
as 1871, not knowing that Words- 
worth’s emendation was published 


3 


— 


34 THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT [vi 


> ’ ΄“ 4 \ ‘ ~ / / ’ 
ἀνόσια παθοῦσαι, ἐπὶ τὸν τῆς πίστεως βέβαιον δρόμον 


\ τῶν , “ ΄ ΄σ 
κατήντησαν, καὶ ἔλαβον γέρας γενναῖον αἱ ἀσθενεῖς τῷ 


σώματι. ὧῆηπλος ἀπηλλοτρίωσεν γαμετὰς ἀνδρῶν καὶ 


, \ \ \ - \ a ͵ a 
ἠλλοίωσεν TO ῥηθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν ᾿λδάμ, Τοῦτο 
NIN ὀοτοῦν εκ τῶν ὀοτέων MOY KAI σὰρξ ἐκ τῆς οἀρκός MOY. 


“σι > / / / \ of 
ζῆλος καὶ Epis πόλεις μεγάλας κατέστρεψεν καὶ ἔθνη 


μεγάλα ἐξερίζωσεν. 


5 ὀστέων] οσταιων A; ὀστῶν (. 
κατέσκαψε (. 


in 1844. The fact of its having 
occurred independently to two minds 
is a strong testimony in its favour. 
Bunsen (Hippolytus τ. p. xviii, ed. 
2, 1854) enthusiastically welcomes 
this emendation as relieving him 
‘from two monsters which disfigured 
a beautiful passage in the epistle of 
the Roman Clement.’ Lipsius also 
in a review of my edition (Academy, 
July 9, 1870) speaks favourably of it; 
and Donaldson (Afostolical Fathers 
p. 122, ed. 2) calls it admirable, 
though elsewhere ( 7heo/. Rev. Janu- 
ary 1877, p. 45) he himself offers 
another conjecture, yevvaiai re καὶ dov- 
Aa. Lagarde (Armen. Stud. p. 73) 
conjectures dvadkides καὶ κορικαί ; 
Haupt (Hermes Ul. p. 146, 1869) 
suggests ἀμνίδες δίκαιαι, Comparing 
Clem. Alex. Protr. 12 (p. 92) ai rod 
Θεοῦ θυγατέρες, ai ἀμνάδες ai καλαί. 

2. κατήντησαν κιτ.λ.} The verb 
καταντᾶν signifies to arrive at a desti- 
nation, and the corresponding sub- 
stantive κατάντημα is ‘a destination, a 
goal,’ Ps. xix. 6: comp. Schol.on Arist. 
Ran. 1026 (993) ἐλαῖαι στιχηδὸν ἵσταν- 
ται, οὖσαι κατάντημα τοῦ δρόμου. 
Thus 6 βέβαιος δρόμος ‘the sure course,’ 
ie. the point in the stadium where 
the victory is secured, is almost equi- 
valent to ‘the goal.’ For καταντᾶν ἐπί 
comp. 2 Sam. iii. 29, Polyb. x. 37. 3, 
xiv. 1. 9. 


ἡ ἐξερίζωσεν)] A; ἐξερρίζωσε C. 


6 ἔρις] ερεισ A. κατέστρεψεν] AS; 


9 ὑπομνήσκοντες] A; 


4. τοῦτο νῦν κιτ.λ.] From the LXxX 
of Gen. ii. 23, which corresponds with 
the Hebrew. 

6. ὥῆλος καὶ ἔρις] The two words 
occur together, Rom. xiii. 13, 2 Cor. 
xii. 20, Gal. v. 20: see above, § 3. 

πόλεις μεγάλας x«.t.A.] See Ecclus. 
Xxviii. 14 πόλεις ὀχυρὰς καθεῖλε καὶ 
οἰκίας μεγιστάνων κατέστρεψε. Jacob- 
son refers to Jortin, who supposes 
that Clement had in his mind Horace 
Carm. i. 16. 17 sq, ‘ Irae Thyesten 
exitio gravi stravere, et altis urbibus 
ultimae stetere causae cur perirent 
funditus.’ 

7. ἐξερίζωσεν) For the form see Tis- 
chendorf ov. Test. 1. p. lvi (ed. 7), 
A. Buttmann Gramm. p. 28 sq. Most 
editors needlessly alter the read- 
ing to ἐξερρίζωσεν. Compare peyado- 
ρήμονα § 15, φυλλοροεῖ ὃ 23 and ii. 
§ 31. For C see above, I. p. 127. 

VII. ‘ While instructing you, we 
would remind ourselves also. We 
are all entered in the same lists; we 
must all run on the straight path ; 
obeying the will of God and respect- 
ing the blood of Christ. Examples 
of penitence in all ages aré before 
our eyes. Noah preached repentance 
to his generation: Jonah to the men 
of Nineveh. All whosoever listened 
to them were saved.’ 

9. ὑπομνήσκοντες] Comp. O7ph, 
Hymn. \xxvii. 6 (p. 345, Herm.) φιλά- 








Io 


vit] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


35 


VII. Ταῦτα, ἀγαπητοί, οὐ μόνον ὑμᾶς νουθετοῦν- 
τες ἐπιστέλλομεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἑαυτοὺς Τὐὑπομνήσκοντες Τ' 
ἐν γὰρ τῷ αὐτῷ ἐσμὲν σκάμματι, καὶ ὃ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν 
ἀγὼν ἐπίκειται. Διὸ ἀπολείπωμεν τὰς κενὰς καὶ μα- 


, / of \ \ ~ \ \ 
Tatas φροντίδας, καὶ ἔλθωμεν ἐπὶ τὸν εὐκλεῆ Kal σεμνὸν 


΄ , ε ΄σ / 
τῆς παραδόσεως ἡμῶν κανόνα. 


ὑπομιμνήσκοντες C. 


ἡμῖν C; dub. S. 


γρυπνος ὑπομνήσκουσάτε πάντα (a refer- 
ence given by Hefele). So also μνή- 
σκομαι in Anacr. ap. Athen. xi. p. 
463 A μνήσκεται εὐφροσύνης (which 
editors perhaps unnecessarily alter 
into μήσεται Or μνήσεται). But as the 
scribe of A blunders elsewhere in add- 
ing and omitting letters under similar 
circumstances (see above, 1. p. 120), 
we cannot feel sure about the read- 
ing. The word occurs again § 62, 
where C reads ὑπομιμνήσκοντες, as it 
does here (see I. p. 126 sq). There is 
the same divergence of form in the 
MSS of the spurious Ignatius, Zar. 9. 

10. σκάμματι] ‘Zists.” The σκάμμα 
is the ground marked out by digging 
a trench or (as Krause supposes) by 


- lowering the level for the arena of a 








contest: see Boeckh Corg. Juscr. no 
2758, with the references in Krause 
Hellen. τ. p. 105 sq, and for its meta- 
phorical use Polyb. xl. 5. 5 οὐδὲ ἐπὶ 
τοῦ σκάμματος ὧν τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον, 
Epict. Diss. iv. 8. 26 εἰς τοσοῦτο 
σκάμμα προεκαλεῖτο πάντα ὁντιναοῦν. 
A large number of examples of this 
metaphor in Christian writers is given 
by Suicer s.v. This word and many 
others referring to the games, as 
agonotheta, epistates, brabium, etc., 
are adopted by the Latins (see esp. 
the long metaphor in Tertull. ad 
Mart. § 3), just as conversely military 
terms are naturalised from Latin into 
Greek ; see Ign. Polyc. 6 with the 


10 ἐν yap] AS; καὶ γὰρ ἐν C. 
11 ἀπολείπωμεν] A; ἀπολίπωμεν ΓΟ. 


sw 7 \ \ 
καὶ ἴδωμεν Ti καλὸν Kal 


ἡμῖν ἀγὼν] A; ἀγὼν 
12 εὐκλεῆ] ευκλαιη A. 


notes. In the phrase ὑπὲρ τὰ ἐσκαμ- 
μένα πηδᾶν, ἅλλεσθαι (e.g. Plat. Craz. 
Ρ. 413 A, Lucian Ga//. 6, Clem. Alex. 
Strom. v. 13, p. 696; see below on 
κανών), to do more than is required 
orexpected,’ ra ἐσκαμμένα is thetrench 
cut at the end of the leap beyond the 
point which it is supposed the great- 
est athlete will reach (Pind. Wem. v. 
36 μακρὰ δὴ αὐτόθεν ἅλμαθ᾽ ὑποσκάπ- 
τοι Tis" ἔχω γονάτων ἐλαφρὸν ὁρμάν). 
Krause indeed (He//en. 1. Ὁ. 393) 
interprets ra ἐσκαμμένα of the line 
marking the leap of the preceding 
combatant, but this explanation does 
not account for the metaphorical use. 

ὁ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν ἀγὼν] See Phil. i. 30 
τὸν αὐτὸν ἀγῶνα ἔχοντες οἷον εἴδετε ἐν 
ἐμοί. 

11. ἐπίκειται] ‘awatts’; as Ign. 
Rom. 6 ὁ τοκετός μοι ἐπίκειται : comp. 
Heb. xii. 1 τὸν προκείμενον ἡμῖν ἀ- 
γῶνα, Clem. Rom. ii. § 7 ἐν χερσὶν ὃ 
ἀγών. 

κενὰς καὶ μάταιας] ‘empty and fu- 
tile? the former epithet pointing to 
the quality, the latter to the aim or ef- 
fect of the action. The combination is 
not uncommon; e.g. LXX Is. xxx. 7, 
Hos. xii. 1, Job xx. 18; comp. The- 
oph. ad Aut. iii. 3, Plut. Vit. Artax. 
15, Mor. p. 1117 A. 

13. τῆς παραδόσεως] The lacuna was 
variously filled so long as A was our 
only authority, the best suggestions 
being τελειώσεως and ἀθλήσεως. The 


Seca 


36 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


[vit 


’ ~ 7 
τί τερπνὸν Kal τί πρόσδεκτον ἐνώπιον τοῦ ποιήσαντος 


ἡμάς. 


> > \ Ὁ ΄σ - \ ΄ 
ἀτενίσωμεν εἰς TO Ala TOU Χριστοῦ καὶ γνωμεν 


΄ A ΄ Ἁ A / 
ὡς ἔστιν τίμιον τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ, ὅτι διὰ THY ἡμετέραν 


\ ΄“ / ’ὔ ’ 
σωτηρίαν ἐκχυθεν παντὶ τῷ κόσμῳ μετανοίας χάριν 


τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ] S; τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ τῷ Θεῷ C; τωθεω[καιπατρ]ᾳαυτου A, 
presumably. An upright stroke (probably 1) and a portion of a preceding letter 


(which might be p) are visible. 
if 8 τι td quod. 


See the lower note. 
4 μετανοίας χάριν] AC ; μετανοίαν S. Bensly points out that 


ὅτι] S translates as 


the omission in S may be easily explained by the homceoteleuton in the Syriac, 


aman, 2 Ὁ. 


true reading could hardly have been 
anticipated ; but it adds to the close- 
ness of the parallel in Polycarp PAz?. 
7 διὸ ἀπολιπόντες τὴν ματαιότητα τῶν 
πολλῶν καὶ τὰς ψευδοδιδασκαλίας ἐπὶ 
τὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἡμῖν παραδοθέντα λόγον 
ἐπιστρέψωμεν, a passage already 
quoted by the editors. By τὸν τῆς 
παραδόσεως ἡμῶν κανόνα Clement ap- 
parently means ‘the rule (i.e. measure 
of the leap or race) which we have 
received by tradition’, referring to 
the examples of former athletes quo- 
ted in the context; comp. ὃ 19 ἐπὶ τὸν 
ἐξ ἀρχῆς παραδεδομένον ἡμῖν τῆς εἰρή- 
νης σκοπόν (to which passage again 
Polycarp is indebted), § 51 τῆς mapa- 
δεδομένης ἡμῖν καλῶς καὶ δικαίως dpo- 
φωνίας. Clement’s phrase is borrow- 
ed by his younger namesake, Strom. 
i. 1 (p. 324) προβήσεται ἡμῖν κατὰ τὸν 
εὐκλεῆ καὶ σεμνὸν τῆς παραδόσεως κα- 
νόνα. 

κανόνα] This is probably a con- 
tinuation. of the metaphor in σκάμμα: 
comp. Pollux iii. 151 τὸ δὲ μέτρον 
τοῦ πηδήματος κανών, ὁ δὲ ὅρος τὰ 
ἐσκαμμένα᾽ ὅθεν ἐπὶ τῶν τὸν ὅρον ὑπερ- 
πηδώντων οἱ παροιμιαζόμενοι λέγουσι πη- 
dav ὑπὲρ τὰ ἐσκαμμένα. See ὃ 41 (with 
the note). Thus κανὼν will be the 
measure of the leap or the race as- 
signed to the athlete. 

τί καλὸν κιτ.λ.] From Ps. cxxxii. I 
ἰδοὺ δὴ τί καλὸν ἢ τί τερπνόν κιτιλ. 


5 ὑπήνεγκεν] A; sustulit Δ Ὁ S; ἐπήνεγκες. 


1. πρόσδεκτον ἐνώπιον] So ἀπόδεκ- 
τον ἐνώπιον, 1 Tim. ii. 3 τοῦτο καλὸν καὶ 
ἀπόδεκτον ἐνώπιον τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν 
Θεοῦ, of which Clement’s language 
here seems to be a reminiscence : 
comp. I Tim. v. 4, where καλὸν καὶ is 
interpolated in the common texts 
from the earlier passage. The simple 
πρόσδεκτος appears in the LXX, Prov. 
xi. 20, xvi. 15, Wisd. ix. 12 (comp. 
Mart. Polyc. 14), but the compound 
εὐπρόσδεκτος is commoner in the 
N. T., and occurs three times in Cle- 
ment (88. 35, 40 twice). 

3. τίμιον τῷ πατρὶ] Compare 1 Pet. 
i. 19 τιμίῳ αἵματι ὡς ἀμνοῦ ἀμώμου καὶ 
ἀσπίλου Χριστοῦ. 

᾿ πατρὶ] The lacuna after τῷ Θεῷ 
in A must, I think, be supplied by 
καὶ πατρὶ rather than πατρὶ alone for 
two reasons; (1) If πατρὶ were con- 
tracted tpi, as is most usual in the 
MS, the letters would not be sufficient 
to fill the space; (2) We find 6 Θεὸς 
καὶ πατὴρ frequently in the Apostolic 
writings followed by rod Κυρίου, etc. 
(e.g. Rom. xv. 6, 2 Cor. i. 3, etc., 
1 Pet. i. 3, Rev. i. 6), whereas ὁ Θεὸς 
πατὴρ is never so found. In fact with 
any genitive following, the alternative 
seems to be ὁ Θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ or Θεὸς 
πατήρ. On the other hand ὁ Θεὸς 
πατὴρ occurs once only in the N. T. 
(Col. iii. 17, with a v.L), and there it 
is used absolutely. 


διέλ- 


On the whole — 





vit] 


, 
5 ὑπηνεγκεν. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


37 


, > ‘ , ‘ 
διέλθωμεν εἰς Tas γέενεας σασας καὶ κατα- 


/ 4 > ΄σ \ ΄σ , , 7 
μάθωμεν ὅτι ἐν γενεᾷ καὶ γενεᾷ μετανοίας τόπον ἔδωκεν 


ε ’ ~ / > ΄σ a! 9 > / 
ὁ δεσπότης τοῖς βουλομένοις ἐπιστραφῆναι ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν. 


“ ψ΄ ἐὖ] / \ « ε / > / 
Nae ἐκήρυξεν μετάνοιαν, καὶ οἱ ὑπακούσαντες ἐσώωώθη- 


θωμεν εἰ5] .... «ὠμενεισ A ; διέλθωμεν (om. els) C ; transeamus super S (which probably 


represents διέλθωμεν els). 


In Rom. v. 12 εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους ὁ θάνατος διῆλθεν 


_ both Pesh. and Harcl. have “2 2) not by “SY as S has here. In § 4 διελθεῖν 


els is rendered by Ὁ “ay. The verb διελθεῖν is frequent in the Lxx. 
7 ὁ δεσπότης] AC; om. 8. 


AC; om. 8. 


however the correct reading is pro- 
bably preserved in the Syriac, the 
different positions of τῷ Θεῷ in the 
two Greek Mss showing that it wasa 
later addition. 

5. ὑπήνεγκεν] ‘offered. So it is gene- 
rally taken, but this sense is unsup- 
ported ; for Xen. He//. iv. 7. 2, Soph. 
ἘΔ 834, are not parallels. Perhaps 
‘won (rescued) for the whole world? 

διέλθωμεν κιτ.λ. This passage is 
copied in Afost. Const. ii. 55 ὁ yap 
Θεὸς, Θεὸς ὧν ἐλέους, ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς ἑκάστην 
γενεὰν ἐπὶ μετάνοιαν καλεῖ διὰ τῶν δι- 
καίων... τοὺς δὲ ἐν τῷ κατακλύσμῳ διὰ 
τοῦ Νῶε, τοὺς ἐν Σοδόμοις διὰ τοῦ 
φιλοξένου Λώτ (see below § 11) κιτ.λ. 

6. γενεᾷ καὶ γενεᾷ] ‘each successive 
generation. A Hebraism preserved 
in the LXx, Esth. ix. 27, Ps. xlviii. 11, 
Ixxxix. I, xc. 1, etc.: comp. Luke i. 
50 γενεὰς καὶ γενεάς (vv. ll.). 

τόπον] The same expression διδόναι 
τύπον μετανοίας occurs also in Wisd. 
xii, 10; comp. Heb. xii. 17 μετανοίας 
τόπον οὐχ εὗρεν, Tatian. ad Graec. 15 
οὐκ ἔχει μετανοίας τόπον, Apost. Const. 
ii. 38 τόπον μετανοίας ὥρισεν, ν. 19 
λαβεῖν αὐτὸν τόπον μετανοία. The 
corresponding Latin ‘foenitentiae 
locus’ occurs in the celebrated letter 
of Pliny to Trajan Plin. et Traj. 
Epist. 96. The emendation τύπον 
is not needed. 

᾿ 7. δεσπότης] Very rarely applied 
᾿ to the Father in the New Testament 





καὶ] 


(Luke ii. 29, Acts iv. 24, Rev. vi. 10, 
and one or two doubtful passages), 
but occurring in this one epistle some 
twenty times or more. The idea of 
subjection to God is thus very pro- 
minent in Clement, while the idea of 
sonshif, on which the Apostolic 
writers dwell so emphatically, is kept 
in the background; see Lipsius p. 
69. This fact is perhaps due in part 
to the subject of the epistle, which 
required Clement to emphasize the 
duty of submission; but it must be 
ascribed in some degree to the spirit 
of the writer himself. 

8. Noe ἐκήρυξεν «.r.d.] The Mo- 
saic narrative says nothing about 
Noah as a preacher of repentance. 
The nearest approach to this concep- 
tion in the Canonical Scriptures is 
2 Pet. ii. 5, where he is called δικαιο- 
σύνης κῆρυξ. The preaching of Noah 
however is one of the more promi- 
nent ideas in the Sibylline Oracles ; 
see especially i. 128 sq. Νῶε δέμας θάρ- 
συνον ἑὸν λαοῖσί τε πᾶσι κήρυξον 
μετάνοιαν κιτιλ. This passage,though 
forming part of a comparatively late 
poem, was doubtless founded on the 
earliest (pre-Christian) Sibylline (iii. 
97—828 of the existing collection) 
which is mutilated at the beginning 
and takes up the narrative of the 
world’s history at a later point than 
the deluge. Indeed this earliest Sibyl 
(if the closing passage of the book 


38 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [vir 


σαν. ᾿Ιωνᾶς Νινευΐταις καταστροφὴν ἐκήρυξεν, οἱ δὲ 
μετανοήσαντες ἐπὶ τοῖς ἁμαρτήμασιν αὐτῶν ἐξιλάσαντο 
τὸν Θεὸν ἱκετεύσαντες καὶ ἔλαβον σωτηρίαν, καίπερ 
ἀλλότριοι τοῦ Θεοῦ ὄντες. 


ἍΕ 


/ a 0. \ / 3 / \ 3 \ 
πνεύματος ἁγίου περὶ μετανοίας ἐλάλησαν, καὶ αὐτὸς 


Οἱ λειτουργοὶ τῆς χάριτος τοῦ Θεοῦ διὰ 


1 οἱ δὲ] ( ; ode A; οἵδε S. 
5. 5 λειτουργοί] λιτουργοι A. 


still belongs to the same poem) con- 
nects herself with the deluge by 
claiming to be a daughter-in-law of 
Noah (iii. 826). From these Ora- 
cles it seems not improbable that 
Clement, perhaps unconsciously, de- 
rived this conception of Noah. To 
this same source may probably be 
traced the curious identification in 
Theophilus ad Aztol. iii. 19 Νῶε κα- 
ταγγέλλων τοῖς τότε ἀνθρώποις μέλλειν 
κατακλυσμὸν ἔσεσθαι προεφήτευσεν av- 
τοῖς λέγων" Δεῦτε καλεῖ ὑμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς 
εἰς μετάνοιαν" διὸ οἰκείως Δευκαλίων ἐ- 
κλήθη ; for Theophilus has elsewhere 
preserved a long fragment from the 
lost opening of the earliest Sibylline 
(ad Autol. ii. 36), and this very 
passage incorporates several frag- 
ments of hexameters, e.g. Δεῦτε καλεῖ 
...Q¢€ds els μετάνοιαν. As Josephus also 
quotes the Sibyllines, he too in his 
account of Noah (Anz. 1. 3. I ἔπειθεν 
ἐπὶ τὸ κρεῖττον αὐτοὺς τὴν διάνοιαν καὶ 
τὰς πράξεις μεταφέρειν, quoted by Hil- 
genfeld here) may have been influ- 
enced by them. See on this subject 
I. p. 178 sq. For the Mohamme- 
dan legends of Noah, as a preacher of 
repentance, see Fabricius Cod. Pseud. 
Vet. Test. 1. p. 262. To the passages 
there collected from apocryphal and 
other sources respecting Noah’s 
preaching add this from the AZo- 
calypse of Paul § 50 (quoted also by 
Hilgenfeld) ἐγὼ εἰμὶ Νώε...καὶ οὐκ 
ἐπαυσάμην τοῖς ἀνθρώποις κηρύσσειν" 


3 ἱκετεύσαντες:] A; ἱκετεύοντες C, and so apparently 
8 μετὰ ὅρκου] AC ; Bryennios reads μεθ᾽ ὅρκου 


Μετανοεῖτε, ἰδοὺ yap κατακλυσμὸς ἔρχε- 
ται (p. 68, ed. Tisch.). A passage 
cited by Georg. Syncell. (Chron. p. 
47 ed. Dind.) from Enoch, but not 
found in the extant book, seems to 
have formed part of Noah’s preach- 
ing of repentance; see Dillmann’s 
Henoch pp.xxxviii,lxi. See also below 
§ 9, with the note on παλιγγενεσία. 

I. καταστροφήν] ‘overthrow, ruin’ ; 
comp. Jonah iii. 4 καὶ Νινευὴ κατα- 


στραφήσεται. 
4. ἀλλότριοι κ-τ.λ.] ‘aliens from 
God, i.e. ‘Gentiles’: comp. Ephes. 


ii. 12 ἀπηλλοτριωμένοι τῆς πολιτεί- 
as τοῦ Ἰσραήλ... .καὶ ἄθεοι ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. 
Both ἀλλότριοι and ἀλλόφυλοι are 
thus used, as opposed to the cove- 
nant-people. 

VIII. ‘God’s ministers through 
the Spirit preached repentance. The 
Almighty Himself invites all men to 
repent. Again and again in the 
Scriptures He bids us wash away 
our sins and be clean ; He proclaims 
repentance and promises forgiveness.’ — 

5. Οἱ λειτουργοὶ] i.e. the prophets ; 
though they are not so called in the 
Lxx or New Testament. 

8. Ζῶ yap ἐγώ κιτ.λ.] Loosely quoted 
from Ezek. xxxiii. 11 ζῶ ἐγώ, τάδε 
λέγει Κύριος, οὐ βούλομαι τὸν θάνατον 
τοῦ ἀσεβοῦς ὡς ἀποστρέψαι τὸν ἀσεβῆ 
ἀπὸ τῆς ὁδοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ ζῆν αὐτόν. 
ἀποστροφῇ ἀποστρέψατε ἀπὸ τῆς ὁδοῦ 
ὑμῶν᾽ καὶ ἵνα τί ἀποθνήσκετε, οἶκος σ- 
ραήλ; κιτιλ. ‘ 





vit] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


39 


\ € / - ε , \ / > , 
de ὁ δεσπότης τῶν ἁπάντων περὶ μετανοίας ἐλάλησεν 
\ J a ‘ > , ’ ’ 2 U ‘ 

μέτα ορκου" Ζῶ rap ἐγώ, λέγει Κύριος, OY Βογλομὰι TON 
, a ς a ε ' \ 

θάνατον TOY ἁμδρτωλοῦ, GC THN METANOIAN’ προστιθεὶς 
\ / > / ͵ “ > ’ > ‘ 

καὶ yvwunv ἀγαθήν: Metanoricate, οἶκος “IcpanaA, ἀπὸ τῆς 

ἀνομίὰς ὑμῶν: εἶπον τοῖς yloic τοῦ λὰοῦ μογ᾽ "Edn @cin 






which has no manuscript authority. 
προστηθεισ A, 
(εἰπών) 8. 


10. Μετανοήσατε κ-.τ.λ.} It is usual 
to treat these words as a loose quo- 
tation from Ezek. xviii. 30 sq οἶκος 
Ἰσραήλ, λέγει Κύριος, ἐπιστράφητε καὶ 
ἀποστρέψατε ἐκ πασῶν τῶν ἀσεβειῶν 
ὑμῶν...καὶ ἵνα τί ἀποθνήσκετε, οἶκος 
Ἰσραήλ ; διότι οὐ θέλω τὸν θάνατον τοῦ 
ἀποθνήσκοντος. If taken from the 
canonical Book of Ezekiel, the words 
are probably a confusion of this pas- 
sage with the context of the other 
(Ezek. xxxiii. 11), as given in the 
preceding note. See however what 
follows. 

11. Ἐὰν ὦσιν κιτ.λ. This passage is 
generally considered to be made up 
of Ps. ciii. 10, 11 οὐ κατὰ τὰς ἁμαρτίας 
ἡμῶν ἐποίησεν ἡμῖν οὐδὲ κατὰ τὰς ἀνο- 
μίας ἡμῶν ἀνταπέδωκεν ἡμῖν" ὅτι κατὰ 
τὸ ὕψος τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἐκρα- 
ταίωσε Κύριος τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς 
φοβουμένους αὐτὸν, and Jer. ili. 19, 22 
καὶ εἶπα, Ilarépa καλέσετέ pe καὶ ἀπ᾽ 
ἐμοῦ οὐκ ἀποστραφήσεσθε... ἐπιστρά- 
φητε υἱοὶ ἐπιστρέφοντες καὶ ἰάσομαι τὰ 
συντρίμματα ὑμῶν, together with Is. i. 
18 καὶ ἐὰν ὦσιν ai ἁμαρτίαι x.r.d. 
Such fusions are not uncommon in 
early Christian writers and occur 
many times in Clement himself. But 
several objections lie against this 
solution here; (1) No satisfactory 
account is thus rendered of the words 
ἐὰν Gow πυρρότεραι κόκκου καὶ μελανώ- 
τεραι σάκκου k.t..: for the passage of 
Isaiah, from which they are supposed 
to be loosely quoted, is given as an 


independent quotation immediately 


res? 


11 ὑμῶν] AS ; τοῦ λαοῦ μου C. 
Edy] AC; καν [?] or καὶ ἐὰν S. 


yap] AS; om. C. 9 προστιθεὶς} 
εἶπον] AC; dum dicts tu 


afterwards. (2) The expression προσ- 
τιθεὶς καὶ γνώμην ἀγαθὴν seems to im- 
ply that, even if not a continuation 
of the same passage, they were at all 
events taken from the same prophet 
as the words quoted just before. (3) 
This inference is borne out by the 
language used just below in intro- 
ducing the passage from Isaiah, καὶ ἐν 
ἑτέρῳ τόπῳ, implying that the previous 
words might be regarded 4as a single 
quotation. (4) A great portion of 
the quotation is found in two differ- 
ent passages of Clement of Alexan- 
dria, and in one of these the words 
are attributed to Ezekiel: Quzs div. 
salv. 39 (p. 957) οὐ βούλομαι τὸν θά- 
vaTov τοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ ἀλλὰ τὴν perd- 
voay’ κἂν ὦσιν αἱ ἁμαρτίαι ὑμῶν ὡς 
φοινικοῦν ἔριον, ὡς χιόνα λευκανῶ, κἂν 
μελάντερον τοῦ σκότους, ὡς ἔριον λευκὸν 
ἐκνίψας ποιήσω, and Paedag. i. 10 
(p. 151) φησὶ yap διὰ Ἰεζεκιήλ᾽ Ἐὰν 
ἐπιστραφῆτε ἐξ ὅλης τῆς καρδίας καὶ 
εἴπητε, ἸΠάτερ, ἀκούσομαι ὑμῶν ὡς λαοῦ 
ἁγίου. Thus it seems to follow either 
(1) That in the recension of the can- 
onical Ezekiel used by the two 
Clements the passage xxxiii. II was 
followed by a long interpolation con- 
taining substantially the words here 
quoted by Clement of Rome; or 
(2) That he is here citing some apo- 
cryphal writing ascribed to Ezekiel, 
which was a patchwork of passages 
borrowed from the canonical pro- 
phets. The latter supposition is fa- 
voured by the language of Josephus 


40 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [ΝΠ| 


‘ai ἁμδρτίδι ὑμῶν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἕως τοῦ οὐρὰνοῦ, Kal ἐὰν 
ὦσιν πυρρότερδι KOKKOY KAl μελὰᾶνώτερδι CAKKOY, κἀὶ ἐπι- 
ctpaAte πρός με ἐξ ὅλης TAC κἀρδίδο Kal εἴπητε, Πάτερ, 
émakoYcomal ὑμῶν ὧς λδοΐ ἁγίου. καὶ ἐν ἑτέρῳ τόπῳ 
λέγει οὕτως" Λούοδοθε Kal κἀθὰροὶ γένεοθε' ἀφέλεοθε τὰς 
TTONHPIAC ἀπὸ τῶν ψγχῶν ὑμῶν ἀπέναντι τῶν ὀφθὰάλμῶν 
ΜΟΥ TAYCACOE ἀπὸ τῶν πονηριῶν ὑμῶν, μᾶθετε KAAON 
ποιεῖν, EKZHTHCATE KPICIN, 


ῥύοδοθε ἀδικούμενον, KPINATE 


ὀρφανῷ Kal Aikai@caTe χήρὰ, Kai δεῦτε Kal διελεγχθῶμεν, 








3 καρδίας] A; ψυχῆς CS. 
οὕτως] A; οὕτως λέγει CS. 
γένεσθε] γενεσθαι Α. 
παυσασθαι Α. 
(om, καὶ) 8. 


(Ant. x. 5. 1), οὐ } μόνον οὗτος (Ἱερεμίας) 
προεθέσπισε ταῦτα τοῖς ὄχλοις ἀλλὰ 
καὶ ὃ προφήτης ᾿᾽Ἰεζεκίηλος πρῶτος 
περὶ τούτων δύο βιβλία γράψας κατέ- 
λιπεν. This statement however may 
be explained by a bipartite division 
of the canonical Ezekiel, such as 
some modern critics have made; and 
as Josephus in his account of the 
Canon (c. Aion. i. 8) and elsewhere 
appears not to recognise this second 
Ezekiel, this solution is perhaps more 
probable. Or again his text may be 
corrupt, β΄ (Ξε δύο) having been merely 
a repetition of the first letter of βι- 
Bria. See also the remarks of Ewald 
Gesch. des V. Isr. WV. p. 19. Apocry- 
phal writings of Ezekiel are men- 
tioned in the Stichometry of Nice- 
phorus (see Westcott Cavon p. 504), 
and from the connexion (Bapovx, 
᾿Αββακούμ, ᾿Εζεκιήλ, καὶ Δανιήλ, ψευὸ- 
εἐπίγραφα) it may be conjectured that 
they were interpolations of or addi- 
tions to the genuine Ezekiel, like the 
Greek portions of Daniel. This hy- 
pothesis will explain the form of the 
quotations here. At all events it 
appears that some apocryphal writ- 
ings attributed to Ezekiel existed, 


4 λαοῦ ἁγίου] C Clem 1523 λαωαγιω A. 
λούσασθε] λουσασθαι A. 
ἀφέλεσθε] αφελεσθαι A; 

8 ῥύσασθε] ρυσασθαι Α. 
χήρᾳ] A; χήραν C; dub. 5. 


5 λέγει 
καὶ] A; om. CS. 
ἀφέλετε Ὁ. 7 παύσασθε] 
9 καὶ δικαιώσατε] AC; δικαιώσατε 

καὶ διελεγχθῶμεν] Kar. . ἐλεχ- 


for Tertullian (de Carn, Choist. 23; 
comp. Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. 16, 
p- 890) and others quote as from Eze- 
kiel words not found in the Canonical 
book: see the passages collected in 
Fabric. Cod. Pseud. Vet. Test. p. 1117. 
Hilgenfeld points out that one of 
these, ‘In quacunque hora ingemue- 
rit peccator salvus erit’, is closely 
allied to Clement’s quotation here. 
This apocryphal or interpolated E- 
zekiel must have been known to Jus- 
tin Martyr also, for he quotes a 
sentence, ἐν ois ἂν ὑμᾶς καταλάβω, ἐν 
τούτοις καὶ κρινῶ (Dial. 47, p. 267), 
which we know from other sources 
to have belonged to this false Eze- 
kiel (see Fabric, l.c. p. 1118); though 
Justin himself from lapse of memory 
ascribes it to our Lord, perhaps con- 
fusing it in his mind with Joh. v. 
30. (On the other hand see West- 
cott /uxtrod. to Gosp. p. 426.) So too 
apocryphal passages of other pro- 
phets, as Jeremiah (Justin. Dza/. 72, 
p. 298) and Zephaniah (Clem. Alex. 
Strom. v. 11, p. 692), are quoted by 
the early fathers. The passage of Je- 
remiah quoted by Justin must have 
been an interpolation, such as I sup- 


on 


το λέγε!" 


15 





1x] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


Διὶ 
KAl ἐὰν @CIN δὶ AMAPTIAI ὑμῶν WC φοινικοῦν, OC 


2. 


χιόνδ AEYKAND* EAN AE ὦσιν ὡς κόκκινον, ὧς ἔριον λεγ- 


‘ 


KAN@. KAl ἐὰν θέλητε KA) EICAKOYCHTE MOY, TA ἀγὰθὰ TAC 
γῆς φἄγεοθε: ἐὰν AE MH θέλητε μηδὲ EICAKOYCHTE MOY, 
μάχδιρὰ ὑμᾶς κδἀτέδετδι: τὸ γὰρ οτόμὰ Kypioy ἐλάλησεν 
τοῦτο. πάντας οὖν τοὺς ἀγαπητοὺς αὐτοῦ βουλόμενος 


~ 3 , ΄σ ΄ 
μετανοίας μετασχειν, ἐστηριξἕεν τω TAVTOKPATOPLKW 


, . ee 
βουλήματι αὐτοῦ. 


IX. Διὸ ὑπακούσωμεν τῆ μεγαλοπρεπεῖ καὶ ἐνδόξῳ 


θωμεν A; καὶ διαλεχθῶμεν C; loguamur cum alterutro (om. καὶ with Pesh) S: 


see above, I. p. 143. 
LXX. 13 φάγεσθε] φαγεσθαι A. 
om. S with the Pesh. 


pose was the case with Clement’s 
citation from Ezekiel ; for he writes 
αὕτη ἡ περικοπὴ ἡ ἐκ τῶν λόγων τοῦ 
Ἰερεμίου ἔτι ἐστὶν ἐγγεγραμμένη ἔν 
τισιν ἀντιγράφοις τῶν ἐν συναγωγαῖς 
᾿Ιουδαίων, πρὸ γὰρ ὀλίγου χρόνου ταῦτα 
ἐξέκοψαν κιτιλ. On the apocryphal 
quotations in Clement see below δὲ 
13, 17, 23, 29, 46 (notes). 

2. μελανώτεραι] The comparative 
μελανώτερος occurs Strabo xvi. 4 ὃ 12 
(p. 772), but I cannot verify Jacob- 
son’s further statement ‘hanc formam 
habes saepius in LXx.’ It is derived 
from the late form μελανός -- μέλας, 
on which see Lobeck Paral. p. 139. 
Another late form of the superlative 
is μελαινότατος. 

σάκκου] Comp. Rev. vi. 12 καὶ ὁ 
ἥλιος ἐγένετο μέλας ὡς σάκκος Tpi- 
xwos, Is. 1. 3 ἐνδύσω τὸν οὐρανὸν σ κό- 
τος καὶ ὡς σάκκον θήσω τὸ περιβό- 
λαιον αὐτοῦ. It was a black hair- 
cloth. Thus Hilgenfeld’s emenda- 
tion λάκκου is superfluous, besides 
being out of place, for the comparison 
is between garment and garment. 
The σκότους of the existing text of 
Clem. Alex. may at once be rejected. 

4. ἐν ἑτέρῳ τόπῳ] Is. i. 16—20. 
The quotation is almost word for 


10 λέγει] A; add. κύριος CS, with Hebrew and 


θέλητε] θεληται A. 14 γὰρ] AC; 


word from the LXx. See Hatch 
Essays in Biblical Greek p. 177, for 
the various readings in the Mss of 
the LXx and in the quotation. It is 
twice quoted by Justin Martyr, AZo/. 
i. 44 (p. 81), i. 61 (p. 94), and the first 
verse again in a third passage, Dia/. 
18 (p. 235); but his quotations do 
not agree verbatim one with another. 
Almost all the various readings of our 
authorities here, καθαροὶ (kai καθαροὶ), 
ἀφέλεσθε (ἀφέλετε), καὶ δικαιώσατε 
(δικαιώσατε), χήρᾳ (χήραν), δεῦτε καὶ 
(δεῦτε), διελεγχθῶμεν (διαλεχθῶμεν, 
etc.) are found in the MSs of the Lxx 
or in Justin or in both. 

9. δικαιώσατε χήρᾳ] ‘give redress 
to the widow, preserving the same 
construction as in κρίνατε ὀρφανῷ. 
The LXx however has the accusative 
χήραν in the second clause though 
with a various reading χήρᾳ. 

10. λέγει] Sc. ὁ Κύριος, which words 
occur in the Lxx of Isaiah in accord- 
ance with the Hebrew. 

16. παντοκρατορικῷ] Apparently the 
earliest instance of this word; comp. 
§ 60. 
IX. ‘Let us therefore obey His 
gracious summons. Let us contem- 
plate the bright examples of obedi- 


42 THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT [1x 


, > -~ \ / , ~ ΄σ 
βουλήσει αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἱκέται γενόμενοι τοῦ ἐλέους καὶ τῆς 
΄ “ ? \ 
χρηστότητος αὐτοῦ προσπέσωμεν Kal ἐπιστρέψωμεν ἐπὶ 
\ > \ ~ > / \ / 
TOUS οἰκτιρμοὺς αὐτοῦ, ἀπολιπόντες THY ματαιοπονίαν 


a νον at tt ee en 


, ” \ Aa Sh , of ~ ᾽ , 
τήν TE ἔριν καὶ TO εἰς θάνατον ἄγον ζῆλος. ἀτενίσωμεν 
εἰς τοὺς τελείως λειτουργήσαντας τῆ μεγαλοπρεπεῖ SOEN 5 
ΡΎ n bey ρ ᾿ 
> ~ / > / A > ε ΄ / © \ 
αὐτοῦ. λάβωμεν ᾿Ενώχ, ὃς ἐν ὑπακοῇ δίκαιος εὑρεθεὶς 


1 γενόμενοι] AC; but S seems to read γινόμενοι. 
ἀπολιπόντες] AC ; but S apparently ἀπολείποντες. 
λειτουργήσανταΞ5] λιτουργησαντασ A. 


3 οἰκτιρμοὺς] οικτειρμουσ A. 
5 τελείως] AC ; τελείους 5. 


ence in past ages: Enoch who was 
translated and saw not death; Noah 
through whom a remnant was saved 
in the ark.’ 

3. ματαιοπονίαν] The word occurs 
in Classical writers, e.g. Plut. Mor. 
119 E, Lucian Dial. Mort. x. 8 (1. p. 
369) ; comp. Theoph. ad Avfol. ii. 7, 
12, iii. 1. Polycarp, PAz/. 2, appa- 
rently remembering this passage has 
ἀπολιπόντες τὴν κενὴν ματαιολογίαν 
καὶ τὴν τῶν πολλῶν πλάνην. But this 
does not justify a change of reading 
here ; for paratoroviay, which is the 
reading of all the authorities here, is 
more appropriate, and a transcriber’s 
error is more likely in the Mss of 
Polycarp (all derived from one very 
late source) than in all our copies of 
Clement: nor is it impossible that 
Polycarp’s memory deceived him. 
Maratodoyia occurs I Tim. i. 6. 

4. ἀτενίσωμεν x.t.r.] Clement of 
Alexandria Strom. iv. 16 (p. 610), after 
giving an earlier passage from this 
epistle (see ἃ 1), adds εἶτ᾽ ἐμφανέστε- 
pov ᾿Ατενίσωμεν κιτιλ. down to “Paa8 
ἡ πόρνη (δ 12), but contents himself 
with a brief abridgement, and does 
not quote in full, so that he gives but 
little aid in determining the text. 

5+ τῇ μεγαλοπρεπεῖ δόξῃ] The same 
expression occurs in 2 Pet. i. 17. 
The word μεγαλοπρεπὴς is frequent 
in Clement, §§ 1, 19, 45, 58, 61, 64, 


ἐλέους] ἐλαιουσ A. 
ἡ θάνα- 


and just above (comp. μεγαλοπρέπεια 
§ 60). It is only found this once in 
the N. T. 

6. Ἐνώχ] Clement is here copying 
Heb. xi. 5 Ἐνὼχ μετετέθη τοῦ μὴ ἰδεῖν 
θάνατον καὶ οὐχ ηὑρίσκετο (comp. 
Gen. v. 24); though the words are 
displaced, as often happens when the 
memory is trusted. In the sequence 
of his first three instances also, 
Enoch, Noah, Abraham—he follows 
the writer of that epistle. See also 
the language in Ecclus. xliv. 16, 17, 
to which Clement’s expressions bear 
some resemblance. 

δίκαιο] The book of Enoch is 
quoted as ᾿Ενὼχ ὁ δίκαιος in Zest. xit 
Patr. Levi 10, Juda 18, Dan. 5, Benj. 
g. Thus it seems to have been a re- 
cognised epithet of this patriarch, and 
perhaps formed part of the title of 
the apocryphal book bearing his 
name. It was probably the epithet 
applied to him also in the opening 
of the extant book, i.2, in the original ; 
see also xii. 4, xiv. I, xv. I, and else- 
where. 

7. αὐτοῦ] i.e. Enochhimself. Forthis 
reflexive use of αὐτοῦ see A. Buttmann 
p. 98 sq. Comp. also §§ 12, 14, 30. 

8. παλιγγενεσίαν] i.e.‘a second birth, 
a renewal, of the world after the 
flood; as Orac. Sib. i. 195 (comp. 
vii. 11) καὶ δεύτερος ἔσσεται αἰών, 
words put into the mouth of Noah 





_e——— ~~ 






































x] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


μετετέθη, καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθη αὐτοῦ θάνατος. 


43 


Noe πιστὸς 


ε \ A “ , > “ , / 
εὑρεθεὶς διὰ THs λειτουργίας αὐτοῦ παλιγγενεσίαν κόσμῳ 


᾽ / \ / > > ~ ε [ A > 
ἐκήρυξεν, καὶ διέσωσεν Ot αὐτοῦ ὁ δεσπότης τα εἰσελ- 


> ε / ~ > \ / 
το θόντα ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ ζῶα εἰς THY κιβωτόν. 


X. ᾿Αβραάμ, ὁ φίλος προσαγορευθείς, πιστὸς ev- 


τοῦ] A; ὁ θάνατος C. 
λειτουργίᾳ C. 
dominus universi 657 ND). 


himself. See Philo Vit. Moys. ii. 12 
(ii. p. 144) παλιγγενεσίας ἐγένοντο ἡγε- 
poves καὶ δευτέρας ἀρχηγέται περιόδου, 
where also it is used of the world 
renovated after the flood. Somewhat 
similar is the use in Matt. xix. 28, 
where it describes the ‘new heaven 
and new earth.’ The Stoics also 
employed this term to designate the 
renewed universe after their great 
periodic conflagrations ; see Philo de 
Mund. incorr. 14 (11. p. 501) οἱ ras 
ἐκπυρώσεις καὶ τὰς παλιγγενεσίας εἰσ- 
ηγούμενοι τοῦ κόσμου, Marc, Anton. 
xi. I τὴν περιοδικὴν παλιγγενεσίαν τῶν 
ὅλων (with Gataker’s note). 
Christian uses see Suicers.v. Any 
direct reference to the baptismal 
water (λουτρὸν παλιγγενεσίας, Tit. iii. 
5), as typified by the flood (comp. 
1 Pet. iii. 21), seems out of place here ; 
but παλιγγενεσία appears to allude 
indirectly to the renewal of the Corin- 
thian Church by repentance. See 
the next note. 

10. ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ] An indirect reference 
to the feuds at Corinth. Even the 
dumb animals set an example of 
concord ; see below ὃ 20 ra ἐλάχιστα 
τῶν ζώων τὰς συνελεύσεις αὐτῶν ἐν 
ὁμονοίᾳ καὶ εἰρήνῃ ποιοῦνται. The word 
ὁμόνοια is of frequent occurrence in 
Clement. 

X. ‘Abraham by obedience left 
his home and kindred, that he might 
inherit the promises of God. Not 
once or twice only was a blessing 


For — 


8 διὰ τῆς AeTovpylas] AS (but λιτουργιασ A); ἐν τῇ 
9 ὁ δεσπότης] S translates the word here and in other passages 
11 πιστὸς] πιστισ A. 


pronounced upon him for his faith, 
He was promised a race countless as 
the stars or the sand in multitude, 
and in his old age a son was granted 
to him.’ 

11. ὁ φίλος] From Is. xli. 8 ‘Abra- 
ham my friend’ (LXX ὃν ἠγάπησα) : 
comp. 2 Chron. xx. 7, and see the 
passages of the Lxx quoted by 
Roensch Zettschr. f. Wiss. Theol. 
XVI. p. 583 (1873). See also James 
ii. 23 καὶ φίλος Θεοῦ ἐκλήθη, and below 
§ 17 φίλος προσηγορεύθη τοῦ Θεοῦ. 
In the short paraphrase of the Alex- 
andrian Clement this chapter relating 
to Abraham is abridged thus, ’ASpaay 
os διὰ πίστιν καὶ φιλοξενίαν φίλος Θεοῦ 
πατὴρ δὲ τοῦ Ἰσαὰκ προσηγορεύθη ; 
and it has therefore been suggest- 
ed to read @y φιλοὺ for o didoc. 
But no alteration is needed. Abra- 
ham is here called ‘ the friend’ abso- 
lutely, as among the Arabs at the 
present day he is often styled ‘ El- 
Khalil’ simply: see d’Herbelot s.v. 
Abraham, and Stanley’s Fewish 
Church 1. p. 13. So too Clem, Hom. 
XViii. 13 οὕτως dvvatat...ovdé Ἐνὼχ ὁ 
εὐαρεστήσας μὴ εἰδέναι οὔτε Νῶε ὁ δί- 
καιος μὴ ἐπίστασθαι οὔτε ᾿Αβραὰμ ὁ 
φίλος μὴ συνιέναι, which has other 
resemblances with this passage of the 
genuine Clement; Clem. Recogn. i. 
32 ‘Abraham pro amicitiis quibus 
erat ei familiaritas cum Deo.’ It is 
an indication how familiar this title 
of Abraham had become in the Apo- 


44 THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT 


[x 


z > ~ > ε “ ’ ~ Jt. ~ 
ρέθη ἐν τῷ αὐτὸν ὑπήκοον γενέσθαι τοῖς ῥήμασιν τοῦ 
Θεοῦ. 


΄- 7 ~ \ ~ sf ΄ \ 
ἐκ TNS συγγενείας αὐτοῦ Kal ἐκ TOU οἴκου TOU πατρὸς 


Ag 2. Ὲ - Gen a ΄σ a > ΄ \ 
οὗτος δι᾽ ὑπακοῆς ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ τῆς γῆς αὐτοὺ καὶ 


ata J “ 3 / \ / > nm > 
αὐτοῦ, ὅπως γῆν ὀλίγην καὶ συγγένειαν ἀσθενῆ καὶ οἶκον 


‘ \ / \ ᾽ , - 
μικρον καταλιπὼν κληρονομησὴ Tas ἐπαγγελίας TOU 5 


΄“ ’ὔ \ ~ » 3 a n ‘ 
Θεοῦ. λέγει yap αὐτῷ" Ἄπελθε ἐκ τῆς γῆς coy kal ἐκ 
τῆς ογγγενείδο coy Kal ἐκ τοῦ οἴκου τοῦ TaTpdc Coy eic THN 
γῆν HN ἂν CO! δείξω, Kal TOIHCW ce εἰς ἔθνος μέγὰ Kal ε΄- 
AorHc@ ce Kal MEFAAYNG τὸ GNOMA Coy, Kal ἔσῃ εὐλογημέ- 
NOC’ Kal εὐλογήσω Toyc εὐλογοῦΐντἄᾶς CE Kal KATAPACOMAI 
TOYC KATAPMMENOYC Ce, KAl EYAOPHOHCONTAI EN CO! ACAI δὶ 
\ a a \ / > ~ ~ > \ 
yAal τῆς γῆς. καὶ παλιν ἐν τῷ διαχωρισθῆναι αὐτον 
Γ \ \ ep 3 -~ e ’ > ° > 
ἀπὸ Λὼτ εἶπεν αὕὐτῳ O Θεός: ᾿Αναβλέψδλς τοῖς ὀφθὰλ- 
μοῖς Coy, ἴλε ἀπὸ τοῦ τόπου, OY NYN οὐ εἶ, πρὸς βορρᾶν Kal AIBA 
KAl ANATOAAC κἀὶ θάλδοοδν᾽ ὅτι TACAN THN γῆν, HN οὐ ὁρᾷς, 
3 συγγενείας] συγγενιασ A. 5 ἐπαγγελίας] ἐπαγγελειασ Α. 
ράσομαι] A; καταράσσομαι C. 15 ἣν] AS; om. C. 16 αἰῶνος] A; τοῦ 
αἰῶνος C. 19 ᾿Εξήγαγεν] A; ἐξήγαγε δὲ CS. 21 τοὺς dorépas] AC ; 
add. τοῦ οὐρανοῦ 8. 24 γήρᾳ] γήρει C; see the note on § 63. 25 τῷ 


Θεῴ] AS; om. C. Fora similar omission see Ign. Rom. 4. πρὸ] A; els C3 
super S (with the Hebr. and Pesh. of Gen. xxii. 2, where the Lxx has ἐφ᾽ or ἐπὶ). 


IO KaTa- 


of the Lord.’ Later Rabbinical illus- 
trations of this title will be found in 
Wetstein on James ii. 23, and espe- 


stolic age, that Philo once inadver- 
tently quotes Gen. xviii. 17 ᾿Αβραὰμ 
τοῦ φίλου μου for rod παιδός μου and 


argues from the expression, de Sodr. 
II (I. p. 401), though elsewhere he 
gives the same text correctly de Leg. 
All. iii. 8 (I. p. 93), Quaest. in Gen. iv. 
21 (p. 261 Aucher). At a much earlier 
date one Molon (Joseph. ¢. AZ. ii. 14, 
33) who wrote against the Jews and 
is quoted by Alexander Polyhistor 
(Euseb. Praep. Ev. ix. 19, p. 420) in- 
terpretedthename Abraham as πατρὸς 
φίλον, apparently reading DAIAN as 
ifit were ὩΣ. And in the Book of 
Jubilees c. 19 (Dillmann in Ewald’s 
Fahrb, Wl. p. 15) it is said of this 
patriarch that ‘he was written down 
on the heavenly tablets as a friend 


cially in Beer Leden Abrahams, notes 
427, 431, 950. Comp. Tertull. adv. 
Fud. 2 ‘unde Abraham amicus Dei 
deputatus ?’ 

6. "AmedOe κιτ.λ.] From Lxx Gen. 
xii. I—3 with slight but unimportant 
variations. In omitting καὶ δεῦρο 
after rod πατρός σου Clement agrees 
with A and the Hebrew against the 
common text which inserts the words. 
He also reads εὐλογηθήσονται with A 
against the common text ἐνευλογηθή- 
σονται, but εὐλογημένος where A has 
εὐλογητός. See Hatch Biblical Greek 
p. 154 for the various readings in this 
passage in the MSS of the LXx, in Acts 








20 


25 


30 





x1] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


45 


col λώσω aYTHN Kal τῷ crrépmati coy ἕως ai@noc: Kal 
TOIHC@ TO CTEpMA COY ὧς THN ἄμμον τῆς γῆς" εἰ AYNaTal 
τις ἐξὰριθμῆοδι THN ἄμμον TAC γῆς, Kal TO cmépma coy 
> ͵ ‘ \ , / > ἢ ε ῃ 
EZAPIOMHOHCeTAl. καὶ πάλιν λέγει" “EZHraren ὁ Oedc TON 
"ABpaam Kal εἶπεν ἀὐτῷ: ἀνάβλεψον εἶς τὸν OYPANON Kal 
ἀρίθμηοον TOYC AcTépac, εἰ AYNHCH ἐξδριθμῆσδι ayToyc* 
οὕτως €cTal TO ciépma coy: émicteycen δὲ ’ABpadm τῷ 
a ee ck ’ > a > ᾿ Ἁ / ‘ 
Θεῷ, καὶ ἐλογίοθη δὐτῷ εἰς Aikatocynun. διὰ πίστιν καὶ 
’ 2S / > - εν" ᾽ , \ δι ~ 
φιλοξενίαν ἐδόθη αὕτῳ ULOS ἐν γήρᾳ, και δι ὑπακοῆς 
/ A / ~ “~ \ « ~ “ 
προσήνεγκεν αὐτὸν θυσίαν τῳ Θεῷ προς ἕν τών ὀρέων 
z af > ἴω 
ὧν ἔδειξεν αὐτῷ. 
‘ / \ / ‘ , 
XI. Διὰ φιλοξενίαν καὶ εὐσέβειαν λὼτ ἐσώθη ἐκ 
7 ΄σ ’ / 4 \ \ \ 
(οδόμων, τῆς περιχώρου πάσης κριθείσης διὰ πυρὸς καὶ 
7 ΄ / ε / / \ > , 
θείου: πρόδηλον ποιήσας ὁ δεσπότης, ὅτι τοὺς ἐλπίζον- 
> \ > / A ~ 
Tas ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν οὐκ ἐγκαταλείπει, τοὺς δὲ ἑτεροκλινεῖς 
ὀρέων] οραιων A, 28 κριθείσης] A, as I read it. Tischendorf, with whom 
Wright agrees, reads it κριθησησ and appeals to the photograph. The photo- 
graph seems to me more like κριθεισησ, and another inspection of the Ms itself 
confirms me. I can see no traces of the left-hand stroke of an H. 29 θείου 


θιου A. ποιήσας] AC; S translates as if ἐποίησεν. 30 ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν] A, 
and so too apparently 8 ; els αὐτὸν C. 


vii. 3, and in Philo Migr. Abrah. τ (1. 
p- 436). Clement agrees with Philo in 
quoting ἄπελθε for ἔξελθε. 

12. ἐν τῷ διαχωρισθῆναι)] The ex- 
pression is taken from Gen. xiii. 14 
pera τὸ διαχωρισθῆναι τὸν Λὼτ ἀπ᾽ 
αὐτοῦ. ᾿ 

13. ᾿Αναβλέψας κ-τ.λ.] From LXx 
Gen. xiii. 14—16, almost word for 
word. 

19. ᾿Εξήγαγεν] From Lxx Gen. xv. 
5, 6, with unimportant variations. 

24. φιλοξενίαν] i.e. his entertaining 
the angels; comp. Heb. xiii.2. Simi- 
larly of Lot just below, § 11, and of 
Rahab, § 12. The stress laid on this 
virtue seems to point to a failing in 
the Corinthian Church. See also the 
note on ἀφιλοξενίαν below, § 35. 


25. πρὸς ἕν x.t.d.] Gen. xxii. 2 ἐφ᾽ 
ἕν τῶν ὀρέων ὧν ἄν σοι εἴπω. 

XI. ‘Lot’s faith and good deeds 
saved him from the destruction of 
Sodom and Gomorrah ; while his own 
wife perished and remains a monu- 
ment to all ages of the punishment 
with which God visits the disobedient 
and wavering.’ 

28. κριθείσης διὰ πυρὸς Comp. Is, 
Ixvi. 16 ἐν τῷ πυρὶ Κυρίου κριθήσεται 
πᾶσα ἡ γῆ. The emendation καυθείσης 
for κριθείσης is unnecessary as well 
as weak, 

29. ποιήσας] A nominative abso- 
lute; see Winer § xxviii. p. 194 
A. Buttmann p. 251 sq. 

30. ἑτεροκλινεῖς} ‘swerving aside, 
especially in a bad sense; Epictet. 


> 


46 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [x1 


e / > / \ > \ / 
ὑπάρχοντας εἰς κόλασιν Kal αἰκισμὸν τίθησιν" συνεξελ- 


/ \ “ ~ / / δ 
θούσης γὰρ αὐτῷ τῆς γυναικὸς, ἑτερογνώμονος ὑπαρχού- 


σι: ~ / « 
ons καὶ οὐκ ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ, εἰς τοῦτο σημεῖον ἐτέθη ὥστε 


/ > \ / ς A . ΄σ ε / / > 
γενέσθαι αὐτὴν στήλην ἄλος ἕως τῆς ἡμέρας ταυτής, εἰς 


Ἁ A ΜΡ “ 4 4 7 \ ε / 
TO γνωστὸν εἶναι πᾶσιν ὅτι οἱ δίψυχοι Kal οἱ δισταζον- 


I κόλασιν] AC; but S translates as if κρίσιν. 


2 érepoyvwpovos] C; A is 


read erepoyvwuoo by Tischendorf and Jacobson, erepoyvwuou by Vansittart. The 
last letter appears to me like c with possibly y superposed. Wright is probably 
correct in his explanation that the y is seen through from eype@H on the oppo- 


site side of the page. 
om. C. 6 κρίμα] κρῖμα C. 


Diss. iii. 12. 7 ἑτεροκλινῶς ἔχω πρὸς 
ἡδονήν. See below, ὃ 47 τοὺς ἑτεροκλι- 
νεῖς ὑπόρχοντας ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν. So ἑτερο- 
κλινία Clem. Hom. Ep. ad Jac. 15, said 
of the ship of the Church heeling 
over, when not properly trimmed. 

2. ἑτερογνώμονος] The word has 
two senses, either (1) ‘dissentient, 
otherwise-minded,’ Cyril. Alex. zz Zs. 
xlviii (11. p. 642), lii (II. p. 736) ὁλοτρό- 
mos ἑτερογνώμονας παρ᾽ ἐκείνους ; OF (2) 
‘wavering, double-minded’, Cyril. 
Alex. Cord. Cat.in Ps. τ. p. 225 διψύχου 
re καὶ érepoyvapovos. ΑΒ it seems to 
be defined here by οὐκ ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ, the 
first meaning must be adopted; 
though Lot’s wife was also ἑτερογνώ- 
pov in the other sense, and as such 
is classed among οἱ δίψυχοι καὶ διστά- 
ἕοντες below. In ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ there is 
again an allusion to the feuds at 
Corinth ; see above § 9. 

3. εἰς τοῦτο x.7.A.] Here ὥστε is 
dependent not on εἰς τοῦτο, but on 
σημεῖον ἐτέθη ; and eis τοῦτο ‘to this 
-end’ stands independently, being 
afterwards explained by εἰς τὸ γνω- 
στὸν εἶναι K.T.A. 

4. ἕως τῆς ἡμ. ταύτης} A pillar of salt 
identified with Lot’s wife is mention- 
ed as standing in Wisdom x. 7, ἀπι- 
στούσης ψυχῆς μνημεῖον ἑστηκυῖα στήλη 
ἁλός, and in Joseph. Azz. i. 11. 4 who 
says that he himself had seen it. So 


The reading therefore is ετερογνωμοσ. 
σημείωσιν] onuwow A. 


3 τοῦτο] AS; 
8 φιλοξενίαν 


too Irenzus (Haer. iv. 31. 3) speaks 
of it as ‘statua salis semper manens,’ 
which he makes a type of the Church. 
Cyril of Jerusalem also, Catech. xix. 
ὃ (p. 309), describes Lot’s wife as ἐστη- 
λιτευμένη δι’ αἰῶνος. The region a- 
bounds in such pillars of salt (see 
Robinson’s Biblical Researches, etc. 
II. p. 108 sq). Medizeval and even 
modern travellers have delighted to 
identify one or other of these with 
Lot’s wife. 

5. of δίψυχοι] The wordoccurs only 
twice, James i. 8, iv. 8, in the New 
Testament. Both the word and the 
warning are very frequent in Cle- 
ment’s younger contemporary Her- 
mas, Vis. ii. 2, iii. 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, TI, 
iv. I, 2, Sz. viii. 7, etc., but especi- 
ally Mand. ix, x. Comp. also Didache 
4 οὐ διψυχήσεις πότερον ἔσται ἢ ov, 
with the corresponding passage in 
Barnab. 19. See below § 23 with 
the note (comp. Clem. Rom. ii. § 11). 

XII. ‘Rahab also was saved by 
her faith and her hospitality. She 
believed in the might of the Lord 
God, and she rescued the spies; 
therefore she and her family were 
spared. She was gifted too with a 
prophetic spirit, for the scarlet thread 
typified the saving power of Christ’s 
blood.’ 


8. ‘PaaB] This account is taken > 








x11] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


47 


~ ΄ ΄σ / \ 
τες περὶ THs τοῦ Θεοῦ δυνάμεως εἰς κρίμα Kal εἰς on- 
/ , ~ ΄ ὔ 
μείωσιν πάσαις ταῖς γενεαῖς γίνονται. 
\ / \ 

XII. Διὰ πίστιν καὶ φιλοξενίαν ἐσώθη ‘PaaB ἡ 
, , \ ε ΝῚ 9 “ ζω ~ A 
πόρνη" ἐκπεμφθέντων γὰρ ὑπὸ *Incod τοῦ τοῦ Ναυὴ 
A ε / 7 A ~ ΄ 
κατασκόπων εἰς τὴν ‘lepryw, ἔγνω 6 βασιλεὺς τῆς γῆς 
«“ «“ - \ , ~ , 
ὅτι ἥκασιν κατασκοπεῦσαι τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν, Kal ἐξέ- 


A, but CS repeat the preposition, see διὰ φιλοξενίαν. For C see Bryennios Didache 
Pp: py’. ἡ πόρνη] A; ἡ ἐπιλεγομένη πόρνη CS; see the lower note. 9 ἐκ- 








πεμφθέντων] εκπεῴφθεντων A. 
10 τὴν] A; om. C. 
Bryennios Didache p. py’. 


from the book of Joshua; but Cle- 
ment gives it in his own words, even 
when recording the conversational 
parts. The instance of Rahab was 
doubtless suggested by Heb. xi. 31, 
James ii. 25; for both these epistles 
were known to S. Clement and are 
quoted elsewhere. His expression 
διὰ πίστιν καὶ φιλοξενίαν connects the 
two aspects, to which the two Apo- 
stolic writers severally direct atten- 
tion, the πίστις of the one, the ἔργα 
of the other; comp. §§ 31, 33, 34, 49 
(notes). See also the note on the φιλο- 
ξενία of Abraham ὃ το. 

ἡ πόρνη] For the insertion ἡὶ ém- 
λεγομένη see above, L pp. 125, 139. 
The object of this interpolation is to 
suggest a figurative sense of the 
word; comp. Orig. iz Jes. Nave 
Flom. iii. § 3 (U1. p. 403) ‘Raab in- 
terpretatur latitudo. Quae est ergo 
latitudo nisi ecclesia haec Christi, 
quae ex peccatoribus velut ex mere- 
tricatione collecta est?...talis ergo et 
haec meretrix esse dicitur, quae ex- 
ploratores suscepit Iesu’; comp. 2. 
vi. § 3 (p. 411). From a like motive 
the Targum interprets the word in 
Josh. ii. 1 by ἐς 15 -- πανδοκευτρία 
‘an innkeeper, and so Joseph. Azz. 
V. I. 2 ὑποχωροῦσιν εἴς τι καταγώγιον... 
ὄντες ἐν τῷ τῆς 'Ῥαχάβης καταγωγίῳ, 
etc. This explanation has been a- 


τοῦ τοῦ] A; τοῦ (omitting the second τοῦ) C. 
11 ἐξέπεμψεν] A; ἔπεμψεν C; dub. S. For C see 


dopted by several Jewish and some 
Christian interpreters; see Gesenius 
Thes. 5. ν. AIM, Ρ. 422. Others again 
have interpreted the word as meaning 
‘Gentile’. The earliest Christian 
fathers took a truer view, when they 
regarded this incident as an antici- 
pation of the announcement in Matt. 
xxl. 31; e.g. Justin Déza/. 111, Iren. 
iv. 20. 12. 

In Heb. xi. 31 also ἡ ἐπιλεγομένη 
πόρνη is read for ἡ πόρνη by ἐξ (first 
hand) and likewise by the Harclean 
Syriac, this part being preserved 
only in the Cambridge Ms (see above, 
I. p. 130 sq). Bensly also calls my 
attention to a passage in Ephraem 
Syrus Of. Graec. 1. p. 310 ὁμοίως δὲ 
καὶ Ῥαὰβ ἡ ἐπιλεγομένη πόρνη διὰ τῆς 
φιλοξενίας οὐ συναπώλετο τοῖς ἀπει- 
θήσασι, δεξαμένη τοὺς κατασκόπους ἐν 
εἰρήνῃ. Immediately before, this 
father has mentioned Abraham and 
Lot as examples of persons rewarded 
for their φιλοξενία, so that he seems 
to have had the passage of S. Clement 
in view. 

9. τοῦ τοῦ Ναυὴ] In the Lxx Num. 
xxxii. 12, Deut. xxxii. 44, Josh. vi. 6, 
etc., he is called Ἰησοῦς 6 τοῦ Ναυή, 
and the same expression is adopted 
here, though in the genitive it sounds 
somewhat awkwardly. 

11. αὐτῶν] Not αὐτῶν, as most edi- 


48 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [xu 


» \ / ͵ ε, 
πεμψεν ἄνδρας τοὺς συλλημψομένους αὐτούς, ὅπως 
, ~ ec 53 

συλλημφθέντες θανατωθῶσιν. ἡ οὖν φιλόξενος ‘PaaB 
εἰσδεξαμένη αὐτοὺς ἔκρυψεν εἰς τὸ ὑπερῷον ὑπὸ τὴν 

μένη ρ ρῷον ὑπὸ τὴ 

/ > / A ΄-΄ A ΄ 

λινοκαλάμην. ἐπισταθέντων δὲ τῶν παρὰ τοῦ βασι- 
λέως καὶ λεγόντων: Πρὸς cé εἰσῆλθον οἱ KATACKOTION τῆς 
γῆς ἡμῶν: ἐξάγαγε aytoyc, ὁ γὰρ BaciAeyc οὕτως κελεύει" 
ἡ δὲ ἀπεκρίθη: Εἰεῆλθον μὲν οἱ ἄνδρες, ofc ζητεῖτε, 
πρός με, ἀλλὰ εὐθέως ἀπῆλθον κἀὶ πορεύήοντὰι TH ὁλῷ᾽ 

ς , > an > / \ 53 \ \ 
ὑποδεικνύουσα αὐτοῖς ἐναλλαξ . Καὶ εἶπεν προς TOUS 
I συλλημψομένους] συλληψομενουσ A, though just below it has συλλημφθεντεσ. 
For the omission of 4% compare εκπεῴθεντων above. C has συλληψομένους, συλ- 
ληφθέντες. For the orthography see § 1 ἀπροσωπολήμπτως. 5 λεγόντων] AC; 
add. li S. 6 οὕτως]. .τωσ A; οὕτω Ὁ. 8 ἀπῆλθον] A; ἐξῆλθον C. 


9 ἐναλλάξ] CS. For A, Tischendorf prints εκ... as though the 2nd letter were 
legible; but nothing more than Εἰ can be discerned, and the 1 might as well be 


the upright stroke of N as of k. 


tors print it; comp. § 9 and see the 
note on Philippians iii. 21. 

I. τοὺς συλλημψομένους] i.e. of συλ- 
λήμψονται. For this construction see 
Winer § xviii. p. 121, and the notes 
Galatians i. 7. 

4. λινοκαλάμην] ‘flax-stalks’ laid on 
the flat roof of the house to dry; see 
Josh. ii. 6. So Joseph. (Az. v. 1. 2) 
explains it, λίνου yap ἀγκαλίδας ἐπὶ τοῦ 
τέγους ἔψυχε. The word ὑπερῷον does 
not occur in the original narrative, 
which describes the men’s lurking 
place as on the house-top (ἐπὶ rod 
δώματος). But Clement would not 
necessarily be familiar with Eastern 
customs and might easily substitute 
a wrong expression. 

9. ὑποδεικνύουσα αὐτοῖς] Clement 
must have made a slip of memory, 
as he has done already in ὑπερῷον ; 
for in the original narrative Rahab 
shows the opposite route not to the 
king’s messengers but to the spies. 

ἐναλλάξ] ‘in the reverse’ or ‘oppo- 
site direction.” The word ἐναλλάξ has 
twomeanings ; (1) ‘alternately, which 


το ἐγὼ] AS; om. C. 11 ὑμῶν] A; 


is its more frequent sense; (2) ‘cross- 
wise, or ‘inversely’; e.g. Aristot. 
Anim, Hist. iii. 4 (p. 515, Bekker) 
ἕτεραι (φλέβες)... «φέρουσιν ἐναλλάξ, ἡ 
μὲν ἐκ τῶν ἀριστερῶν εἰς τὰ δεξιά, ἡ δὲ 
εἰς τὰ ἀριστερὰ ἐκ τῶν δεξιῶν. 80 ἴοο 
the attitude of Jacob crossing his 
hands, when he blesses the sons of 
Joseph, is described in Barnab. 13 
(professing to quote the words of 
Genesis) καὶ ἐποίησεν ᾿Ιακὼβ ἐναλλὰξ 
τὰς χεῖρας κιτιλ. Again in mathe- 
matical language speaking of propor- 
tion, ἐναλλὰξ is Permutando, i.e. the 
inversion of the antecedents and 
consequents, as defined by Euclid v. 
def. 13 ἐναλλὰξ λόγος ἐστὶ λῆψις τοῦ 
ἡγουμένου πρὸς τὸ ἡγούμενον καὶ τοῦ ἑπο- 
μένου πρὸς τὸ ἑπόμενον : Comp. Aristot. 
Anal, Post. i. ς (1. p. 74), ii. 17 (p. 99), 
Eth. Nic. v. 6 (p. 1131), who is rather 
fond of the word. The attempts to 
supply the lacuna in A were signal 
failures before the discovery of the 
second MS. 

11. 06 φόβος x.r.A.] The expression 
does not occur in the Lxx here, but 


:΄. 


Io 







TO THE CORINTHIANS. 49. 


x1] 


ἄνδρας" Γινώοκογοὰ γινώοκω ἐγὼ ὅτι Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς 
ὑμῶν TAPAAIAMCIN ὑμῖν THN [AN TAYTHN, ὁ γὰρ φόβος καὶ 
ὁ TPOMOC ὑμῶν ἐπέπεοεν τοῖς κἀτοικοῦοιν AYTHN. ὧς ἐὰν 
OYN γένητὰι AdBEIN AYTHN YMAC, AlacwCATE ME κὰὶ τὸν 
οἶκον τοῦ πὰτρός ΜΟΥ. καὶ εἶπαν αὐτῆ" Ἔσοτδι οὕτως ac 
ἐλάᾶλησὰς ἡμῖν. ὧς ἐὰν OYN γνῷο πὰρλγινομένογο HMAC, 
CYNAZEIC πᾶντδο TOYC οοὐΐο ὑπὸ τὸ τέγος οοὺ, Kal AlAcwOH- 
ΟΟΝΤὰᾺΙ ὅσοι γὰρ ἐὰν εὐρεθῶοιν ἔξω TAC OIKIAC, ATTOAOYNTAL 
καὶ προσέθεντο αὐτῇ δοῦναι σημεῖον, ὅπως κρεμάση ἐκ 


΄ of ΄ -"; / ΄σ΄ J \ 
τοῦ οἴκου αὐτῆς κόκκινον, πρόδηλον ποιοῦντες ὅτι διὰ 


om. CS. φόβος, τρόμος] C; φοβοσ, ...uos A. The two words are trans- 
posed in S. 12 αὐτήν] AC; τὴν γῆν S. ἐὰν] A; ἂν Ὁ. 15 ἐλά- 
Anoas] A; λελάληκας (. ὧς] AC; not translated in 8. ἐὰν] A; ἂν C. 


παραγινομένους] AS (by the pointing); παραγενομένους C. 16 τὸ τέγος cov] 
τοτοεγοσσου A; τὸ στέγος (om. gov) C; tectum domus tuae S. See below. A 


reads σου, not ov as sometimes stated. 


(καὶ ὅσοι) 8. ἐὰν A; av C. 
is common elsewhere; e.g. Gen. ix. 2, 
Deut. ii. 25, xi. 25. These passages 
illustrate not only the combination 
of φόβος and τρόμος, but the repeti- 
tion of the article before the latter. 
Cotelier observes that Clement seems 
to have had in his copy of the Lxx 
(Josh. ii. 9) the words καὶ κατέπτησ- 
σον πάντες οἱ κατοικοῦντες THY γῆν ap 
ὑμῶν, which are wanting in all the 
best Mss, though supplied in the 
Complutensian edition and repre- 
sented in the original Hebrew. The 
existing text of the LXx has only ém- 
πέπτωκεν yap ὁ φόβος ὑμῶν ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς. 
16. τέγος] The text of our au- 
thorities makes it difficult to decide 
whether we should read oréyos or 
téyos. The former occurs in the LXx 
only once, Epist. Jer. 8; the latter 
not at all in the LXx, but in Aquila 
Num. xxv. ὃ. In these passages 
they are used for ‘lupanar’; and 
τέγος especially has frequently. this 
bad sense elsewhere (eg. Ovac. 
Sibyll. iii. 186, v. 387). But the 


CLEM. II, 


17 ὅσοι γὰρ] AC; et omnes illi qui 


18 κρεμάσῃ] A; éxxpeudon CS. 


word is perhaps. not intended to bear 
the meaning here. 

18. προσέθεντο x.t.d.] ‘they went 
on to give her a sign’. The word is 
used in imitation of the LXx diction, 
where it very frequently renders 5p 
and thus reproduces the Hebraism 
‘to add to do,’ as e.g. Luke xix. 11 
προσθεῖσα εἶπεν, Acts xii. 3 προσέθετο 
συλλαβεῖν καὶ Πέτρον, and so commonly 
in the LXx. In this sense both the 
active and middle are used. Har- 
nack strongly objects to the transla- 
tion ‘praeterea ei signum dederunt’ 
and renders ‘praeterea mandaverunt 
ei ut signum daret,’ appa rently taking 
προστίθεσθαι ‘to enjoin’ or ‘impose.’ 
This seems an impossible rendering, 
and moreover in the narrative (Josh. 
ii. 19) the spies are represented as 
giving the sign of the scarlet thread 
to Rahab in the first instance. 

19. πρόδηλον κ-τ.λ.] So Justin Dial. 
111 (p. 338) τὸ σύμβολον τοῦ κοκκίνου 
σπαρτίου...τὸ σύμβολον τοῦ αἵματος 
τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἐδήλου, dV οὗ οἱ πάλαι 


4 


50 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


΄ ! fal / / a7 ~ ΄ 
τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ Κυρίου λύτρωσις ἔσται πᾶσιν τοῖς 


[xi 


/ \ / A ΄ 
πιστεύουσιν καὶ ἐλπίζουσιν ἐπὶ τὸν Θεόν. Ὁρᾶτε, 
> / 3 / / 3 \ / > a 
ἀγαπητοὶ, οὐ μόνον πίστις ἄλλα προφητεία ἐν TH 

ἐ 

\ , 
γυναικὶ γέγονεν. 

/ 53 > / 
XII. Ταπεινοφρονήσωμεν οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ἀποθέμε- 5 


΄σ > / \ , \ > / \ 
νοι πασαν ἀλαζονείαν καὶ τύφος καὶ αφροσυνην και 


1 τοῦ Κυρίου] AC; τοῦ χριστοῦ S (see the passage of Justin in the lower note). 


2 καὶ ἐλπίζουσιν AC; om. 8. 


πόρνοι καὶ ἄδικοι ἐκ πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν 
σώζονται κιτιλ., perhaps getting the 
idea from this passage. Irenzeus (iv. 
20. 12) copies Justin, ‘Raab for- 
nicaria conservata est cum universa 
domo sua, fide signi coccini etc.’ 
See also Origen Juz Fes. Hom. 
iii. § 5 (1. p. 405), vi § 4 (11. p. 411), 
In Matth. Comm. Ser. 125 (111. p. 
919). From this time forward it 
becomes a common type with the 
fathers. Barnabas (§ 7) similarly ex- 
plains the scarlet wool of the scape- 
goat (see the note there). Compare 
also Heb. ix. 19, which may have 
suggested this application to Cle- 
ment. 

The word πρόδηλος occurs twice be- 
sides in Clement ὃ 11 πρόδηλον ποιήσας 
ὁ δεσπότης ὅτι (the same construction 
which we have in Heb. xii. 14 πρόδη- 
λον ὅτι ἐξ Ἰούδα κ.τ.λ.), ὃ 40 προδήλων 
οὖν ἡμῖν ὄντων τούτων. It may be a 
question in many passages whether 
the preposition denotes Priority in 
time or distinctness. In Demosth. 
de Cor. 293 εἰ μὲν yap ἦν σοι πρόδηλα 
τὰ μέλλοντα... «τότ᾽ ἔδει προλέγειν, εἰ δὲ 
μὴ προήδεις κιτιλ., 2b. 199 εἰ γὰρ ἦν 
ἅπασι πρόδηλα τὰ μέλλοντα γενήσε- 
σθαι καὶ προήδεσαν ἅπαντες καὶ σὺ 
προύλεγες. On the other hand πρόδη- 
Xos frequently signifies ‘plain,’ ‘mani- 
fest,’ ‘famous,’ ‘illustrious,’ and it is 
explained by προφανής in the Greek 
lexicographers, 


3 οὐ] A; ὅτι οὐ CS. 


ἀλλὰ] A; add. καὶ 


3. ἀλλὰ προφητεία] So Origen zz 
Fes. Hom. iii. § 4 (11. p. 403) ‘Sed et 
ista meretrix quae eos suscepit ex 
meretrice efficitur jam propheta etc.’ 

4. γέγονεν] The perfect tense yéyo- 
vev, ‘is found, must unquestionably be 
the right reading here; comp. 1 Tim. 
ii. 14 ἡ δὲ γυνὴ ἐξαπατηθεῖσα ἐν παρα- 
βάσει γέγονεν, where, as here, the 
tense denotes the permanence of the 
record and the example. See also 
Gal. iii. 18 τῷ δὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ δὲ ἐπαγγε- 
Alas κεχάρισται ὁ Θεός, iv. 23 ὁ ἐκ τῆς 
παιδίσκης κατὰ σάρκα γεγέννηται, where 
the explanation of the perfect is the 
same. So too frequently in the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, e.g. vii. 6 
δεδεκάτωκεν, xi. 28 πεποίηκεν. 

XIII. ‘Let us therefore be hum- 
ble, and lay aside anger and pride. 
The Holy Spirit condemns all self- 
exaltation. Let us call to mind the 
words in which the Lord Jesus com- 
mends a gentle and forgiving spirit. 
The promise of grace is held out to 
patient forbearance.’ 

5. ἀποθέμενοι κιτλ}] So § 57 
μάθετε ὑποτάσσεσθαι ἀποθέμενοι τὴν 
ἀλάζονα καὶ ὑπερήφανον τῆς γλώσσης 
ὑμῶν αὐθάδειαν. Comp. Heb. xii. 1 
ὄγκον ἀποθέμενοι πάντα, James i. 21, I 
Pet. ii. 1. 

6. τύφος] A neuter form like ἔλεος, 
(ros, πλοῦτος, etc., for which see 
Winer § ix. p. 78 and Jacobson’s 
note on ζῆλος above § 4. For an ex- 





xu] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


51 


ὀργάς, καὶ ποιήσωμεν TO γεγραμμένον" λέγει yap TO 
πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον" MH kayyacO@ ὃ copdc ἐν TH οοφίὰ Δ τοῦ, 
μηλὲ ὁ icyypdc ἐν TH icyyi δύτοῦ μηδὲ ὁ πλούγοιος ἐν τῷ 
πλούτῳ aYTOY, AAN ἢ ὁ καλγχώμενος ἐν Κγρίῳ KayydcOw, τοῦ 
ἐκζητεῖν AYTON KAl ποιεῖν κρίμὰ Kal AIKAIOCYNHN® μάλιστα 


μεμνημένοι τῶν λόγων τοῦ Κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ, οὗς ἐλάλησεν 


CS. 
p- 126. 


4 γέγονεν] A; ἐγενήθη C; dub. S. See the lower note and comp. 1. 
6 ἀλαζονείαν] C; αλαΐζονιαν A, 


τύφος] A; τύφον C, 


10 ἀλλ᾽ 4 ὁ] A; ἀλλ᾽ ὁ C, and so perhaps S. 


ample of ridos Jacobson here quotes 
Conc. Ephes. Can. 8 (Routh Script. 
Eccl. Opusc. p. 395). As the vis long 
in the older writers but short in the 
more recent (e.g. Greg. Naz. II. pp. 
490 v. 44, 880 v. 45, ed. Caillau), I have 
accentuated it according to this later 
usage; see L. Dindorfin Steph. Thes. 
s.v. and compare the analogy of στῦ- 
hos, στύλος, Galatians ii. 9. 

8. Μὴ καυχάσθω κ.τ.λ.] This pas- 
sage is taken from 1 Sam. ii. 10, or from 
Jer. ix. 23, 24, or from both combined. 
The editors have overlooked the first 
of these passages, quoting only the 
second, though in several points Cle- 
ment’s language more closely resem- 
bles the first. The latter part in 
I Sam. ii. 10 runs ἀλλ᾽ ἢ ἐν τούτῳ 
καυχάσθω ὁ καυχώμενος συνιεῖν καὶ 
γινώσκειν τὸν Κύριον καὶ ποιεῖν κρίμα 
καὶ δικαιοσύνην ἐν μέσῳ τῆς γῆς; while 
the corresponding passage in Jere- 
miah diverges still more from Cle- 
ment’s quotation. On the other hand 
S. Paul quotes twice (1 Cor. i. 31 


᾿ καθὼς γέγραπται, 2 Cor. x. 17) 6 καυχώ- 


μενος ἐν Κυρίῳ καυχάσθω. The resem- 


_ blance of Clement’s language to 5. 
_ Paul may be explained in two ways ; 
either (1) S. Paul does not quote lite- 


rally but gives the sense of one or 


_ other passage (1 Sam. ii. 10 or Jer. 
ix. 2354); and Clement, writing after- 


if 





wards, unconsciously combines and 
confuses S. Paul’s quotation with the 


original text; or (2) A recension of 
the text of Jeremiah (or Samuel) was 
in circulation in the first century 
which contained the exact words 6 
καυχώμενος ἐν Κυρίῳ καυχάσθω. The 
former is the more probable hypo- 
thesis. Iren. iv. 17. 3 quotes Jer. ix. 
24 as it stands in our texts. In 
neither passage does the Hebrew 
aid in solving the difficulty. In 1 Sam. 
ii. 10 it is much shorter than and quite 
different from the Lxx. Lucifer 2720 
Athan. ii. 2 (Hartel, p. 148) quotes 
it ‘non glorietur sapiens in sua sa- 
pientia nec glorietur dives in divitiis 
suis, sed in hoc glorietur qui gloriatur, 
inquirere me et scire in Dominum 
gloriari, quia ego sum Dominus qui 
facio misericordiam et judicium et 
justitiam super terram.’ As Cotelier 
remarks, he seems to have read ἐκζη- 
τεῖν with Clement, for he has ‘in- 
quirere’ three times in this context, 
but the coincidence may be acci- 
dental. On the other hand Antioch. 
Palzst. Hom. xliii (Bibl. Vet. Patr. 
p. 1097, Paris 1624) quotes directly 
from 1 Sam. ii. 10, and betrays no 
connexion with Clement’s language. 

12. μεμνημένοι κιτ.λ.] Comp. Acts 
XX. 35 μνημονεύειν τῶν λόγων τοῦ Κυρίου 
Ἰησοῦ, ὅτι εἶπεν κατιλ. See above ὃ 2 
ἥδιον λαμβάνοντες x.r.A. (with the note), 
where Clement’s language reflects 
the context of this quotation. 


4—2 


52 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [XIII 


διδάσκων ἐπιείκειαν καὶ μακροθυμίαν: οὕτως yap εἶπεν" 
Ἐλεᾶτε ἵνὰ ἐλεηθῆτε, ἀφίετε ἵνὰ ἀφεθῇ ὑμῖν" ὧς ποιεῖτε, 
οὕτω ποιηθήρσετδι ὑμῖν: ὧς δίδοτε, οὕτως δοθήοετδι YMIN* 
ὡς κρίνετε, οὕτως κριθήσεοθε' WC XPHCTEYECHE, οὕτως XPH- 
cTeyOHceTal ὑμῖν" ᾧ μέτρῳ μετρεῖτε ἐν δὐτῷ METPHOHCE- 
rar ὑμῖν. Ταύτῃ τῆ ἐντολῆ καὶ τοῖς παραγγέλμασιν 
τούτοις στηρίξωμεν ἑαυτοὺς εἰς τὸ πορεύεσθαι ὑπηκόους 
ὄντας τοῖς ἀγιοπρεπέσι λόγοις αὐτοῦ, ταπεινοῴρο- 


1 ἐπιείκειαν) επιεικιαν A. οὕτως] Ο; ««τωσ A. 2 ᾿Ἐλεᾶτε] A; 
ἐλεεῖτε C, ἀφίετε] A; ἄφετε C. 3 οὕτως] C, and in all the other 
places in this sentence where it occurs; so too A, except in the first, where it has 


ουτω. 4 κρίνετε] κρινεται A. 


πορεύεσθαι] πορεύεσθε C. 


2. Ἐλεᾶτε κιτ.λ.] The same saying 
which is recorded in Matt. vii. 1, 2, 
Luke vi. 36—38, to which should be 
added Matt. v. 7 μακάριοι of ἐλεήμονες 
ὅτι αὐτοὶ ἐλεηθήσονται, Vi. 14 ἐὰν γὰρ 
ἀφῆτε τοῖς ἀνθρώποις κ-ιτιλ., Luke vi. 
31 Καθὼς θέλετε ἵνα ποιῶσιν «k.T.d. 
(comp. Mark xi. 25). As Clement’s 
quotations are often very loose, we 
need not go beyond the Canonical 
Gospels for the source of this pas- 
sage. The resemblance tothe original 
is much closer here, than it is for 
instance in his account of Rahab 
above, ὃ 12. The hypothesis there- 
fore, that Clement derived the saying 
from oral tradition or from some 
lost Gospel, isnot needed. Polycarp 
indeed (PAz/. 2) in much the same 
words quotes our Lord as saying 
ἀφίετε καὶ ἀφεθήσεται ὑμῖν, ἐλεεῖτε wa 
ἐλεηθῆτε, but it can hardly be doubted 
from his manner of introducing the 
quotation (μνημονεύοντες ὧν εἶπεν ὁ 
Κύριος διδάσκων), that he had this 
passage of Clement in his mind 
and does not quote independently. 
See also Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 18 
(p. 476) ἐλεᾶτε, φησὶν ὁ Κύριος x.7.A., 


χρηστεύεσθε] xpnoreverOu A. 
μέτρῳ... μετρηθήσεται ὑμῖν] here, AS Clem; before ws κρίνετε κιτ.λ., Ὁ. ἐν 
αὐτῷ] S; evavrn A; οὕτως C; om. Clem. 
10 πραὺν] A; πρᾶον C. 


5 ᾧ 


ἡ στηρίξωμεν] A; στηρίζωμεν C. 
τὰ λόγια] A 


where it is quoted almost exactly as 
here, except that ἐν αὐτῷ is omitted. 
He betrays no misgiving that he is 
not quoting directly from the Gospel, 
when evidently he has taken the 
words from his namesake the Roman 
Clement. Comp. AZost. Const. ii. 21, 
Ps-Ign. Tradl. 8. 

On the form ἐλεᾶν (for ἐλεεῖν) see 
Winer § xv p. 97 sq, A. Buttmann 
p. 50; comp. Clem. Hom. xviii. 6. 
Previous editors needlessly read ἐλε- 
εἴτε here. 

4. ὡς χρηστεύεσθε] The corre- 
sponding words in S. Luke (vi. 36) 
are γίνεσθεοἰκτίρμονες. In Justin Dial. 
96 and Afol. i. 15 they are quoted 
γίνεσθε δὲ χρηστοὶ καὶ oixrippoves, and 
in Clem. Hom. iii. 57 γίνεσθε ἀγαθοὶ 
καὶ oixrippoves. Theverbypnorever Oat 
occurs I Cor. xiii. 4. 

5. ᾧ μέτρῳ k.t.d.] Quoted also in- 
directly Clem. Hom. xviii. 16 6 μέτρῳ 
ἐμέτρησαν, μετρηθῇ αὐτοῖς τῷ ἴσῳ. See 
Mark iv. 24, besides the passages 
already quoted from the other Evan- 
gelists. 

8. ἁγιοπρεπέσι] Compare Polyc. 
Phil. 1. This is apparently the earli- 






































xiv] 
v4 


«ες Ul 


θεῖν. 


τοὺς λόγους C (with Lxx); dub. 85. 
21. 12 ἡμᾶς] AS; ὑμᾶς C. 
CS. ἀλαζονείᾳ] αλαΐζονια A. 





oes] στασισ A. 


est passage in which the word occurs. 
Suicer gives it a place ‘quia a lexi- 
_ cographis omissa,’ but does not quote 
- either of these passages in the Apo- 
stolic fathers. 

9. Ἐπὶ τίνα κιτιλ.] A quotation from 
the Lxx of Is. lxvi. 2 with slight and 
unimportant variations. For a dis- 
tinction between mpavs and ἡσύχιος 
see Bengel on 1 Pet. iii. 4 (where 
both words occur). Comp. also 

Hatch Biblical Greek p. 73 sq. 
_ XIV. ‘We ought to obey God 
_ rather than man. If we follow men, 
_ we shall plunge ourselves into strife 
_ and peril; if we follow God, we 
_ Shall be gentle and loving. The 

_ Scriptures teach us, that the guileless 
and meek shall inherit the earth; 
_ but that the proud and insolent shall 
be blotted out.’ 
It. Δίκαιον κιτ.λ.] This passage as 
far as καλῶς ἔχοντος is quoted in 
_ Nicon the Monk, in an extract given 
_ by Cotelier from the Paris Mss Reg. 
_ 2418, 2423, 2424. He strings together 
_ with this passage quotations from §§ 
15, 46, of this epistle, and § 3 of the 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 53 


vouvtes. φησὶν yap ὁ ἅγιος Novos’ Ἐπὶ tina ἐπιβλέψω, 
10 ἀλλ᾽ ἢ ἐπὶ τὸν TIPAYN KAl HCYYION KAl TPEMONTA MOY τὰ λόγιδ; 
XIV. δίκαιον οὖν καὶ ὅσιον, ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί, ὑπη- 

KOous ἡμᾶς μᾶλλον γενέσθαι τῷ Θεῷ ἢ τοῖς ἐν ἀλαζονείᾳ 
καὶ ἀκαταστασίᾳ μυσεροῦ ζήλους ἀρχηγοῖς ἐξακολου- 
βλάβην γὰρ οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν, μᾶλλον δὲ κίν- 
15 δυνον ὑποίσομεν μέγαν, ἐὰν ῥιψοκινδύνως ἐπιδῶμεν ἑαυ- 
τοὺς τοῖς θελήμασιν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, οἵτινες ἐξακοντί- 
ζουσιν εἰς ἔριν καὶ στάσεις εἰς τὸ ἀπαλλοτριῶσαι ἡμᾶς 


11 ὅσιον] AC; θεῖον S. See also 88 2, 
γενέσθαι τῷ Θεῷ] A; τῷ θεῷ γενέσθαι 
13 ζήλου:] A; ξήλου C. 17 ἔριν 


A; pes S (where the plural depends merely on vib, and would be suggested by 
the plural of the following word); αἱρέσεις C Nicon. See above, I. p. 125. 
els To] AC; τοῦ Nicon. 


στά- 


Second. See the several references. 
ὑπηκόους «.t.A.] For the stress laid 

by Clement on the duty of ὑπακοή, 

see §§ 7, 9, 10, 13, 14, 19, 58, 60, 63. 

13. μυσεροῦ] The form μυσερὸς 
occurs again below § 30; and in both 
places the editors have altered it to 
μυσαρός. This is not necessary: see 
Lobeck Pathol. p. 276. In Lev. xviii. 
23 it is so written in A; and simi- 
larly in Mark i. 42 ἐκαθερίσθη is read 
in the best MSs: see Tischendorf on 
Acts x. 15 and proleg. p. 1 (ed. 7), 
Winer § v. p. 56. See also the form 
μιερὰν (for μιαρὰν) in Boeckh C. J. G. 
no. 3588. So likewise the play on 
ἱερεύς, μιερεύς, in Afost. Const. ii. 28. 
(C writes μυσαράν for μυσεράν in ὃ 30, 
but not so here). 

ἀρχηγοῖς] Comp. ὃ 51 ἀρχηγοὶ τῆς 
στάσεως. 

15. ῥιψοκινδύνως] ‘in a foolhardy 
spirit’; Appian Civ. i. 103. It does 
not occur in the Lxx or New Testa- 
ment. 

16. ἐξακοντίζουσιν] The word here 
appears to mean, ‘launch out.’ Gene- 
rally, when it occurs metaphorically, 


54 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[xiv 


τοῦ καλῶς ἔχοντος. χρηστευσώμεθα αὐτοῖς κατὰ τὴν 
εὐσπλαγχνίαν καὶ γλυκύτητα τοῦ ποιήσαντος ἡμάς. 
γέγραπται yap? Xpuctoi ἔοσοντδι οἰκήτορες γῆς, Akakol 
λὲ γπολειφθήοοντδι ἐπ᾽ AaYTAC’ οἱ δὲ TAPANOMOYNTEC ἐξο- 
λεθρεγθήοσοντδι AT Δὐτῆσ' καὶ πάλιν λέγει" Εἶδον ἀςεθηῆ 
ὑπερυψούμενον KAl @TAIPOMENON ὧς TAC κέδρογο τοῦ AiBa- 


NOY, KAl TAPAAGON καὶ ἰδοὺ οὐκ HN, Kal €ZEZHTHCA TON τόπον 
, 


1 αὐτοῖς] A; ἑαυτοῖς CS. 


θρευθήσονται C. See the lower note. 


aceBnv A; τὸν ἀσεβῆ C; there is the same ν. ]. in the LxXx. 
ἡ τὸν τόπον... εὗρον] AC; αὐτὸν καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθη ὁ τόπος 
9 ἐνκατάλειμμα] ενκαταλιμμα A ; ἐγκατάλλειμμα 


αἰπερομενον A. 
αὐτοῦ (with the Lxx) 8. 


Cc. το κολληθῶμεν] AC; ἀκολουθήσωμεν Nicon. 


λόγους Or γλώσσας would be under- 
stood, if not expressed. 

I. αὐτοῖς] ‘towards them, the 
leaders of the schism ; comp. 2 Thess. 
iii, 15 μὴ ὡς ἐχθρὸν ἡγεῖσθε κιτιλ. This 
must be done ‘in imitation of the com- 
passion of the Creator Himself’ (κατὰ 
τὴν εὐσπλαγχνίαν K.T.A.); comp. Matt. 
v. 44. Others substitute αὑτοῖς = ἀλλή- 
λοις, but this is not so good. More- 
over, as the contracted form αὑτοῦ 
etc., for ἑαυτοῦ etc., seems never to 
occur in the New Testament, it is a 
question whether Clement would have 
used it : see the note on αὐτῶν ὃ 12. 

2. εὐσπλαγχνίαν κιτ.λ.] The same 
combination occurs in Theoph. ad 
Autol. ii. 14 τὴν γλυκύτητα καὶ εὐ- 
σπλαγχνίαν καὶ δικαιοσύνην κιτιλ. quoted 
by Harnack. 

3. χρηστοὶ «.1.A.] From Prov. ii. 
21,22. The first part of the quota- 
tion xpyorol...ér αὐτῆς is found in A 
with a very slight variation (and par- 
tially inS), but B omits the words ; the 
second runs in all the best Mss of the 
LXX, ὁδοὶ [δὲ] ἀσεβῶν ἐκ γῆς ὀλοῦνται, οἱ 
δὲ παράνομοι ἐξωσθήσονται ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς. In 
quoting the latter part Clement seems 
to be confusing it with Ps. xxxvii. 39 
of δὲ παράνομοι ἐξολοθρευθήσονται ἐπὶ 


2 γλυκύτητα] γλυκήτητα (. 
dm’ αὐτῆς] AC; om. S (by homceoteleuton). 


4 οἱ δὲ... 

ἐξολεθρευθήσονται] A; εξολο- 
5 Εἶδον] ov A. ἀσεβῆ] 
6 ἐπαιρόμενον 


12 Οὗτος ὁ λαὸς] 


ro αὖτο, which occurs in the context 
of his next quotation. 

4. ἐξολεθρευθήσονται] On the vary- 
ing forms ὀλεθρεύειν and ὀλοθρεύειν 
see Tischendorf ov. Test. p. xlix. 
Our chief Ms for the most part writes 
the word with an ε. 

5. Εἶδον ἀσεβῆ x.r.A.] From the 
Lxx of Ps. xxxvii. 36—38 with unim- 
portant variations. The Lxx has καὶ 
ἐζήτησα αὐτὸν καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθη ὁ τόπος 
avrov. In the Hebrew there is 
nothing corresponding to ὁ τόπος 
avrov. Without hinting that he is 
quoting from a previous writer, Cle- 
ment of Alexandria, Strom. iv. 6 (p. 
577), strings together these same six 
quotations, beginning with Ps. xxxvii. 
36 sq and ending with Ps. xii. 4 sq 
(παρρησιάσομαι ἐν αὐτῷ). In compar- 
ing the two, we observe of the Alex- 
andrian Clement, that (1) In his first 
passage he restores the text of the 
LXX, and quotes καὶ ἐζήτησα αὐτὸν 
κιτιλ. ; (2) For the most part he follows 
Clement of Rome, e.g. in the remark- 
able omission noted below (on ἄλαλα 
γενηθήτω x.t.d.); (3) He inserts be- — 
tween the quotations an explanatory © 
word or sentence of his own; (4) He 
ends this string of quotations with the ~ 





15 PONTO. 





xv] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


55 


AYTOY καὶ OYY εὗρον. φύήλδοςε sKAKIAN Kal ἴδε EYOYTHTA, ὅτι 


ECTIN ENKATAAEIMMA ἀνθρώπῳ εἰρηνικῷ. 

XV. Τοίνυν κολληθώμεν τοῖς μετ᾽ εὐσεβείας εἰρη- 
νεύουσιν, καὶ μὴ τοῖς μεθ᾽ ὑποκρίσεως βουλομένοις εἰρή- 
νην. λέγει γάρ που Οὗτος ὁ Aadc τοῖς χείλεοίν Me τιμᾷ, 


ε ͵ 2h A 3, > a \ , 
ἢ δὲ KapAia aYT@N πόρρω ἄπεοτιν AT ἐμοῦ. καὶ παλιν" 
Τῷ οτόμδτι ἀὐτῶν eYAorofcan, TH δὲ KAPAIA AYT@N KATH- 


A and apparently S; ὁ λαὸς οὗτος C. 

13 ἄπεστιν] A Clem; ἀπέχει C Nicon; dub. S. 
your C; εὐλογοῦσι Clem. See I. p. 127. 
κατηρῶντο] C (with Lxx); καταρῶνται Clem; Tischendorf says of the 


the Lxx. 


\ / / , a ’ 
Kat παλιν ever’ “HrdttHcan δὐτὸν τῷ οτόμδτι 


τοῖς χείλεσιν] AS; τῷ στόματι C. 
14 εὐλογοῦσαν] A; εὐλό- 
τῇ δὲ] AC Clem; καὶ τῇ S, with 


reading of A “κατήρουντο certum est,’ but Wright reads it κατηρωντο. I looked 


several times and could not feel certain. 


On such forms as κατήρουντο see 


Tischendorf Nov. Test. prol. p. lvii (ed. 7). 


very words of the Roman Clement, 
ταπεινοφρονούντων γὰρ ... τὸ ποίμνιον 
αὐτοῦ, without any indication that he 
is citing from another. 

_ 9. ἐνκατάλειμμα] ‘a remnant, i.e. 
a family or a memorial of some 
kind, as in ver. 39 ra ἐγκαταλείμματα 
τῶν ἀσεβῶν ἐξολοθρεύσεται: comp. Ps. 
xxxiv. 16 τοῦ ἐξολοθρεῦσαι ἐκ γῆς τὸ 
μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν, quoted by Clement 
below, § 22. 

XV. ‘Letus then attach ourselves 
to the guileless and peaceful; but 
avoid hypocrites who make a show 
of peace. Against such the denun- 
ciations of Scripture are frequent and 
severe; against the idle profession of 
God’s service—against the deceitful 
and proud lips.’ 

12. Οὗτος ὁ λαὸς] From Is. xxix. 13, 
which is quoted also Matt. xv. 8, 
Mark vii. 6. Clement follows the 
Evangelists rather than the original 
text. For the opening words of the 
original, ἐγγίζει μοι ὁ λαὸς οὗτος ἐν 
τῷ στόματι αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐν τοῖς χείλεσιν 
αὐτῶν τιμῶσίν pe, they give the sen- 
tence in a compressed form οὗτος ὁ 
λαὸς (ὁ λαὸς οὗτος Matt.) τοῖς χείλεσίν 


με τιμᾷ as here. Both Evangelists 
have ἀπέχει with the Lxx, where 
Clement has ἄπεστιν. Clem. Alex. 
follows our Clement, modifying the 
form however to suit his context. In 
Clem. Rom. ii. § 3 it is quoted exactly 
as here, except that ὁ λαὸς οὗτος stands 
for οὗτος 6 λαός. Justin quotes the 
Lxx, Dial. 78 (p. 305). For various 
readings in the MSS of the LxxX and 
quotations from it see Hatch Bibiical 
Greek p. 177 54. 

14. Τῷ στόματι κιτ.λ.] From Lxx 
Ps. lxii. 4, with unimportant varia- 
tions. 

evAoyovcay| for εὐλόγουν. See 
Sturz Dial. Mac. p. 58, and the refer- 
ences in Winer § xiii. p. 89. In the 
Lxx here SB have εὐλογοῦσαν. Clem. 
Alex. (edd.) quotes εὐλογοῦσι. 

15. Ἠγάπησαν κ-ιτ.λ.} From Ps, 
Ixxviii. 36, 37 almost word for word. 
’EmioréOnoay is here a translation of 
NONI, ‘were stedfast.’ Though ἠγά- 
πησαν is read by the principal Mss 
(SB) of the Lxx, the original reading 
was probably ἠπάτησαν, as this corre- 
sponds with the Hebrew. See also 
Hatch Biblical Greek p. 204 sq. 


56 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xv 


AYT@N KAI TH FAMCCH δγτῶν EpEeyCAaNTO δὐτόν, ἡ δὲ KaPAIa 
AYTO@N οὐκ εὐθεῖ MET aYTOY, οὐδὲ ἐπιοτώθηοσοὰν EN TH 
διδθήκῃ ayToy. διὰ τοῦτο "AAaAa γενηθήτω TA χείλη TA 
λόλιὰ τὰ λάλοῖντὰ KATA τοῦ Alkaloy ἀνομίδν" καὶ πάλιν 
Ἐξολεθρεύήολι Kypioc manta τὰ χείλη τὰ δόλιὰ, FADCCAN 
MEPAAOPHMONA, TOYC εἰπόντας, τὴν γλῶοοὰδν ἡμῶν μεγὰάλύ- 
νῶμεν, τὰ χείλη ἡμῶν TAP’ ἡμῖν ἐοτιν" TIC ἡμῶν κύριός 
EcTIN; ἀπὸ TAC τἀλδιπωρίὰς τῶν πτωχῶν Kal ἀπὸ τοῦ 


1 ἐψεύσαντο] AS Clem; ἔψεξαν C. 3 διὰ τοῦτο] CS Clem; om. A. 


γενηθήτω] A Clem; γενηθείη C. 
Clem by homceoteleuton. 


4 τὰ λαλοῦντα...τὰ δόλια] S; om. AC 


5 γλῶσσαν μεγαλορήμονα τοὺς elmévras] AS; καὶ 


λῶσσαν μεγαλορήμονα τοὺς εἰπόντας Clem; γλῶσσα μεγαλορήμων" καὶ πάλιν" Tods 
εἰπόντας C. The scribe thus patches up by insertion and alteration the text which 
the previous omission had dislocated, so that it may run grammatically and make 


sense; see I. p. 143. 


3. διὰ τοῦτο] This should not be 
treated as part of the quotation, since 
it is not found in any of the passages 
of the Psalms which are here strung 
together. The Alexandrian Clement 
however (p. 578), quoting from his 
Roman namesake, may perhaps have 
regarded it as such. 

ἤλλαλα κιτ.λ.} Iventuretotranscribe 
(within brackets) the note in my first 
edition; from which it will be seen 
how far I had divined the reading of 
the text, as since confirmed by the 
Syriac version. 

[The words ἄλαλα γενηθήτω τὰ χείλη 
τὰ δόλια are taken from the Lxx, Ps. 
xxxi. 19. Those which follow are from 
the LXx Ps. xii. 3—6 ἐξολοθρεύσαι 
Κύριος πάντα τὰ χείλη τὰ δόλια [καὶ] 
γλῶσσαν μεγαλορήμονα τοὺς εἰπόντας 
κιτιλ. Since in the quotation of Cle- 
ment, as it stands in the MS, γλῶσσαν 
μεγαλορήμονα has no government, it 
seems Clear that the transcriber’s eye 
has passed from one τὰ χείλη τὰ δόλια 
to the other and omitted the intro- 
ductory words of the second quota- 
tion. I have therefore inserted the 
words ἐξολεθρεύσαι Κύριος πάντα τὰ 


6 μεγαλύνωμεν] A; μεγαλυνοῦμεν C Clem; dub. 5. 


χείλη τὰ SdAca. Wotton and others 
detected the omission but made the 
insertion in the form καὶ Ἐξ. K. π. 
τι x. ta δόλια καὶ This does not 
explain the scribe’s error. The καὶ 
before γλῶσσαν μεγαλορήμονα, though 
found in AB, is marked as to be 
erased in S and is omitted in many 
MSS in Holmes and Parsons; and in 
our Clement’s text of the LXx it must 
have been wanting. The Hebrew omits 
the conjunction in the corresponding 
place. The existing omission in the 
text of the Roman Clement seems to 
be as old as the end of the second 
century, for his Alexandrian name- 
sake (see the note on εἶδον ἀσεβῆ 
κιτιλ. above) gives the passage, ἄλαλα 
γενηθήτω πάντα τὰ χείλη τὰ δόλια καὶ 
γλῶσσαν μεγαλορήμονα κ.τ.λ.; inserting 
καὶ before γλῶσσαν, though quoting 
it in the main as it is quoted here. 
Orwehavethealternative of supposing 
that a transcriber of the Alexandrian 
Clement has independently made a 
similar omission to the transcriber 
of the Roman. For the form peyadopy- 
μονα see the note on ἐξερίζωσεν ὃ 6.] 
7. map ἡμῖν] ‘in our Power, our 





Io 


15 





xvi] 


CTENAPMOY τῶν TIENHT@N NYN ANACTHCOMAI, 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


57 


λέγει Kypioc: 


GHCOMAI EN CWTHPIM, TAPPHCIACOMAI EN AYTO. 


XVI. 


> / \ / > ~ 
οὐκ εἐπαιρομένων ἐπὶ τὸ ποίμνιον αὐτοῦ. 


Ταπεινοφρονούντων γάρ ἐστιν ὁ Χριστός, 


τὸ σκῆπτρον 


[τῆς μεγαλωσύνης] τοῦ Θεοῦ, ὁ Κύριος [ἡμῶν] Χριστὸς 


9 ~ 3 7 5] / > , 29\ ς 
Ιησοῦς, οὐκ ἦλθεν ἐν κόμπῳ ἀλαζονείας οὐδὲ ὑπερηφα- 


: ‘ i \ \ 
vias, kaimrep δυνάμενος, ἀλλὰ ταπεινοφρονῶν, καθὼς τὸ 


7 παρ᾽ ἡμῖν] A Clem; παρ᾽ ἡμῶν CS. 
στήσομαι] αναστησομεν Α. 


λωσύνης] AC; om. S Hieron. 


χριστὸς CS Hieron. 
AC [Hieron]; add. ἦλθεν S. 


own. It represents the Hebrew 1JNN. 
The dative is correctly read also by 
Clem. Alex. and some Mss of the 
Lxx ; but SAB have παρ᾽ ἡμῶν. 

9. ἀναστήσομαι] The reading of 
A avaornoopey has arisen from ava- 
στησομε, Whence avacrnaopé: comp. 
αιχμαλωσιᾷ (αἰχμαλωσίαν) for αἰχμαλω- 
ova (αἰχμαλωσίᾳ) in ii. ὃ 6. So too 
§ 41 συνειδησιν (συνειδηστ) for συνει- 
δησι--: συνειδήσει. 

10. θήσομαι κ-.τιλ.}] “17 will place 
him in safety, I will deal boldly by 
him. The Hebrew of the last clause 
is wholly different from the LXx. 

XVI. ‘Christ is the friend of the 
lowly; He Himself is our great pat- 
tern of humility. This is the leading 
feature in the portrait which the evan- 
gelic prophet has drawn of the lamb 
led to the slaughter. This too is 
declared by the lips of the Psalmist. 
If then He our Lord was so lowly, 
what ought we His servants to be?’ 

12. οὐκ ἐπαιρομένων κ-τ.λ.] Comp. 
1 Pet. ν. 3, Acts xx. 29. The word 
ποίμνιον occurs again §§ 44, 54, 57. 

τὸ σκῆπτρον κιτ.λ.] The expression 
is apparently suggested by Heb. i. 8, 
where Ps. xlv. 6 ῥάβδος εὐθύτητος ἡ 
ῥάβδος τῆς βασιλείας σου is applied to 


8 ἀπὸ] A; om. CS Clem. 9 dva- 


10 ἐν σωτηρίῳ] Clem; evowrnpia A; NIPWDI (ἐν 
σωτηρίᾳ or ἐν σωτηρίῳ) S; om. C. The ss of the LXx vary. 
ἡμῶν] A; om. C Hieron; dub. S, for {1 is 
used equally for ὁ κύριος and ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν. 
14 ἀλαζονείας] αλαζονιασ A. 


13 τῆς μεγα- 
Χριστὸς Ἰησοὺς] A; ἰησοῦς 
15 ταπεινοφρονῶν] 


our Lord. Fell refers to the applica- 
tion of the same text made by Justin 
Dial. 63 (pp. 286 54) to show ὅτι καὶ 
προσκυνητός ἐστι καὶ Θεὸς καὶ Χριστός. 
Jerome zz Jsaz, 111. 13 (IV. p. 612) 
quotesthis passage of Clement, ‘Scep- 
trum Dei, Dominus Jesus Christus, 
non venit injactantia superbiae, quum 
possit omnia, sed in humilitate.’ This 
application of our Lord’s example 
bears a resemblance to Phil. ii. 5 sq 
and may be an echo of it. 

13. μεγαλωσύνη) The word is 
doubtful here, but occurs several 
times in Clement elsewhere, §§ 20, 
27, 36, 58, 61, 64, 65; and this fact is 
in its favour. 

14. ἐν κόμπῳ x.t.d.] Macar. Magn. 
Afpocr. iv. 2 (p. 159) πολὺς yap οὗτος 
τῆς ἀλαζονείας ὁ κόμπος. 

ἀλαζονείας κιτ.λ.] The adjectives ἀλα- 
(ev and ὑπερήφανος occur together, 
Rom. i. 30, 2 Tim. iii. 2. The one 
refers to the expression, the other to 
the thought; see the distinction in 
Trench WV. 7. Syn. § xxix. Ist ser. 

15. καίπερ δυνάμενος) This passage 
implies the pre-existence of Christ ; 
comp. Phil. ii. 6 sq ὃς ἐν μορφῇ Θεοῦ 
ὑπάρχων κιτιλ.; see the introduction 
I. p. 398 sq. 


58 THE EPISTLE OF 5, CLEMENT > [xv1 


φησὶν yap- 


Κύριε, Tic émicteycen TH AkOH ἡμῶν; καὶ ὁ Bpayi@n Κγρίου 


~ a J \ > ~ 3 / Ἂ 
πνευμὰ τὸ ἅγιον περὶ αὐτου ἐλαλησεν 


τίν! ἀπεκδλύφθη; ἀνηγγείλαμεν ἐνὰντίον AYTOY, ὧς πδιδίον, 
ὧς ῥίζὰ ἐν rH διψώομ' οὐκ ἔστιν εἶδος ἀὐτῷ, οὐδὲ δόξδ᾽ 


Kal εἴδομεν AYTON, Kal οὐκ εἶχεν εἶδος οὐδὲ KAAAOG, ἀλλὰ 5 


‘ 3 > a ” > a ι Φ a > , 
TO E1A0C AYTOY ATIMON, EKAEITION πὰρὰ τὸ εἶδος τῶν ANOPO- 


” > al bal \ , ‘ > ‘ , 
TION" ἄνθρωπος EN πληγῇ ὧν Kal πόνῳ Kal εἰλὼς φέρειν 


MAAAKIAN, ὅτι ἀπέοτραπτδὰι τὸ πρόσωπον ayTOY, HTIMACOH 


Kal οὐκ ἐλογίοθη. οὗτος τὰς AMapTiac ἡμῶν φέρει Kal περὶ 
ἡμῶν ὀλγνᾶτδι, Kal ἡμεῖς ἐλογιοάμεθὰ AYTON εἶνδι ἐν πόνῳ 
3 ἀνηγγείλαμεν] ανηγγιλαμεν Α. παιδίον] AS; πεδίον C. 4 εἶδος 
αὐτῷ] A (with Lxx); αὐτῷ εἶδος C; and so S, but the order cannot be pressed in 
this case. 5 κάλλος] AC; δόξαν S, but NMAIW is probably a copyist’s 
error for NI, the former word having occurred in the previous sentence. 


6 ἐκλεῖπον] εκλιπὸν A. 


2. Κύριε x.r-A.] A Messianic appli- 
cation is made of this 53rd chapter 
of Isaiah by S. Matthew viii. 17 (ver. 
4), by S. Mark xv. 28 (ver. 12), 
by S. Luke xxii. 37 (ver. 12), by 
S. John i. 29 (ver. 4, 7), xii. 38 (ver. 1), 
by Philip Acts viii. 32 sq (ver. 7, 8), 
by S. Paul Rom. x. 16 (ver. 1), and 
by S. Peter 1 Pet. ii. 23 sq (ver. 5, 
9). Barnabas also (δ 5) applies ver. 
5, 7,to our Lord; and Justin both in 
the Afology and in the Dialogue 
interprets this chapter so frequently: 
see esp. Afol. I. 50, 51 (p. 85 sq), 
Dial. 13 (p. 230 sq), in both which 
passages it is quoted in full. For Jew- 
ish Messianic interpretations of this 
chapter see Hengstenberg Chris¢ol. 
Il. p. 310 sq (Eng. trans.), Schéttgen 
Hor. Hebr. τι. p. 138 sq, and espe- 
cially Driver and Neubauer The jifty- 
third Chapter of Isaiah according to 
the Fewish Interpreters, Oxf. and 
Lond. 1877, with Pusey’s preface. 

Clement’s quotation for the most 
part follows the Lxx tolerably closely. 
The more important divergences 
from the LxXx are noticed below. 


τὸ εἶδος των ἀνθρώπων] AC; πάντας ἀνθρώπους 8. 


The LXx itself differs considerably 
from the Hebrew in many points. 
See also Hatch Biblical Greek p. 
178 sq, p. 201 sq, on the form of the 
early quotations from this passage 
of the Lxx. 

3. ἀνηγγείλαμεν κιτ.λ.)] The Lxx 
reading here is devoid of sense and 
must be corrupt, though the mss and 
early quotations all present ἀνηγγείλα- 
μεν. As this word corresponds to the 
Hebrew 5") (Aq. Theod. ἀναβήσεται, 
Symm. ἀνέβη), Is. Voss proposed 
ἀνετείλαμεν (see Grabe Diss. de Varits 
Vitiis LXX p. 38); but even this 
alteration is not enough, and we 
should require ἀνέτειλεν. The follow- 
ing meaning however seems gene- 
rally to have been attached to the 
words; ‘We—the preachers—an- 
nounced Him before the Lord; as 
a child is He, as a root etc.’ (see 
Eusebius and Jerome on the pas- 
sage); but Justin Déa/. 42 (p. 261) 
strangely explains ὡς παιδίον of the 
child-like submission of the Church 
to Christ. The interpretation of Ori- 
gen ad Rom. viii. § 6 (Iv. p. 627) 


coe 





xvi] 


‘ > “ ‘ > ’ 
Kal ΕΝ TAHTH KAI EN KAKOCEL]. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


59 


AYTOC δὲ ETPAYMATICOH διὰ 


TAC AMAPTIAC ἡμῶν KAl MEMAAAKICTAL AIA TAC ANOMIAC ἡμῶν. 


πδιλείὰ εἰρήνης ἡμῶν ἐπ᾽ AYTON' τῷ μώλωπι AYTOY ἡμεῖς 


iA@HMEN. 


ἂς ς , 3 , Pu a 
TTANTEC ὧς TPOBATA ETTAANHOHMEN, ANOPOTOC TH 


ὁλῷ δύτοῦ émAANHOH* Kal Κύριος πὰρέδωκεν AYTON ὑπὲρ 


τῶν ἁμδρτιῶν ἡμῶν. 


Kal aYTOc: διὰ τὸ κεκἀκῶοθδι οὐκ 


> U i , ε , > \ Η » ‘ ε 
ANOIFEL τὸ CTOMA’ ὧς TIPOBATON ἐπὶ οΦᾶγην ἤχθη, KAI WC 


ἀμνὸς ἐναντίον τοῦ KEIPANTOC ἄφωνος, οὕτως οὐκ ἀνοίγει 


τὸ CTOMA δΥ̓τοῦ. 


See the lower note for the LXx reading. 


in CS. See the lower note. 


13 παιδεία] radia A. 
ἁμαρτιῶν] AC; ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις S with the Lxx. See the lower note. 


ἐν TH TATIEINWCE! ἢ κρίοις δυτοῦ ἤρθη 


12 ἁμαρτίας, ἀνομίας] A; transposed 
15 ὑπὲρ τῶν 
19 ἐν 


τῇ ταπεινώσει] AC; add. ejus S, where the punctuation attaches it to the previous 


sentence. κρίσις] κρισεισ A. 


is not quite clear. The fathers of 
the fourth and fifth centuries gene- 
rally interpret ὡς ῥίζα ἐν γῇ διψώσῃ 
as referring to the miraculous con- 
ception. In the order ἐν. avr. os 
mad. Clement agrees with SA Justin 
Ρ. 230 (p. 85, 260 sq, ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ); 
and so the old Latin, e.g. Tertull. adv. 
Mare. iii. 17 (and elsewhere) ‘annun- 
tiavimus coram ipso velut puerulus 
etc.’: but B has ὡς rad. ἐν. αὖτ., the 
order of the Hebrew. 

6. mapa τὸ εἶδ. τ. dvOp.] The LXx 
S, Clem. Alex. p. 440, παρὰ πάντας (S 
corr. from παν) τοὺς υἱοὺς τῶν ἀνθρώ- 
mov; B, Justin p. 230, Tertull. adv. 
Mare. iii. 7, adv. Fud. 14, παρὰ τοὺς 
υἱοὺς τῶν ἀνθρώπων ; A, Tertull. adv. 
Mare. iii.17, παρὰ πάντας ἀνθρώπους ; 
Justin p. 85, Clem. Alex. p. 252, παρὰ 
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους. 

7. καὶ πόνῳ] Wanting in the Lxx. 
The words must have crept in from 
below, ἐν πόνῳ καὶ ἐν πληγῇ; either by 
a lapse of memory on Clement’s part 
or by an error in his copy of the Lxx 
or in the transcription of Clement’s 
own text. 

8. ἀπέστραπται) The original is 





WO! OID IND, ‘as hiding the face 
Srom him’ or ‘fromus. The LxXseem 
to have adopted the latter sense, 
though they have omitted 33019 ; ‘ Azs 
face ἐς turned away, i.e. as one 
ashamed or loathed ; comp. Lev. xiii. 
45. 

12. ἁμαρτίας, ἀνομίας] So B, Justinp. 
230; but SA, Barnab. § 5, Justin p. 
85, transpose the words, reading ἀνο- 
pias in the first clause and ἁμαρτίας 
in the second. 

14. ἄνθρωπος] ‘each man, distribu- 
tive; a Hebraism not uncommon in 
the LXx; and the use is somewhat 
similar in John ii. 25, 1 Cor. xi. 28. 

15. ὑπὲρ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν] The LXx has 
ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις, and 50 Justin pp. 86,230, 
Clem. Alex. p. 138; but Tertull. adv. 
Prax. 30 ‘pro delictis nostris.’ 

19. ἐν τῇ ταπεινώσει κ.τ.λ.] This pas- 
sage is also quoted from the LXx in 
Acts viii. 33 ἐν τῇ ταπεινώσει [αὐτοῦ] 
ἡ κρίσις αὐτοῦ ἤρθη, where the first 
αὐτοῦ should be omitted with the best 
Mss, so that S. Luke’s quotation ac- 
cords exactly with the Lxx. For the 
probable meaning of the Lxx here 
see the commentators on Acts Lec.; 


60 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xvI 


THN γενεὰν AYTOY Tic διηγήςετδι; ὅτι aipetal ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς 
H Ζωὴ δύτοῦ' ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνομιῶν τοῦ λδοῦ MOY ἥκει εἶς θἄνδ- 
TON. κἀὶ δώσω TOYC πονηροὴς ANTI τῆς τἀφῆς δὐτοῦ Kal 
TOYC πλογοίογο ἀντὶ TOY OANATOY ἀύτοῦ' ὅτι ANOMIAN OYK 
ἐποίησεν, οὐδὲ EYPEOH δόλος EN τῷ CTOMATI δύτοῦ. καὶ 
Kypioc BoyAeTal Ka@apical AYTON τῆς πληγῆς ἐὰν δῶτε περὶ 
AMAPTIAC, ἡ ψυχὴ ὑμῶν ὄψετδι σπέρμὰ MAKPOBION. Kal Κύριος 
BoyAetal ἀφελεῖν ἀπὸ τοῦ πόνου TAC ψγχῆς δγτοῦ, δεῖξδι 
AYT@ φῶς kal πλάοσδι TH ογνέσει, δικδιῶσδι δίκδιον εὖ δογ- 
A€EYONTA πολλοῖο' Kal τὰς AMAPTIAC AYT@N ἀὐτὸς ἀνοίςει. διὰ 


Ι τὴν γενεὰν] AC; καὶ τὴν γενεάν 8. 2 ἥκει] AC; ἤχθη S. See the 


lower note. 


and for patristic interpretations of 
γενεά, Suicer I. p. 744 s.v. The 
Hebrew is different. 

2. ἥκει] ἤχθη LXX and Tertull. adv. 
Fud. το; but ἥκει is read by Justin 
pp. 86, 230, though elsewhere he has 
ἤχθη p. 261 (MSS ἤχθην), comp. p. 
317 ὅτι ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνομιῶν τοῦ λαοῦ 
ἀχθήσεται εἰς θάνατον. As ἤχθη may 
easily have been introduced from 
ver. 7, ἥκει was perhaps the orig- 
inal reading of the LXx; and so it 
stands in some Μ55 in Holmes and 
Parsons. 

3. καὶ δώσω κ-τ.λ.] The Lxx clearly 
means that the wicked and the 
wealthy should die in requital for 
His death; as Justin Dial. 32 (p. 
249) ἀντὶ τοῦ θανάτου αὐτοῦ τοὺς πλου- 
σίους θανατωθήσεσθαι. Thus the refer- 
ence to the crucifixion of the thieves 
and the entombment in Joseph’s 
grave, which the original has sug- 
gested to later Christian writers, is 
rendered impossible in the Lxx. This 
application however is not made in 
the Gospels, where only ver. 12 ἐν 
τοῖς ἀνόμοις ἐλογίσθη is quoted in this 
connexion, nor (I believe) in any fa- 
ther of the second century nor even 


7 ὄψεται] evera A. 
The } which represents ἀπὸ before τοῦ πόνου is pointed as {{-Ξ μέν. 


8 τῆς ψυχῆς] AC; ἀπὸ τῆς ψυχῆς 8. 
12 τοῖς] 


in Tertullian or Origen. 

5. οὐδὲ εὑρέθη δόλος] So A in the 
LXX, but SB (corrected however in 
S by later hands) have simply οὐδὲ 
δόλον, following the Hebrew more 
closely. In 1 Pet. ii. 22 are the 
words ὃς ἁμαρτίαν οὐκ ἐποίησεν οὐδὲ 
εὑρέθη δόλος ἐν τῷ στόματι αὐτοῦ, though 
this is not given as a direct quotation 
and may have been intended merely 
as a paraphrase, like much of the 
context. But it is quoted by Justin 
also καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθη δόλος p. 230, and 
οὐδὲ εὑρέθη δόλος p. 86, though in a 
third passage he has οὐδὲ δόλον p. 330. 
And so likewise Tertull. adv. Fud. 
Io ‘nec dolus in ore ejus inventus 
est,’ Origen I. p. 91 C, Il. pp. 250 Ὁ, 
287 C, and Hippol. zz Psalm. 7 (p. 
191 Lagarde). The passage of S. 
Peter might have influenced the form 
of quotation and even the reading of 
the MSS in some cases: but the pas- 
sages where οὐδὲ εὑρέθη δόλος appears 
are so numerous, that we must sup- 
pose it to have been so read in some 
copies of the LxXxX at least as early as 
the first century. This reading is 
found in several Mss in Holmes and 
Parsons. 





xvi] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 61 


τοῦτο AYTOC KAHPONOMHCE! TOAAOYC Kal τῶν ἰοχγρῶν μεριεῖ 

CKYAd* ἀνθ᾽ GN TAPEADOH εἶς θάνατον ἢ ψυχὴ δύτοῦ Kal τοῖς 

> U > , ‘ > ‘ ς , a > ͵ \ 

ANOMOIC EAOLICOH® KAI AYTOC AMAPTIAC πολλῶν ANHNEPKEN Kal 
‘ ε ͵ a , \ “ 

λιὰ τὰς AMAPTIAC ἀὐτῶν πὰρεδόθη. Καὶ πάλιν αὐτὸς φησιν" 


15. Ἐγὼ δέ εἶμι οκώληξ Kal οὐκ ἄνθρωποο, ὄνειδος ἀνθρώπων 


20 





Kal ἐξογθένημὰ λδοῦ. TANTEC οἱ θεωροῦντές ME €ZEMYKTHPI- 
CAN με, EAAAHCAN ἐν YEIAECIN, EKINHCAN KEQAAHN, Ἤλπιοεν 
ἐπὶ Κύριον, PycacO@ δύτόν, CMCATW AYTON, ὅτι θέλει aYTON. 
ὍὉὍ, “ " ὃ > / / ς ε ‘ ε ὃ ὃ 
PATE, ἄνδρες ἀγαπητοί, Tis ὁ ὑπογραμμος ὁ δεδομε- 

΄ / « / / 

vos ἡμῖν: εἰ yap ὁ Κύριος οὕτως ἐταπεινοφρόνησεν, Ti 


A; ἐν τοῖς C, and so probably S, which has 3 not δ᾽ 
18 ὅτι] AC; εἰ 8. 


17 ἐκίνησαν} εκεινησαν A. 


6. τῆς πληγῆς] So SB Justin pp. 86, 
230 ; but A (LXx) has ἀπὸ τῆς πληγῆς. 
For καϑαρίζειν or καθαίρειν τινός comp. 
Herod. i. 44. So the intransitive 
verb καθαρεύειν (Plato Efist. viii. p. 
356 E) and the adjective καθαρός 
(Herod. ii. 38) may take a genitive. 

δῶτε] So also LXx (SAB) and Jus- 
tin pp. 86, 230 (MSS, but many edd. 
δῶται). Eusebius comments on this 
as the 1 ΧΧ reading, and Jerome dis- 
tinctly states it to be so. Accordingly 
it was interpreted, ‘If ye make an 
offering’ (or, translated into its Chris- 
tian equivalent, ‘If ye be truly con- 
trite and pray for pardon’), With 
δοῦναι περὶ comp. Heb. v. 3 περὶ éav- 
Tov προσφέρειν περὶ ἁμαρτιῶν. The 
meaning of the original is doubtful, 
but δῶτε seems to be a rendering of 
nwn taken as a second person, ‘ chou 
shalt give. The reading δῶται ‘ give 
himself, which some editors here 
would adopt, is quite late and can 
hardly stand. 

7. Κύριος βούλεται κιτ.λ.] The LXx 
departs very widely from the Hebrew, 
but its meaning is fairly clear. For 
ἀφελεῖν ἀπό, ‘to diminish from; comp. 
Rev. xxii. 19, Exod. v. 11, and so fre- 


15 δέ] AS; om. C. 


quently. Tertullian however reads 
τὴν ψυχήν ‘eximere a morte animam 
ejus,’ adv. Fud. το. πλάσαι (sc. αὐτόν) 
stands in the present text of the Lxx 
(SAB), and in Justin pp. 86, 230, nor 
is there any indication of a different 
reading: but, as yaw» stands in the 
corresponding place in the Hebrew, 
the original reading of the Lxx was 
probably πλῆσαι, as Grabe suggested 
(Diss. de Vit. Var. LXX, p. 39). Com- 
pare the wv. ll. ῥάσσει and ῥήσσει in 
Mark ix. 18. 

12. τοῖς ἀνόμοις] ἐν τοῖς ἀνόμοις LXX 
(SAB), Justin pp. 86, 231, (though in 
the immediate neighbourhood of the 
first passage he has pera τῶν ἀνόμων, 
Ρ. 85); μετὰ ἀνόμων, Luke xxii. 37, 
(+Mark xv. 28+). 

14. αὐτός] Christ Himself, in whose 
person the Psalmist is speaking. 
Comp. ὃ 22, where αὐτὸς προσκαλεῖ- 
ται has a similar reference. The 
words are an exact quotation from 
the LXx Ps. xxii.6—8. The applica- 
tion to our Lord is favoured by 
Matt. xxvii. 43. 

19. ὁ ὑπογραμμὸς] See the note 
above on ὃ 5. 


62 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [xvi 


/ ΄ \ ΄σ ΄ 
ποιήσωμεν ἡμεῖς οἱ ὑπὸ τὸν ζυγὸν τῆς χάριτος αὐτοῦ 
δι’ αὐτοῦ ἐλθόντες : 

XVII. 


> / \ ~ 
μασιν αἰγείοις Kat μηλωταῖς περιεπάτησαν κηρύσσον- 


Μ \ / 6 > 7 .« > / 
LUNnT aL YEVW ME α KAKELVYWY, OLTLVES EV δέρ- 


\ af col “- 
τες τὴν ἔλευσιν τοῦ Χριστοῦ: λέγομεν δὲ ᾿Ηλίαν καὶ 
As \ 
᾿Ελισαιὲ ἔτι δὲ Kal ᾿Ιεζεκιήλ, τοὺς προφήτας" πρὸς Tov- 
\ \ / 
τοις καὶ τοὺς μεμαρτυρημένους. ἐμαρτυρήθη μεγάλως 


ἐλθόντες] S3 ελθοντοσ A; 
ἔτι δὲ] AS; om. C. 


I ποιήσωμεν] A; ποιήσομεν C; dub. S. 
ἀπελθόντες C. 6 Ἑλισαιὲ] As ’EXtooae C. 





καὶ] AC; om. S. 
add. δὲ C. 


renders e¢ dicit cogitans humiliter, videbo gloriam Dei. 


I. τὸν ζυγὸν τῆς χάριτος] A verbal 
paradox, explained by the ‘easy yoke’ 
of Matt. xi. 29, 30. The following δὲ 
αὐτοῦ is ‘through His humiliation and 
condescension.’ 

XVII. ‘We should also copy the 
humility of the prophets who went 
about in sheepskins and goatskins ; 
of Abraham the friend of God, who 
confessed that he was mere dust and 
ashes; of Job the blameless, who 
condemned himself and all men as 
impure in the sight of God; of Moses 
the trusty servant, who declared his 
nothingness before the Lord.’ 

The whole of this chapter and part 
of the next are quoted by Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 16 (p. 610) in continuation 
of $9sq (see the note there): but he 
cites so freely, abridging and enlarging 
at pleasure, and interspersing his own 
commentary (e.g. τὴν οὐχ ὑποπίπ- 
τουσαν νόμῳ αἰνιττόμενος ἁμαρτίαν γνω- 
στικῶς μετριοπαθῶν), that he cannot 
generally be taken as an authority 
on the text, and (except in special 
cases) I have not thought it worth 
while to record his variations. 

3. ἐν δέρμασιν κιτ.λ.] From Heb. xi. 
37. For the prophets’ dress comp. 
Zech. xiii. 4 ‘The prophets shall be 
ashamed...neither shall they wear a 


πρὸς Tovros] AC; add. δὲ S. 
9 ἀτενίζων] A; ἀτενίσας C; ἀτενίσω S, apparently, for it 


 ἐμαρτυρήθη] AS; 
ταπεινοφρονῶν] C; 


garment of hair’ (where the Lxx 
omits the negative and destroys the 
sense, καὶ ἐνδύσονται δέρριν τριχίνην) ; 
see also Bleek Hedr. l.c., Stanley’s 
Sinai and Palestine p. 305. The 
word μηλωτὴ is used in the Lxx to 
translate ΠΝ, paludamentum, ‘a 
mantle’; e.g. of Elijah and Elisha, 
1 Kings xix. 13, 19, 2 Kings ii. 8, 13, 
14. Though not a strict equivalent, 
it was doubtless adopted as describing 
the recognised dress of the prophet. 
Ezekiel is fitly classed with the older 
prophets, as representing a stern and 
ascetic type. His dress is nowhere 
mentioned in the O. T., but might 
be taken for granted as the ordinary 
garb of his office. Clem. Alex. after 
μηλωταῖς adds καὶ τριχῶν καμηλείων 
πλέγμασιν, as after Ἰεζεκιὴλ he adds 
καὶ Ἰωάννην, the former interpolation 
preparing the way for the latter. 

6. ᾿Ἐλισαιὲ] A frequent form in the 
best MSs of the LXx (with a single or 
a double σὴ, e.g. 2 Kings ii. 1 sq. The 
editors have quite needlessly changed 
it into Ἐλισσαῖον, which is the form 
in Clem. Alex. 

τοὺς προφήτας] Epiphanius has 
been thought to refer to this passage 
in Haer. xxx. 15, αὐτὸς (Κλήμης) ἐγκω- 
μιάζει λίαν καὶ Δαβὶδ καὶ Σαμψὼν καὶ 











Io 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 63 


xvi] 


/ ΄ ~ ‘ ’ὔ 
᾿λβραὰμ καὶ φίλος προσηγορεύθη τοῦ Θεοῦ, Kai λέγει 
> \ ~ - ~ > \ 
ἀτενίζων εἰς τὴν δόξαν τοῦ Θεοῦ, ταπεινοφρονῶν' ᾿Εγὼ 

͵ 3 ὡς \ , 4 \ \ \ 34% / , 
δέ εἶμι γῆ Kal croddc. ἔτι δὲ καὶ περὶ ᾿Ιὼβ οὕτως γέ:- 
γραπται" Ἰὼβ δὲ HN δίκδιος Kal ἄμεμπτος, ἀληθινός, θεο- 


͵ > ͵ > \ \ an 3 > > \ ε ~ 
ceBHc, ATeYOMENOC ἀπὸ TANTOC κἀκοῦ" αλλ᾽ αὐτὸς ἑαυτοὺ 


κατηγορεῖ λέγων, Οὐλεὶς κἀθὰρὸς 


ταπεινοῴρωνων A. 
S with Lxx. 


11 δὲ] CS Clem; om. A. 
ἀληθινός] αληθεινοσ A; ἀληθινὸς καὶ Clem 611. 
AC Clem; πονηροῦ πράγματος (with Lxx) 8. 
A; contra seipsum dicens loquitur (as if κατηγορῶν λέγει) 8. 


ἀπὸ ῥδύπουγ, oYd’ ἂν 
καὶ] AC [Clem]; om. 
12 κακοῦ] 
13 κατηγορεῖ λέγων] C; 


οὐδ᾽ 


av] C; οὐδ᾽ εἰ Clem; def. A. See the lower note. 


πάντας τοὺς προφήτας x.r.A.; but the 
reference must be to the spurious 
Epistles on Virginity, where Samson, 
as well as the others, is mentioned by 
name (see above, I. p. 409). 

7. τοὺς μεμαρτυρημένους) ‘borne 
witness to, approved, whether by God 
or by men; see below, §§ 17, 18, 19, 
38, 44, 47, Acts vi. 3, Heb. xi. 2, 4, 5, 
39, 3 Joh. 12,etc. Here the testimony 
of God’s voice in Scripture seems to 
be intended, as appears from the 
examples following. 

8. φίλος προσηγορεύθη] Comp. 
James ii. 23, and see above, ὃ τὸ with 
the note. 

9. τὴν δόξαν] i.e. the outward ma- 
nifestation, the visible light and glory 
which betokened His presence; as 
e.g. Exod. xvi. 7, 10, xxiv. 16, 17, 
Xxxiil. 19, 22, xl. 28, 29, Luke ii. 9, 
I Cor. xv. 40 sq, 2 Cor. iii. 7 sq, etc. 

ταπεινοφρονῶν] A favourite word 
with Clement ; see ὃ 2, 13 (twice), 
16 (three times), 19, 30, 38, 48. In 
like manner ταπεινοφροσύνη and ra- 
πείνωσις occur seyeral times. The 
scribe of A reads ταπεινοῴρων ὧν here, 
as he reads ταπεινοῴρον ov ὃ 19. In 
both cases his reading must be cor- 
rected. This verb occurs only once 
in the LXx (Ps. cxxxi. 2), and not 


once in the New Testament. 


Ἐγὼ δὲ «.7.A.] Quoted exactly from 


the EXX Gen. xviii. 27. 

11. Ἰὼβ ἦν κιτιλ.] A loose quotation 
from Job 1.1, where SB have ἀληθι- 
vos ἄμεμπτος δίκαιος θεοσεβής, and A 
ἄμεμπτος δίκαιος ἀληθεινὸς θεοσεβής. 

13. κατηγορεῖ λέγων] I prefer this 
ἴο κατηγορῶν λέγει ΟΥ̓ κατηγορῶν εἶπεν. 
Wotton is certainly wrong in saying 
that he could read εἶπεν in A. There 
is no trace of the word and cannot 
have been any. He must have made 
some confusion with the εἶπεν below, 
which is blurred. 

Οὐδεὶς «.7.A.] A loose quotation 
from the LXx Job xiv. 4, 5. 

οὐδ᾽ ἂν] All the best Mss of the 
LXX agree in reading ἐὰν καὶ, which 
many editors have preferred here. 
On the other hand Clem. Alex. Strom. 
iv. 16 (p. 611) has οὐδ᾽ εἰ, and as in 
the rest of this quotation he follows 
his namesake pretty closely, where he 
departs from the Lxx, he may have 
done so in this instance. Origen, 
who frequently quotes the text, gene- 
rally has οὐδ᾽ ἂν (e.g. 11. p. 829) or 
οὐδ᾽ εἰ (III. pp. 160, 685), but some- 
times omits the negative. In Afost. 
Const. ii. 18 it is quoted as here. 
The passage is one of very few out- 
side of the pentateuch quoted by 
Philo, de Mut. Nom. 6 (1. p. 585), 
who reads τίς γὰρ.. «καὶ ἂν... 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xv 


64 


a 


Movons πιοτὸς én ὅλῳ TH 


μιᾶς HMépac ἡ ἢ ZH ayToy. 

3, Ἴ a 3 / \ \ “ ε / 3 ΄σ ot 

οἴκῳ ἀγτοῦ ἐκλήθη, καὶ διὰ τῆς ὑπηρεσίας αὐτοῦ ἔκρινεν 

ε \ af \ ΄σ ὔ al , 

ὁ Θεὸς Αἴγυπτον διὰ τῶν μαστίγων Kal τῶν αἰκισμα- 
3 ~ 3 \ 3 ΄- if 

των αὐτῶν. ἀλλὰ κἀκεῖνος δοξασθεὶς μεγάλως οὐκ 

Ω / > > 53 > \ ΄σ / 

ἐμεγαλορήμονήσεν, αλλ΄ εἶπεν, ἐπὶ τῆς βάτου χρήμα- 5 
΄ > ΄ 4 ͵ > 2 , a Ll 

τισμοῦ αὐτῷ διδομένου, Tic εἶμι ἐγώ, ὅτι me πέμπειο; 


2 αὐτοῦ pri] AS (with Heb. iii. 2); om. C. éxpwev] AC; κρίνει (appa- 


rently) S. 
(or τοῦ) βάτου ὃ; ἐκ τῆς βάτου Clem. 


I. πιστὸς x.t.A.] He is so called 
Num. xii. 7; comp. Heb. iii. 2. The 
αὐτοῦ is τοῦ Θεοῦ, for the LXxX has 
μου. ν 
2. ὑπηρεσίας] Comp. Wisd. xiii. 
II, xv. 7. 

ἔκρινεν x.7.A.] Compare ὃ 11 κρι- 
θείσης διὰ πυρός. Moses was the 
instrument in fulfilling the prophecy 
uttered before, Gen. xv. 14 (comp. 
Acts vii. 7) τὸ δὲ ἔθνος ᾧ ἐὰν δουλεύ- 
σωσι κρινῶ ἐγώ. 

5. ἐμεγαλορημόνησεν] See the note 
on ἐξερίζωσεν, ὃ 6. 

ἐπὶ τῆς βάτου] A cannot have so 
read the words as they stand in C, 
unless this line was very much longer 
than the preceding or following one. 
Moreover ἐπὶ τοῦ τῆς βάτου χρηματισ- 
μοῦ αὐτῷ διδομένου is in itself a very 
awkward and unlikely expression. 
Probably A read ἐπὶ τῆς βάτου or ἐπὶ 
τοῦ βάτου, this being a common mode 
of referring to the incident; Luke xx. 
37 (comp. Mark xii. 26), Justin Dza/. 
128 (p. 357), Clem. Hom. xvi. 14, 
Apost. Const. v.20. The reading of 
C must be attributed to the in- 
decision of a scribe hesitating be- 
tween the masculine and feminine 
genders; the word being sometimes 
masculine, ὁ βάτος (e.g. Exod. iii. 
2, 3, 4, Apost. Const. vii. 33), some- 
times feminine (Deut. xxxiii. 16, Acts 
vil. 35, Justin Déal. 127, 128, Clem. 


5 ἐπὶ τῆς βάτου] ε...... βατου A; ἐπὶ τοῦ τῆς βάτου C; ἐπὶ τῆς 


See the lower note. 9 εἴπωμεν 
Hom. xvi. 14, Afost. Const. ν. 20). 
So we have ἐπὶ τοῦ βάτου Mark xii. 
26 (though with an ill-supported v.1.), 
but ἐπὶ τῆς βάτου Luke xx. 37. In 
Justin Diad. 60 (p. 283) we meet with 
ἀπὸ τῆς βάτου, ὁ βάτος, ὁ βάτος, ὁ βάτος, 
ἐκ τῆς βάτου, in the same chapter. 
See on this double gender of the word 
Fritzsche on Mark l.c. 

6. Tis εἰμι ἐγώ] From Exod. 11]. 11 
τίς εἰμι ἐγώ, ὅτι πορεύσομαι κ.τ.λ. 

7. ἐγὼ δὲ κιτιλ.] From Exod. iv. 
10 ἰσχνόφωνος καὶ βραδύγλωσσος ἐγὼ 
εἰμι. 

ὃ. Ἐγὼ δέ εἰμι ἀτμὶς κιτ.λ.] This 
quotation is not found in the Old 
Testament or in any apocryphal book 
extant whole or in part. The nearest 
parallel is James iv. 14, ποία yap ἡ 
ζωὴ ὑμῶν ; ἀτμὶς [yap] ἐστε ἡ πρὸς ὀλί- 
γον φαινομένη κιτιλ. Compare also 
Hosea xiii. 3 ‘As smoke from the 
chimney’ (or ‘the window’), where 
the LXX seems to have translated 
originally ἀτμὶς ἀπὸ ἀκρίδων (see Sim- 
son’s Hosea p. 44), corrupted into 
ἀπὸ δακρύων in B and corrected into 
ἐκ καπνοδόχης from Theodotion in A; 
and Ps. cxix. 83 ‘I am become like 
a bottle in the smoke,’ where again 
the LXx mistranslates ὡσεὶ ἀσκὸς ἐν 
πάχνῃ. In none of these passages 
however are the words very close, 
nor are they spoken by Moses. Per- 
haps therefore this should be reckon- 











To 





xvi] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 65 


ἐγὼ δέ εἶμι ICYNO@WNOC Kal BpadyrAw@ccoc. Kal πάλιν 
/ > \ ᾿ > > ‘ > \ ͵ 
λέγει, Ἐγὼ δέ εἶμι ἀτμὶς ἀπὸ κύθρδο. 


XVIII. 


/ \ « 4 , ” ᾿ 
Aaveid; πρὸς ὃν εἶπεν ὁ Θεός, Efpon ἄνλρὰ κἀτὰ THN 


/ \ of δὲ \ “- / 
Ti δὲ εἴπωμεν ἐπὶ τῷ μεμαρτυρημένῳ 


KApAian Moy, Aayeid τὸν τοῦ leccai, ἐν ἐλέει δἰωνίῳ Eypica 
; \ \ \ ἢ \ \ , ‘ Ν 
aytén. ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτὸς λέγει πρὸς τὸν Θεόν" ᾿Ελέηοόν 


A; εἴποιμεν C. 
AS; om. C. 


ed among S. Clement’s quotations 
from apocryphal books, on which 
Photius (2207. 126 ῥητά τινα ὡς ἀπὸ 
τῆς θείας γραφῆς ξενίζοντα παρεισάγει) 
remarks: see also §§ 8, 13, 23, 30, 46 
(notes). Hilgenfeld supposes that the 
words were taken from the Assump- 
tion of Moses. This is not impossible ; 
but the independent reason which he 
gives for the belief that Clement 
was acquainted with that apocryphal 
work is unsatisfactory; see the note 
on the phcenix below, ἃ 25. I have 
pointed out elsewhere (§ 23) another 
apocryphal work, from which they 
might well have been taken. The 
metaphor is common with the Stoics: 
see Seneca 7road. 392 sq ‘Ut cali- 
dis fumus ab ignibus Vanescit...Sic 
hic quo regimur spiritus effluit’, M. 
Anton. x. 31 καπνὸν καὶ τὸ μηδέν, xii. 
33 νεκρὰ καὶ καπνός ; so also Empedo- 
cles (in Plut. ΟΖ. Mor. p. 360 C, quoted 
by Gataker on x. 31) had said, wxv- 
popot καπνοῖο δίκην ἀρθέντες ἀπέπταν. 

κύθρας] Another form of χύτρας, 
just as κιθὼν and χιτὼν are inter- 
changed. The proper lonic genitive 
would be κύθρης, which is used by 
Herodes in Stob. Floril. \xxviii. 6 
(quoted in Hase and Dindorf’s Steph. 
Thes.). Clem. Alex. Paed. ii.1 (p. 165) 
has κυθριδίοις ; and for instances of 
κυθρῖνος (for χυτρῖνος) see Lobeck 
Pathol. p. 209. In the text of Clem. 
Alex. here χύτρας is read. 

XVIII. ‘Again take David as an 


CLEM, 11. 


10, 11 Δαυείδ] dad AC. See above, § 4. 
11 ἐλέει] C; ελαιει A; ἐλαίῳ S Clem (edd.). See below. 


10 ὁ Θεός] 


example of humility. He is declared 
to be the man after God’s own heart. 
Yet he speaks of himself as over- 
whelmed with sin, as steeped in im- 
purity, and prays that he may be 
cleansed by God’s Spirit’. 

10. πρὸς ov] Comp. Rom. x.21, Heb. 
i. 7, and see Winer § xlix. p. 424. 

Εὗρον κιτ.λ.] A combination of Ps. 
Ixxxix. 21 εὗρον Δαυεὶδ τὸν δοῦλόν 
μου, ἐν ἐλαίῳ ἁγίῳ μου ἔχρισα αὐτόν, 
with 1 Sam. xiii. 14 ἄνθρωπον κατὰ 
τὴν καρδίαν αὐτοῦ, or rather with Acts 
xiii. 22 εὗρον Δαυεὶδ τὸν τοῦ Ἰεσσαί, 
ἄνδρα κατὰ τὴν καρδίαν pov (itself a 
loose quotation from 1 Sam. xiii. 14). 
In the first passage ἐλαίῳ the reading 
of SA is doubtless correct, the cor- 
responding Hebrew being }»W; though 
ἐλέει is read by B. But Clement ap- 
pears to have read ἐλέει as our Greek 
MSS testify. Similarly in § 56, when 
quoting Ps. cxli. 5, he reads εἐλαιοσ 
(ie. ἔλεος) ἁμαρτωλῶν for ἔλαιον ἅμαρ- 
τωλῶν. On the interchange of δι 
and ε in this word see above, I. p. 121. 
On the other hand Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 17 (p. 611), quoting this 
passage of his namesake, restores 
the correct word ἐλαίῳ (if his editors 
can be trusted), as he would do 
naturally, if accustomed to this read- 
ing in the Psalms. 

12. ᾿Ελέησον κιτ.λ.] The 51st Psalm 
quoted from the LXx almost word for 
word. The variations are very slight 
and unimportant. 


66 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xvu1 


me, ὁ Θεός, KATA TO Méfa ἔλεός COY, Kal KATA TO πλῆθος 
τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν Coy ἐξάλειψον TO ἀνόμημά MOY. ἐπὶ πλεῖον 
πλῆνόν με ἀπὸ TAC ἀνομίδο MOY, κὰὶ ἀπὸ TAC AMAPTIAC MOY 
κἀθάριοόν Me* ὅτι τὴν ANOMIAN MOY ἐγὼ γινώοκω, Kal H 
AMAPTIA MOY ἐνώπιόν MOY ECTIN διὰ πὰντόο. CO] μόνῳ HMAap- 
TON, KAl TO πονηρὸν ἐνώπιόν COY ἐποίηοάδ᾽ ὅπως AN AlKAI@- 
θηῆς ἐν τοῖς λόγοις Coy, KAl νικήσῃς ἐν τῷ κρίνεοθδί ce. 


iAoy γὰρ ἐν ANOMIAIC CYNEAHM@OHN, καὶ ἐν AMAPTIAIC EKIC- 


CHCEN Με H MHTHP ΜΟΥ. 


SAHAA κἂὶ TA KPYHIA TAC codiac coy EAHAWCAC μοι. 


1 ἔλεος] ελαιοσ A. 


2 οἰκτιρμῶν] οἰκτειρμων A. 


ἰδοὺ γὰρ ἀλήθειὰν HrdtHcac’ TA 


δὰν- 


ἐπὶ πλεῖον κ.τ.λ.] C 


omits the rest of the quotation from this point to ἐξουθενώσει (inclusive) at the end 


2. ἐπὶ πλεῖον κ-τ.λ,} i.e. ‘wash me 
again and again’. The Hebrew is 
‘multiply (and) wash me’. 

6. ὅπως κιτ.λ.] This verse is quoted 
also Rom. iii. 4. The middle κρίνεσ- 
θαι, ‘to have a cause adjudged, to 
plead; is said of one of the parties to 
a suit. The ‘pleading’ of God is a 
common image in the Old Testament; 
e.g. Is. i. 18, v. 3. In this passage 
however the natural rendering of the 
Hebrew would be κρίνειν, not κρίνεσ- 
θαι. 

7. νικήσῃς] Thefuturerixnoers isim- 
probable (see Winer § xli. p. 304), 
especially with a preceding δικαιωθῆς ; 
and the Ms A is of no authority where 
it is a question between ἢ and εἰ. 
The Lxx text (SB) has νικήσῃς. 

8. ἐκίσσησεν ‘concetved’, not found 
elsewhere in the LXx. The sense 
and construction which the word has 
here seem to be unique. Elsewhere 
it denotes the fastidious appetite of 
women at such a time and takes a 
genitive of the object desired ; comp. 
Arist. Pax 497. 

9. τὰ ἄδηλα κιτ.λ.1 The LXxX trans- 


lators have missed the sense of the . 


original here. 
11. ὑσσώπῳ] As one defiled by le- 


prosy or some other taint was purged 
according to the law; see Lev. xiv. 
4 sq, Num. xix. 6, 18, and Perowne 
On the Psalms, ad loc. 

12. ἀκουτιεῖς] For the word ἀκουτί- 
few see Sturz de Dial. Mac. p. 144. 
It was perhaps invented to translate 
the Hiphil of Yow. 

16. εὐθὲς] A common form of the 
neuter in the LXx, e.g. Judges xvii. 6, 
xxi. 25, 2 Sam. xix. 6, 18, etc. The 
masculine εὐθὴς also occurs, e.g. Ps. 
xcii. 14. 

19. ἡγεμονικῷ] The word occurs 
frequently in the Greek philosophers. 
The Stoics more especially affected 
the term, τὸ ἡγεμονικόν, OF ἡγεμονικόν 
without the article, using it to signify 
the principle of life, the centre of 
being, the seat of the personality, 
the element which determines the 
character, etc. (see Menage on Diog. 
Laert. vii. 86 ὃ 159; Schweighauser 
on Epictet. Dzss, 1, 20. 11 with the 
index; Mayor on Cic. de Nat. Deor. 
ii. 11 § 29). Considering the world 
to be an animated being, they dis- 
cussed what and where was its 
ἡγεμονικόν. The Stoic definition of 
ἡγεμονικόν in the human being, as 
given by Chrysippus, appears in 





XviIt] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


67 


τιεῖς ME YCCHMW, KAI KABAPICOHCOMAI" πλγνεῖς ME, Kal ὑπὲρ 
χιόνὰ λεγκὰνθέοομδι" ἀκουτιεῖς με ATAAAIACIN καὶ εὐφροού- 


NHN’ APAAAIACONTAI OCTA TETATTEIN@MENA. 


ἀπόστρεψον TO 





TPOCWTON COY ἀπὸ τῶν AMAPTIM@N MOY, κἀὶ πᾶἄσδς τὰς ANO- 
15 μίδο MOy ἐξάλειψον. KAPAIAN KAOAPAN KTICON ἐν ἐμοί, ὁ 
Oedc, Kal πνεῦῖμὰ εὐθὲς ἐγκδίνιοον ἐν τοῖς EfKATOIC ΜΟΥ. 
MH ἀπορίψηο με ἀπὸ τοῦ προοώπου Coy, Kal τὸ πνεῦῖμὰ τὸ 
ἅγιόν COY μὴ ANTANEAHC ἀπ᾿ ἐμοῦ. ἀπόλος μοὶ THN ἀγὰλ- 


λίδοιν τοῦ σωτηρίου coy, Kal TNEYMaTI ἡγεμονικῷ CTH- 


of the chapter; see I. p. 128. 


πλυνιεισ A. 


Diog. Laert. lc. τὸ κυριώτατον τῆς 
Ψυχῆς ἐν ᾧ ai φαντασίαι καὶ ai ὁρμαὶ 
γίνονται καὶ ὅθεν ὁ λόγος ἀναπέμπεται. 
M. Antoninus divides the human 
being (ii. 2) into three parts, σαρκία, 
πνευμάτιον, ἡγεμονικόν, which corre- 
sponds to his triple division else- 
where (iii. 16) σῶμα, ψυχή, νοῦς ; comp. 
26. v. 11. In Epictetus the use of the 
word is very frequent. A full defini- 
tion of it is given in Sext. Empir. ix. 
§ 102 (p. 414 Bekker) πᾶσαι ai ἐπὶ ra 
μέρη τοῦ ὅλου ἐξαποστελλόμεναι δυνά- 
μεις ὡς ἀπό τινος πηγῆς τοῦ ἡγεμονι- 
κοῦ ἐξαποστέλλονται, with the context. 
It is identified by various writers 
with the λόγος or with the νοῦς or 
with the πνεῦμα or with the ψυχή, 
according to their various philoso- 
phical systems. In Latin it becomes 
principatus in Cicero (de Nat. Deor. 
Le. ‘principatum id dico quod Graeci 
ἡγεμονικόν vocant’) and principale in 
Seneca (2. 92 § 1, 113 ὃ 23, and 
elsewhere). So Tertullian de Resurr. 
Carn. 15 ‘principalitas sensuum quod 
ἡγεμονικόν appellatur,’ de Anim. 15 
‘summus in anima gradus vitalis 
quod ἡγεμονικὸν appellant, id est 
principale.’ 

The Hebrew word 2°73, here trans- 
lated ἡγεμονικόν, signifies ‘prompt’, 


πλεῖον] mov A. 
A. 10 gov] A (with Lxx); om. S (with Hebr.). 
16 ἐγκάτοις] ενκατοισ A, 


ἡ νικήσῃς] νικησεισ 
11 πλυνεῖς] 


‘spontaneous’, and so ‘liberal in 
giving’. Hence it gets a secondary 
meaning ‘a prince’ or ‘a noble’, 
‘generosity’ or ‘liberality’ being con- 
nected with persons of this high rank. 
In this meaning, which is extremely 
common, the LxXxX translators seem 
to have taken it here; and the ideas 
which heathen philosophy associated 
with the word ἡγεμονικὸς suggested it 
as an equivalent. Thus πνεῦμα ἡγε- 
μονικὸν would mean ‘a spirit which 
is a principle or source of life.’ The 
Hebrew phrase itself however seems 
to signify nothing more than ‘an 
open, hearty, free spirit.’ 

But, inasmuch as the Holy Spirit 
is the fountain-head of all spiritual 
life, the expressions πνεῦμα ἡγεμονικόν, 
‘spiritus principalis’, came soon to 
be used by Christian writers of the 
Holy Spirit ; and the passage in the 
Psalms was so explained, as e.g. by 
Origen Comm. ad Rom. |. vii. 8 1 (Of. 
IV. Ρ. 593 De la Rue) ‘principalem 
spiritum propterea arbitror nomi- 
natum, ut ostenderetur esse quidem 
multos spiritus, sedin his principatum 
et dominationem hunc Spiritum sanc- 
tum, qui et principalis appellatur, 
tenere’, This connexion indeed 
might appear to them to be suggested 


5—2 


68 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xvi 


picdN με. διλάξω ANOMOYC τὰς GAoYc coy, Kal aceBeic 
ETICTPEPOYCIN ἐπί CE bY¥cal me ἐξ aimat@n, ὁ Oedc, ὁ Θεὸς 
τῆς cw@THpiac Moy. ἀγδλλιάςετδι ἢ γλῶοοᾶ MOY THN AIKAIO- 
cYNHN coy. Κύριε, τὸ οτόμὰ Moy ANOIzZEIC, kal TA χείλη 
moy ANarreAei THN AINECIN Coy’ ὅτι εἰ HOEAHCAC @YCIAN, 
ἔλωκδ &N* GAOKAYTOMATA οὐκ EYAOKHceEIc. θγοίὰ TH θεῷ 
πνεῦῖμὰ CYNTETPIMMENON’ KAPAIAN CYNTETPIMMENHN Kal τε- 
TATIEINWMENHN ὁ θεὸς οὐκ EZO0YOENDCEL. 

XIX. Τῶν τοσούτων οὖν καὶ τοιούτων οὕτως με- 
μαρτυρημένων τὸ ταπεινοφρονοῦν καὶ τὸ ὑποδεὲς διὰ 


~ ε al > ’ ε ΄ > ‘ \ \ \ ς “ 
τῆς ὑπακοῆς οὐ μόνον nuas ἀλλα καὶ Tas πρὸ ἥμων 


4.34 τὸ στόμα...τὰ χείλη] A; the words are transposed in S with the Lxx and 
9. τοσούτων, τοιούτων] A; transposed in CS. 
το ταπεινοφρονοῦν] ταπεινοῴφρονον A; ταπεινόφρον C. 
τὰς πρὸ ἡμῶν γενεὰς] AS; τοὺς πρὸ ἡμῶν (omitting 
12 τε] AC; om. 5. 


Hebrew. 

om. C; καὶ οὕτως S. 
τι ἀλλὰ] CS; αλλασ A. 
γενεὰς) Ο. 


by the words of the Psalm itself, 
since τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιόν σου Occurs 
in the preceding verse. So in the 
Fragm. Murator. p. 18 (Tregelles), 
where speaking of the four Gospels 
this very early writer says that they 
are in perfect accord with one another 
‘cum uno ac principali Spiritu de- 
clarata sint in omnibus omnia’; on 
which passage see Hesse Das Mura- 
torische Fragment p. 109 sq. Thus 
πνεῦμα ἡγεμονικόν furnishes an ad- 
ditional instance of the alliance of 
the phraseology of Greek philosophy 
with scriptural ideas, which is a 
common phenomenon in early Chris- 
tian literature. 

στήρισον] So SB read in the Lxx, 
but A and others στήριξον. On 
these double forms see Buttmann 
Ausf. Gr. Spr. § 92 (1. p. 372); and 
on the use of στήρισον, etc., in the 
New Testament, Winer ὃ xv. p. 101. 
The scribe of A in Clement is in- 
consistent; for he has ἐστήριξεν ὃ 8, 


στηρίξωμεν ὃ 13, but ἐστήρισεν § 33, 


οὕτως] A; 


13 αὐτοῦ] AC; τοῦ θεοῦ 5. 


and στήρισον here. 

2. αἱμάτων] The plural denotes es- 
pecially ‘d/oodshed’, as in Plat. Legg. 
ix. p. 872 E, and the instances col- 
lected in Blomfield’s Gloss. to Asch. 
Choeph. 60: see also Test. xit Patr. 
Sym. 4 εἰς αἵματα παροξύνει, Anon. 
in Hippol. Haer. v. 16 αἵμασι χαίρει 6 
τοῦδε τοῦ κόσμου δεσπότης, Tatian. ad 
Graec. 8. The same is the force also 
of the Hebrew plural 097, of which 
αἵματα here and elsewhere is a ren- 
dering: comp. Exod. xxii. 1, where, 
as here, ‘bloodshed’ is equivalent to 
‘blood-guiltiness’. 

XIX. ‘These bright examples of 
humility we have before our eyes. 
But let us look to the fountain-head 
of all truth; let us contemplate the 
mind of the universal Father and 
Creator, as manifested in His works, 
and see how patience and order and 
beneficence prevail throughout crea- 
tion’. 

9. Τῶν τοσούτων κ-ιτιλ.] An imita- 
tion of Heb. xii. 1. 








TO THE CORINTHIANS. 69 


XIx| 


\ / > / / ὃ / Α 
γενεὰς βελτίους ἐποίησεν, τούς τε καταδεξαμένους τὰ 
΄. > / ’ὔ “ > \ 

λόγια αὐτοῦ ἐν φόβῳ καὶ ἀληθείᾳ. Πολλῶν οὖν καὶ 


μεγάλων καὶ ἐνδόξων μετειληφότες πράξεων, ἐπαναδρά- 


15 μωμεν ἐπὶ τὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς παραδεδομένον ἡμῖν τῆς εἰρήνης 


σκοπόν, καὶ ἀτενίσωμεν εἰς τὸν πατέρα καὶ κτιστὴν τοῦ 
σύμπαντος κόσμου, καὶ ταῖς μεγαλοπρεπέσι καὶ ὑπερ- 
βαλλούσαις αὐτοῦ δωρεαῖς τῆς εἰρήνης εὐεργεσίαις τε 
κολληθώμεν' ἴδωμεν αὐτὸν κατὰ διάνοιαν Kal ἐμβλέψω- 


~ » ΄σ “ > \ ͵7ὔ ΄ 
20 mev τοῖς ὄμμασιν τῆς ψυχῆς εἰς τὸ μακρόθυμον αὐτοῦ 


βούλημα: νοήσωμεν πῶς ἀόργητος ὑπάρχει πρὸς πᾶσαν 


\ ͵ ΄ι 
τὴν κτίσιν αὐτοῦ. 


14 πράξεων] C; πραξαιων A; add. τούτων, ἀδελφοὶ ἀγαπητοί 8. 
AC; hujus mundi S; see above, § 5, and below, ii. § 19. 


17 κόσμου] 
19 κολλη- 


θῶώμεν7Ὑ AC; consideremus (νοήσωμεν) et adhaereamus S, but this is probably one 
of the periphrases which abound in S (see I. p. 136). 


το. ταπεινοφρονοῦν] See the note on 
ταπεινοφρονῶν above, ὃ 17; and comp. 
§ 38 below. 

τὸ ὑποδεὲς} ‘submissiveness’, ‘sub- 
ordination’. This seems to be the 
meaning of the word, which is very 
rare in the positive, though common 
in the comparative ὑποδεέστερος ; see 
Epiphan. Haer. Ixxvii. 14 τὸ ὑποδεὲς 
kai ἠλαττωμένον, a passage pointed 
out to me by Bensly. Accordingly 
in the Syriac it is rendered diminutio 
et demissio. Laurent says ‘Colo- 
mesius male substantivo szbjectio 
vertit; collaudatur enim ἢ. 1. volun- 
taria sanctorum hominum egestas’, 
comparing Luke x. 4, and Harnack 
accepts this rendering ‘egestas’. But 
this sense is not well suited to the 
context, besides being unsupported ; 
nor indeed is it easy to see how 
ὑποδεής could have this meaning, 
which belongs rather to ἐνδεής. It 
might possibly mean ‘fearfulness’, a 
sense assigned to it by Photius, 
Suidas, and Hesychius, who explain 
it ὑπόφοβος. But usage suggests its 


connexion with δέομαι zndigeo, like 
ἀποδεής, ἐνδεής, καταδεής, rather than 
with δέος “mor, like ἀδεής, περιδεής. 

12. καταδεξαμένους | Davies proposes 
καταδεξομένους. Theemendation would 
have been more probable if the pre- 
position had been different, διαδεξο- 
μένους and not καταδεξομένους. 

14. μετειληφότες] ‘participated in’, 
i.e. profited by as examples. The 
achievements of the saints of old are 
the heritage of the later Church. 

15. εἰρήνης σκοπόν] ‘the mark, the 
goal, of peace’. God Himself is the 
great exemplar of peaceful working, 
and so the final goal of all imitation. 

21. ἀόργητος] ‘calm’; Ign. Philad. 
1, Polyc. PAzd. 12 (note). Aristotle 
attaches a bad sense to the word, as 
implying a want of sensibility, £7z/. 
Nic. ii. 7. Others however distin- 
guished ἀοργησία from ἀναισθησία (see 
Aul. Gell. i. 27); and with the Stoics 
it was naturally a favourite word, e.g. 
Epict. Diss. iii. 20. 9 τὸ ἀνεκτικόν, τὸ 
ἀόργητον, τὸ πρᾷον, iii. 18. 6 εὐσταθῶς, 
αἰδημόνως, ἀοργήτως, Μ. Anton, 1. 1 


70 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[xx 


€ 4 ͵7ὔ ΄ , 
XX. Οἱ οὐρανοὶ τῆ διοικήσει αὐτοῦ σαλενομενοι 
> > / / c / \ \ \ 
ἐν εἰρήνη ὑποτάσσονται αὐτῷ" ἡμέρα TE και νὺξ τον 
/ ἂν ὦ ᾽ ~ “ / ὍΔ > / 
τεταγμένον UT αὐτοῦ δρόμον διανύουσιν, μηδὲν ἀλλήλοις 
> / J / \ ΄ 3 / \ 
ἐμποδίζοντα. ἥλιός TE Kal σελήνη ἀστέρων TE χοροὶ 
\ \ 3 “-“ ς , / 
κατὰ τὴν διαταγὴν αὐτοῦ ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ δίχα πασῆης 5 
\ 3 ᾽ ΄ 
παρεκβάσεως ἐξελίσσουσιν τοὺς ἐπιτεταγμένους αὐτοῖς 


rd 
Oplo mous. 


1 διοικήσει] AC; δικαιώσει S apparently. 
ἀστέρων τε χοροὶ] AC; but S translates as if dorepés τε καὶ χόροι. 


βάσεωΞ] .apexBacewos A; παραβάσεως C. 


τὸ καλόηθες καὶ ἀόργητον. The word 
does not occur in the Lxx or New 
Testament. 

XX. ‘All creation moves on in 
peace and harmony. Night and day 
succeed each other. The heavenly 
bodies roll in their proper orbits. 
The earth brings forth in due sea- 
son. The ocean keeps within its 
appointed bounds. The seasons, the 
winds, the fountains, accomplish their 
work peacefully and minister to our 
wants. Even the dumb animals ob- 
serve the same law. Thus God has 
by this universal reign of order mani- 
fested His beneficence to all, but 
especially to us who have sought 
His mercy through Christ Jesus’. 

I. σαλευόμενοι] If the reading be 
correct, this word must refer to the 
motion of the heavenly bodies, ap- 
parently uneven but yet recurrent 
and orderly ; and this reference seems 
to be justified by ἐξελίσσουσιν below. 
Σαλεύεσθαι is indeed frequently used 
in the Old Testament to express 
terror and confusion, in speaking of 
the earth, the hills, etc.; but never of 
the heavens. So too in the Sibylline 
Oracles, iii. 675, 714, 751. On the 
other hand Young would read py 
σαλευόμενοι; and Davies, improving 
upon this correction, suggests ov 
σαλευόμενοι, repeating the last letters 


fal “ \ \ ? “~ ΄σ 
γῆ κυοφοροῦσα κατὰ τὸ θέλημα αὐτοῦ τοῖς 


4 τε καὶ] AS; καὶ (om. τε) C. 
6 παρεκ- 
In S it is rendered im omni egressu cursus 


of αὐτοῦ. But such passages in the 
New Testament as Matt. xxiv. 29, 
Heb. xii. 26, 27, are not sufficient to 
justify the alteration ; for some ex- 
pression of motion is wanted. Not 
‘ fixity, rest,’ but ‘regulated change’ 
is the idea of this and the following 
sentences. For this reason I have 
retained σαλευόμενοι. In the passage 
of Chrysostom quoted by Young in 
defence of his reading, zz Psalm. 
cxlviii. § 2 (V. p. 491) οὐδὲν συνεχύθη 
τῶν ὄντων" ov θάλαττα τὴν γῆν ἐπέκλυ- 
σεν, οὐχ ἥλιος τόδε τὸ ὁρώμενον κατέ- 
καυσεν, οὐκ οὐρανὸς παρεσαλεύθη κ.τ.λ.» 
this father would seem purposely to 
have chosen the compound παρασα- 
λεύεσθαι to denote disorderly motion. 
The same idea as here is expressed in 
Theoph. ad Autol. i. 6 ἄστρων χορείαν 
γινομένην ἐν τῷ κύκλῳ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ οἷς ἡ 
πολυποίκιλος σοφία τοῦ Θεοῦ πᾶσιν ἴδια 
ὀνόματα κέκληκεν, comp. 20. ii. 15. . 

5. ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ] Naturally a frequent 
phrase in Clement; 85. 9, 11, 34, 49, 
50, comp. §§ 21, 30, 60, 61, 63, where 
likewise the word ὁμόνοια occurs. 

6. mapexBacews| The other reading 
παραβάσεως destroys the sense. For 
the whole passage comp. AZost. 
Const. vii. 34 pooripes...dmapaBarov 
σώζοντες τὸν δολιχὸν καὶ κατ᾽ οὐδὲν 
παραλλάσσοντες τῆς σῆς προσταγῆς. In 
the immediate neighbourhood is the 





xx] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 71 


ον 4 τι \ / 3 ΄ \ \ \ 
ἰδίοις καιροῖς τὴν πανπλήθη ἀνθρώποις τε καὶ θηρσὶν καὶ 
΄ ΄ = Te > \ / > / “ A 
TAGW τοῖς οὐσιν ET αὐτὴν ζώοις ἀνατέλλει τροφήν, μὴ 
“ \ > fod “ ~ / 
διχοστατοῦσα μηδὲ ἀλλοιοῦσά τι τῶν δεδογματισμέ- 
e ἴω ᾽ ’ \ 
νων ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. ἀβύσσων τε ἀνεξιχνίαστα Kal νερτέ- 
3 7 ΄ ? - ΄ 
ρων ἀνεκδιήγητα κρίματα τοῖς αὐτοῖς συνέχεται προσ- 
/ A , ΄σ \ \ 
τάγμασιν. TO κύτος τῆς ἀπείρου θαλάσσης κατὰ τὴν 


épsorum, which probably represents παρεκβάσεως, and where probably the reading 
was διὰ for δίχα. 8 πανπλήθη] A; παμπλήθη C. 9. ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν] 





A; ἐπ’ αὐτῆς C; in illa 8. 


same quotation from Job xxxviii. 11 as 
here in Clement. 

ἐξελίσσουσιν}͵; Comp. Plut. Mor. 
Ρ. 368 A τοσαύταις ἡμέραις τὸν αὐτῆς 
κύκλον ἐξελίσσει (of the moon), Heliod. 
Eth. ν. 14 οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν νομέα κύκλους 
ἀγερώχους ἐξελίττοντες (both passages 
given in Hase and Dindorf’s Szeph. 
Thes.). Thus the word continues the 
metaphor of χοροί, describing the 
tangled mazes of the dance, as e.g. 
Eur. Tvoad. 3. The ὁρισμοὶ therefore 
are their defined orbits. 

9. ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν] For the accusative 
so used see Winer § xlix. p. 426. 

ἀνατέλλει] Here transitive, as e.g. 
Gen. iii. 18, Is. xlv. 8, Matt. v. 45 ; 
comp. Epiphanes in Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iii. 2, p. 512, ἥλιος κοινὰς 
τροφὰς ζώοις ἅπασιν ἀνατέλλει (MSS 
ἀνατέλλειν), which closely resembles 
our Clement’s language here. 

10, τῶν δεδογματισμένων κ.τ.λ. 


Comp. ὃ 27 οὐδὲν μὴ παρέλθῃ τῶν δε- 


δογματισμένων ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 

12. κρίματα] ‘statutes, ordinances,’ 
i.e. the laws by which they are 
governed, as e.g. 2 Chron. xxx. 16 
ἔστησαν ἐπὶ τὴν στάσιν αὐτῶν κατὰ 
τὸ κρίμα αὐτῶν (‘as they were ap- 
pointed’), 2 Chron. iv. 7 τὰς λυχνίας 
κατὰ τὸ κρίμα αὐτῶν (comp. ver. 20). 
But κρίματα is very awkward, and 
several emendations have been sug- 
gested, of which κλίματα is the best. 


We may either adopt this, or (as I 
would suggest in preference) strike 
out the word altogether. In either 
case we may fall back upon the con- 
jecture of Lipsius (p. 155, note) that 
κρίματα was written down by some 
thoughtless scribe from Rom. xi. 33 
ἀνεξερεύνητα τὰ κρίματα αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀν- 
εξιχνίαστοι αἱ ὁδοὶ αὐτοῦ (he gives the 
reference ix. 33, which is repeated 
by Jacobson, and still further corrupt- 
ed ix. 23 by Hilgenfeld). Indeed the 
same word seems still to be running 
in the head of the scribe of A when be- 
low he writes κρυματα for κυματα. The 
νέρτερα are the ‘subterranean regions’ 
regarded physically. Yet κρίματα is 
the reading of all our authorities. It 
must have been read moreover by 
the writer of the later books of the 
Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 35 aveé- 
ἐχνίαστος κρίμασιν. My attention has 
been called also to the connexion of 
words in Ps. xxxvi (xxxv). 5 τὰ κρίματά 
σου [ὡσεὶ] ἄβυσσος πολλή. 

13. τὸ κύτος] ‘the hollow, the basin, 
as Ps, lxiv. 7 6 συνταράσσων τὸ κύτος 
τῆς θαλάσσης. In Dan. iv. 8 τὸ κύτος 
is opposed to τὸ ὕψος. Comp. also 
Theoph. ad Autol. i. 7 ὁ συνταράσσων 
τὸ κύτος τῆς θαλάσσης, and Afost. 
Const. vill. 12 ὁ συστησάμενος ἄ- 
βυσσον καὶ μέγα κύτος αὐτῇ πε- 
ριθείς...πηγαῖς ἀενάοις μεθύσας... 
ἐνιαυτῶν κύκλοις ... νεφῶν ὀμβροτόκων 


72 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[xx 


΄σ \ > \ 
δημιουργίαν αὐτοῦ συσταθὲν cic τὰς cynarwrdc οὐ παρ- 


/ ~ ~ > \ 
εκβαίνει Ta περιτεθειμένα αὐτῇ κλεῖθρα, ἀλλὰ καθὼς 


4 ~ / ~ 
διέταξεν αὐτῇ, οὕτως ποιεῖ. 


1 δημιουργίαν] δημιουργειαν A. 
κρυματα A. 


διαδρομαῖς εἰς καρπῶν γονὰς καὶ 
ζῴων σύστασιν, στάθμον ἀνέμων 
διαπνεόντων κιτιλ., in which passage 
the resemblances cannot be acci- 
dental. 

I. els τὰς συναγωγὰς] From LXX 
Gen. i. 9 καὶ συνήχθη τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ ὑπο- 
κάτω τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εἰς τὰς συναγωγὰς 
αὐτῶν, wanting in the Hebrew. It 
refers to the great bodies of water, 
the Mediterranean, the Caspian, the 
Red Sea, etc. 

παρεκβαίνει x«.t.A.] From Job 
XXxVili. 10, 11 ἐθέμην δὲ αὐτῇ ὅρια 
περιθεὶς κλεῖθρα καὶ πύλας, εἶπα δὲ αὐτῇ 
Μέχρι τούτου ἐλεύσῃ καὶ οὐχ ὑπερβήσῃ, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν σεαυτῇ συντριβήσεταί σου τὰ 
κύματα: comp. also Ps. civ. 9, Jer. v. 22. 

4. ὠκεανὸς κιτ.λ.] This passage is 
directly quoted by Clem. Alex. Strom. 
v. 12 (p. 693), by Origen de Prince. 
ii. 6 (I. p. 82, 83), Select. in Ezech. 
viii. 3 (III. p. 422), by Jerome ad 
Ephes. ii. 2 (VIL. p. 571). It must 
also have suggested the words of 
Irenzeus Haer. ii. 28. 2 ‘Quid autem 
possumus exponere de oceani accessu 
et recessu, quum constet esse certam 
causam? quidve de his quae ultra 
eum sunt enuntiare, qualia sint?’ On 
the other hand the expression ὁ πολὺς 
καὶ ἀπέραντος ἀνθρώποις ὠκεανὸς used 
by Dionys. Alex. in Euseb. H. 5. 
vii. 21 may be derived indirectly 
through Clement or Origen. On 
Photius see below, p. 86. 

5. améparos| ‘zmpassable, as the 
context shows, and as it is rendered 
in the translation of Origen de Princ. 
ii. 3 (‘intransmeabilis’), The com- 
mon form in this sense is ἀπέρατος ; 


συντριβήσεται] A; συντριβήσονται C. 


εἶπεν yap* Ἕως de 


3 οὕτως] A; οὕτω C. 4 κύματα) 
5 ἀνθρ. ἀπέρ.} A; ἀπέρ. 


though ἀπέραντος is read here not only 
in our MSS, but by Clem. Alex. p. 693 
and Dionys. Alex. in Euseb. H. £. vii. 
21, or their transcribers, and may 
possibly be correct. Yet as I could 
not find any better instances of this 
use than Eur. Med. 212, Aisch. Prom. 
159 (where Blomf. suggests déparos), 
and in both passages the meaning 
may be questioned, I have preferred 
reading ἀπέρατος as quoted by Origen 
Select. in Ezech. viii. 3. 

The proper meaning of ἀπέραντος, 
‘boundless,’ appears from Clem. Hom. 
Xvi. 17, XVii. 9, 10, where it is found in 
close alliance with ἄπειρος. See also 
Clem. Alex. /ragm. p. 1020. On the 
other hand for dméparos comp. e.g. 
Macar. Magn. Afoer. iv. 13 (p. 179) pet 
τῷ θέρει καὶ τῷ χειμῶνι πολὺς καὶ ἀπέρα- 
τος. The lines in A here are divided 
atrepan|toc ; and this division would 
assist the insertion of the n. An 
earlier scribe would write arrepd toc 
for atrepaltoc. See Didymus 3 3209. 
Psal. 138 (p. 1596 ed. Migne) εἰ yap 
καὶ ὠκεανὸς ἀπέραντος, ἀλλ᾽ οὖν καὶ οἱ 
per αὐτὸν κόσμοι ταῖς τοῦ δεσπότου 
διαταγαῖς διϊθύνονται" πάντα γὰρ τὰ πρὸς 
αὐτοῦ γεγενημένα ὅποι ὅποια] ποτ᾽ ἐστὶν 
ταγαῖς τῆς ἑαυτοῦ προνοίας διοικούμενα 
ἰθύνεται. This language may possibly 
have been derived from Origen, and 
not directly from Clement. Anyhow 
the recognition of both the various 


readings, rayais, διαταγαῖς, is worthy — 


of notice. 
of per’ αὐτὸν κόσμοι κ-τ.λ.] Clement 


may possibly be referring to some — 


known but hardly accessible land, 
lying without the pillars of Hercules 


« 


ἘῸΝ 


᾿ 








xx] 


ἥξειο, Kal TA κύματά COY EN COl CYNTPIBHCeETAl. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 73 


᾽ \ 
@WKEQAVOS 


7 ~ ~ 
5 ἀνθρώποις ἀπέρατος καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτὸν κόσμοι ταῖς αὐταῖς 


΄ ~ , \ \ \ 
Tayais τοῦ δεσπότου διευθύνονται. Kaipol éapivol καὶ 


ἀνθρ. C. 
Didym. See the lower note. 


and in foreign seas: as Ceylon (Plin. 
NV. H. vi. 22 ‘Taprobanen alterum 
orbem terrarum esse diu existima- 
tum est, Antichthonumappellatione’), 
or Britain (Joseph. B. F. ii. 16. 4 ὑπὲρ 
ὠκεανὸν ἑτέραν ἐζήτησαν οἰκουμένην καὶ 
μέχρι τῶν ἀνιστορήτων πρότερον Βρετ- 
τανῶν διήνεγκαν τὰ ὅπλα). But more 
probably he contemplated some un- 
known land in the far west beyond 
the ocean, like the fabled Atlantis of 
Plato or the real America of modern 
discovery. From Aristotle onwards 
(de Caelo ii. 14, p. 298, Meteor. ii. 5, 
p. 362), and even earlier, theories had 
from time to time been broached, 
which contemplated the possibility 
of reaching the Indies by crossing 
the western ocean, or maintained the 
existence of islands or continents 
towards the setting sun. The Cartha- 
ginians had even brought back a 
report of such a desert island in the 
Atlantic, which they had visited, 
[Aristot.] Mirab. Ausc. ὃ 84 p. 836, 
§ 136 p. 844, Diod. v. 19, 20; see 
Humboldt Zxam. Crit. 1. p. 130. 
In the generations before and after 
the time of Clement such specula- 
tions were not uncommon. Of these 
the prophecy in Seneca’s Medea 
ii. 375 ‘ Venient annis saecula seris 
Quibus oceanus vincula rerum Laxet 
et ingens pateat tellus etc., is the 
most famous, because so much stress 
was laid on it by Columbus and his 
fellow discoverers: but the state- 
ments in Strabo i. 4 (p. 65), Plut. 
Mor. p. 941, are much more remark- 
able. The opinions of ancient writers 
on this subject are collected and ex- 


dméparos] Orig ; intransmeabilis S; ἀπέραντος AC Clem, Dionys, 
6 ταγαῖς] AC; διαταγαῖς Origen. 


See below. 


amined in the Ist volume of A. von 
Humboldt’s Exam. Crit. dela Géogr. 
du Nouveau Continent : see also other 
works mentioned in Prescott’s Ferdz- 
nand and Isabella 11. p. 102. This 
interpretation is quite consistent with 
the fact that Clement below (§ 33) 
speaks of the ocean as τὸ περιέχον 
τὴν γῆν ὕδωρ. 

At all events this passage was 
seemingly so taken by Irenzeus and 
Clement of Alexandria, and it is dis- 
tinctly explained thus by Origen (.5 61. 
in Exzech. viii. 3 sq, de Prince. ii. 6) 
who discusses it at great length. All 
these fathers acquiesce in the exist- 
ence of these ‘other worlds. At a 
later date however this opinion came 
to be regarded with suspicion by 
Christian theologians. Tertullian, de 
Pall. 2, Hermog. 25, was the first 
to condemn it. The idea of the 
Antipodes is scouted by Lactantius 
Div. Inst. iii. 24, with other fathers 
of the fourth century and later (comp. 
August. de Civ. Dez xvi. 9); and in the 
reign of Justinian (c. A.D. 535) the spe- 
culations of Cosmas Indicopleustes 
(Montfaucon Col/. Nov. Patr. τι. p. 
113 sq), who describes the earth as 
a plain surface and a parallelogram 
in form (see Humboldt lc. 1. p. 41 
sq), stereotyped for many centuries 
the belief of Christian writers on this 
subject. It was made a special charge 
against Virgilius, the Irish geome- 
trician, bishop of Salzburg (+ A.D. 
784); see Stokes /reland and the 
Celtic Church p. 224 sq. 

6. rayais] ‘directions, as Hermes 
in Stob. Zcd. i. 52. 40 ἐποπτὴρ τοίνυν 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [xx 


74 


\ \ \ \ ἢ ἂν ΙΝ. 
θερινοὶ καὶ μετοπωρινοὶ καὶ χειμερινοὶ ἐν εἰρήνη μετα- 
/ > / >. ¥ \ ‘ \ 
παραδιδόασιν ἀλλήλοις. ἀνέμων σταθμοὶ κατὰ τὸν 
’ \ \ ΄σ / 
ἴδιον καιρὸν τὴν λειτουργίαν αὐτῶν ἀπροσκόπως ἐπιτε- 
~ / / \ \ ΄ \ 
λοῦσιν: ἀέναοί TE πηγαὶ πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν Kal ὑγείαν 
~ ’ > / / \ \ 
δημιουργηθεῖσαι δίχα ἐλλείψεως παρέχονται τοὺς πρὸς 5 
΄σ > / / / 7 ΄σ \ 
ζωῆς ἀνθρώποις μαζούς. τά τε ἐλάχιστα τῶν ζώων τὰς 
/ ~ > / ~ 
συνελεύσεις αὐτῶν ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ Kat εἰρήνη ποιοῦνται. 
΄- / / \ / φο 
Ταῦτα πάντα ὁ μέγας δημιουργὸς καὶ δεσπότης τῶν 
ς / > o: Ψ ἢ 8 / , > 3 
ἁπαντων ἐν εἰρήνη καὶ ὁμονοίᾳ προσέταξεν εἶναι, εὐεργε- 


I μετοπωρινοὶ] μεθοπωρινοι A. μεταπαραδιδόασιν] A, and so app. S; μετα- 


διδόασιν (. 
it had read ἄνεμοί τε σταθμῶν. 
λειτουργειαν Α. 
Ss. ὑγείαν] A; ὑγίειαν C. 


ταγῆς ἔσται τῶν ὅλων ὀξυδερκὴς θεὸς 
᾿Αδράστεια, with other passages quoted 
by Hasein Steph. Thes. s.v. Origen 
Sel. in Ezech. \.c., and apparently 
also de Princ. 1.ς. (for the Latin is ds- 
positionibus), has διαταγαῖς, which 
some editors adopt ; but he would 
naturally substitute a common for 
an unusual word, and his quotation 
throughout is somewhat loose. 

1. μεταπαραδιδόασιν] ‘ give way in 
successton’; again a rare word, of 
which a few instances are collected 
in Hase and Dindorf’s Steph. Thes. 

2. ἀνέμων σταθμοῦ] From Job 
XXVili..25 ἐποίησεν δὲ ἀνέμων σταθμὸν 
καὶ ὑδάτων μέτρα, where it means 
‘weight, as the original shows. 
Clement however may have mis- 
understood the meaning; for he 
seems to use the word in a different 
sense, ‘ the fixed order’ or ‘ the fixed 
stations, as the context requires. 
The common Greek expression in 
this sense is στάσεις, e.g. Polyb. i. 
75.8 κατά τινας ἀνέμων στάσεις, ix. 5. 
23 ἐπιχώριοι τὰς τῶν ἀνέμων στάσεις 
κάλλιστα γινώσκουσι: see Schweig- 
hauser on Polyb. i. 48..2. A good 


4 ἀέναοι] A; ἀένναοι C. 
5 πρὸς ζωῆς] A; πρὸς ζωὴν C. S translates 


2 ἀνέμων] A; add. re CS. S translates ventique locorum as if 


3 τὴν] AS; καὶ τὴν C. λειτουργίαν] 
ἀπόλαυσιν] AC; add. τε 


illustration of Clement’s meaning is 
the noble passage in Lucretius v. 
737 54. 

3. ἀπροσκόπως] So again ὃ 61 
διέπειν τὴν ὑπό σου δεδομένην αὐτοῖς 
ἡγεμονίαν ἀπροσκόπως. For the cor- 
responding adjective dmpdckoros, 
which seems to have been a spe- 
cially Pauline word (Acts xxiv. 16, 
as well as 1 Cor. x. 32, Phil. i. 10) 
see Philippians |.c. 

4. ὑγείαν] A common form in late 
writers: see Lobeck Paral. p. 28 
(with the references), Phryn. p. 493, 
Pathol. p. 234. It is so written in 
several inscriptions, and so scanned 
in Orph. Hymn. \xxxiv. 8 (p. 350, 
Herm.) ὄλβον ἐπιπνείουσα καὶ ἡπιό- 
χειρον ὑγείαν (unnecessarily altered 
by Porson, Eur. Ores¢. 229, into ἠπιό- 
χειρ᾽ ὑγίειαν), and elsewhere. Editors 
therefore should not have substituted 
ὑγίειαν. Compare rapeia § 50. 

5. τοὺς πρὸς ζωῆς μαζούς] The meta- 
phor was perhaps suggested by Jer. 
xvill. 14 (LXX) μὴ ἐκλείψουσιν ἀπὸ 
πέτρας μαστοί, which however departs 
from the existing reading of the He- 
brew. For πρὸς ζωῆς, ‘on the side of 








15 


᾿ χῆϊν. 2. 


Xx] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


75 


΄ ΄σ A ΄σ \ 
τοτῶν τὰ πάντα, ὑπερεκπερισσῶς δὲ ἡμᾶς τοὺς προσπε- 


~ Cal \ ΄σ YY ΄σ 
φευγότας τοῖς οἰκτιρμοῖς αὐτοῦ διὰ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν 
᾿Ιησοῦ Χ ῦ, ᾧ ἡ δό ὶ ἡ λωσύνη εἰς τοὺς 
noov Χριστοῦ, ᾧ ἡ δόξα καὶ ἡ μεγα yn εἰ 


IA ~~ / ’ 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμῆην. 


“ > \ > 7 ΄σ 
XXI. ῥὉρᾶτε, ἀγαπητοί, μὴ αἱ εὐεργεσίαι αὐτοῦ 
ε \ , > / ~ 4 νὰ 2.4 \ Ss 
ai πολλαὶ γένωνται εἰς κρίμα πᾶσιν ἡμῖν, ἐὰν μη ἀξίως 
rat \ ’ ’ 
αὐτοῦ πολιτευόμενοι τὰ καλὰ καὶ εὐάρεστα ἐνώπιον αὐ- 


΄ ΄σ > / 
τοῦ ποιῶμεν μεθ᾽ ὁμονοίας. 


ea quae ad vitam, omitting μα ξούς altogether. 
10 προσπεφευγότα5] AS; προσφεύγοντας C. 
12 καὶ ἡ μεγαλωσύνη] AC; om. S. 


if συλλήψεις) 8. 
pois] οιἰκτειρμοισ A. 


λέγει yap mov: Πνεῦμα 


ἡ συνελεύσει5] AC; auxilia (as 
11 οἰκτιρ- 
15 εἰς κρίμα 


πᾶσιν ἡμῖν] A; εἰς κρίματα σὺν ἡμῖν C (ειοκριλλάτδογν for EICKPIMATTACIN) ; 


in judicium nobis S; see 1. p. 143+ 


life, ‘conducive to life? comp. Acts 
XXVii. 34 πρὸς τῆς ὑμετέρας σωτηρίας, 
Clem. Hom. viii. 14 πρὸς κόσμου καὶ 
τέρψεως, and see Winer § xvii. p. 391. 
This sense of πρὸς is more common 
in classical Greek. 

7. ovvedevoes] Comp. Jer. viii. 7 
‘The stork in the heaven knoweth 
his appointed times; and the turtle 
and the crane and the swallow ob- 
serve the time of their coming’, etc. 
Or it may refer to their pairing at 
the proper season of the year. Comp. 
Ptolem. Geogr. i. 9 (quoted in Steph. 
Thes.). 

8. δημιουργὸς] Only once in the 
New Testament, Heb. xi. 10: in the 
LXX again only in 2 Macc. iv. 1 (and 
there not of the Creator). On the 
Christian use of this Platonic phrase 
see Jahn’s Methodius 11. pp. 11, 39, 91. 

10. προσφεύγειν] Altogether a late 
and somewhat rare word: see 1 Sam. 
xxix. 3 (Sym.). It does not occur in 
the LXx or New Testament. 

12. ἡ δόξα καὶ ἡ pey.] Soagain ὃ 64. 
In the doxology Jude 25 also the two 
words occur together; comp. Ecclus. 


XXI. ‘His blessings will turn to 


16 αὐτοῦ pri.] AC; om. S. 


our curse unless we seek peace and 
strive to please Him. He sees all 
our most secret thoughts. Let us 
therefore offend foolish and arrogant 
men rather than God. Let us honour 
Christ ; let us respect our rulers, and 
revere old age; let us instruct our 
wives in purity and gentleness, and 
our children in humility and the fear 
of God. His breath is in us, and His 
pleasure can withdraw it in a mo- 
ment’. 

15. ἀξίως πολιτευόμενοι] The ex- 
pression occurs in Phil. i. 27. Cle- 
ment’s language here is echoed by 
Polycarp PAii. 5. 

16. εὐάρεστα ἐνώπιον] Heb. xiii. 21 ; 
comp. Ps. cxiv. 9. 

17. λέγει yap κ-τ.λ.] Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 17 (p. 611 sq) cites the re- 
mainder of this section and the whole 
of the next, continuously after §§ 17, 18 
(seethe note ὃ 17). For the most part he 
quotes in the same loose way, abridg- 
ing and interpolating as before; but 
here and there, asin the long passage 
τὰς γυναῖκας ἡμῶν .... ἀνελεῖ αὐτήν, he 
keeps fairly close to the words of his 
original and may be used as an au- 
thority for the readings. 


76 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xxi 


’ , > “a ‘ a -“ ’ a 
Kypioy λύχνος ἐρεγνῶν TA Tamieia TAC γδοτρόσ. Ιδωμεν 
- ? , > \ 4 Δ , > \ “ 
πῶς ἐγγύς ἐστιν, καὶ ὅτι οὐδὲν λέληθεν αὐτὸν τῶν 
δί- 


ΕΝ > 4 ~ ε ~ > A ΄ ’ 
καιον οὖν ἐστιν My λιποτακτεῖν ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ TOU θελη- 


΄ « ΄ ΕΣ ra nan e , 
ἐννοιῶν ἡμών οὐδὲ τῶν διαλογισμῶν ὧν ποιούμεθα. 


3 “- “- > / ν᾽ \ πεν μ“ 
ματος αὐτοῦ: μᾶλλον ἀνθρώποις ἄφροσι καὶ ἀνοήτοις 5 
> / “ ~ 
καὶ ἐπαιρομένοις Kal ἐγκαυχωμένοις ἐν ἀλαζονείᾳ τοῦ 
7 > ΄. / 3 ΄σ ΄ A / 
λόγου αὐτῶν προσκόψωμεν ἢ τῷ Θεῷ. Tov Κύριον 


᾿Ιησοῦν [Χριστόν], οὗ τὸ αἷμα ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἐδόθη, ἐντρα- 


I λύχνος] C Clem 611; λυχνον A. 
AC; add. modis S. 


te C. 5 μᾶλλον] AC; add. δὲ 5. 
μενοι A. ἀλαζονείᾳ] αλαΐζονια A. 
A; om. CS. νέους] ναιουσ A. 


Πνεῦμα Κυρίου κιτ.λ.] From Prov. 
xx. 27, which runs in the LXx φῶς 
Κυρίου πνοὴ ἀνθρώπων ὃς ἐρευνᾷ (€pavra) 
ταμεῖα (ταμιεῖα) κοιλίας. A adds ἢ 
λύχνος after ἀνθρώπων, but this must 
originally have been a gloss suggest- 
ing an alternative reading for φώς, as 
λύχνος is actually read by Aq. Sym. 
Theod. ; 566 ἃ similar instance of cor- 
rection in this MS noted above on § 17. 
Comp. also Prov. vi. 23 λύχνος ἐντολὴ 
νόμου καὶ φῶς, from which passage 
perhaps λύχνος came to be interpo- 
lated here. Hilgenfeld prints λέγει yap 
που πνεῦμα Κυρίου Λύχνος ἐρευνῶν K.T.A. 
and finds fault with Clem. Alex. for 
making the words πνεῦμα Κυρίου part 
of the quotation (λέγει yap που ἡ γραφή 
Πνεῦμα Κυρίου x.r.A.) ; but they seem to 
be wanted to complete the sentence. 
Our Clement in fact quotes loosely, 
transposing words so as to give a 
somewhat different sense. See below, 
Is. lx. 17 quoted in § 42. For the exact 
words λέγει γάρ mov see δὲ 15, 26, and 
for other instances of λέγει (or φησί) 
with no nominative expressed, §§ 8, 
To, 16, 29, 30, 46. On the spelling of 
ταμιεῖα (ταμεῖα) Clement (or his tran- 
scriber) is capricious: see § 50 (note). 


ταμιεῖα] AC; ταμεῖα Clem. 
ὅτι] AC; om. (?)S. 


2 ἐστιν 
4 λιποτακτεῖν] A; λειποτακ- 
6 ἐγκαυχωμένοις] εγκαυχω- 
8 Χριστόν] A; om. CS. 10 ἡμῶν] 
11 παιδείαν] παιδιαν A. τοῦ φόβου] 
2. ἐγγύς éorw] As below § 27; 
comp. Ps, xxxiv. 18, cxix. 151, cxlv. 
18, Ign. Ephes. 15 ra κρυπτὰ ἡμῶν ey- 
yes αὐτῷ ἐστιν (with the note), Herm. 
Vis. ii. 3. There is no allusion here 
to the nearness of the advent, as in 
Phil. iv. 5 (see the note there). 

οὐδὲν λέληθεν x.7.A.] This passage 
is copied by Polycarp “ἀξ, 4 καὶ 
λέληθεν αὐτὸν οὐδὲν οὔτε λογισμῶν 
οὔτε ἐννοιῶν. On διαλογισμοί, ‘inward 
guesttonings, see the note on Phil. 
ii, 14. 

4. λιποτακτεῖν] So αὐτομολεῖν be- 
low, § 28. Ignatius has the same 
metaphor but uses the Latin word, 
Polyc. 6 μήτις ὑμῶν δεσέρτωρ εὑρεθῇ: 
see the note there. 

On the authority of our older ms I 
have preferred the form λιποτακτεῖν. 
There is poetical authority for the 
simple vowel in λιποτάξιον; see 
Meineke Fragm. Com, 11. p. 1214, 
Ill. p. 71, with the notes. So too in 
analogous words, wherever they occur 
in verse, the form in ὁ is found: e.g. 
λιπαυγής, λιπόναυς, λιποναύτης, λι- 
πόπνοος, λιποσαρκής; λιποψυχεῖν. The 
grammarians differed on this point ; 
see Choeroboscus in Cramer’s A necd. 






























ΧΧΙ] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


77 


“ \ / “ “ \ 
πῶμεν: TOUS προηγουμένους ἡμῶν αἰδεσθῶμεν, τοὺς 


A / ΄σ 
THV παιδείαν ‘TOU 


e ΄ / \ / ’ 
το πρεσβυτέρους ἡμῶν τιμήσωμεν, τοὺς νέους παιδεύσωμεν 
ρ ᾽ 
7 ΄ ~ \ ~ 
φόβου τοῦ Θεοῦ, τὰς γυναῖκας ἡμῶν 


> \ A > \ la A > / ΄ 
ἐπὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν διορθωσώμεθα: τὸ ἀξιαγάπητον τῆς 
Ψ A > ἢ ΄σ ΝΑ 
ἁγνείας ἦθος ἐνδειξάσθωσαν, τὸ ἀκέραιον τῆς πραὕτητος 
> lod , \ > \ ΄ ’ 
αὐτῶν βούλημα ἀποδειξάτωσαν, τὸ ἐπιεικὲς τῆς γλωσ- 


΄ A ΄- ΄ \ ’ \ 
το σῆς αὐτῶν διὰ τῆς σιγῆς φανερὸν ποιησατωσαν' THY 


3 / > - \ \ , > ‘ ΄σ - 
ἀγάπην αὐτῶν, μὴ κατα προσκλίσεις, ἄλλα πασιν τοῖς 


AC; om. ὃς 
ἁγνείας. 


(καὶ βούλημα) 8. 


13 ἁγνείας] αγνιασ A. Clem 612 has the order ἦθος τῆς 
ἐνδειξάσθωσαν] AC Clem. 
Clem as ἐνδειξάτωσαν (ad Joc. and comp. p. pk’). 

15 σιγῆς] CS Clem; φωνησ A. 


Bryennios wrongly gives the reading of A 
14 βούλημα] AC; NII) 
16 mpockNice:s] 


AS; προσκλήσεις C. This same itacism occurs several times in C, 88 47, 50. 


Graec. Bibl. Oxon. 11. p. 239 λέγει 
ὁ Ὦρος ὅτι πάντα παρὰ τὸ λείπω διὰ 
τῆς εἰ διφθόγγου γράφεται, οἷον λειπό- 
νεως, λειποταξία, λειποτάξιον, λειπο- 
στράτειον᾽ ὁ δὲ ᾿Ωριγένης διὰ τοῦ ι λέγει 
γράφεσθαι. There seems to be no 
poetical and therefore indisputable 
authority for the εἰ. 

5. dp. καὶ ἀνοήτ.] LXX Jer. x. 8 
ἅμα ἄφρονες καὶ ἀνόητοί εἰσι, found in 
some copies, but not in the principal 
Mss. The former word points to 
defective reason, the latter to defec- 
tive perception. Comp. § 39. 

6. ἐγκαυχωμένοις κιτ.λ.] See James 
iv. 16 καυχᾶσθε ἐν ταῖς ἀλαζονείαις 
ὑμῶν. 

7. τὸν Κύριον κιτ.λ.] Clem. Alex. 
(p. 611 sq), as commonly punctuated, 
quotes the passage τὸν Κύριον Ἰησοῦν 
λέγω... οὗ τὸ αἷμα ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἡγιάσθη" 
ἐντραπῶμεν οὖν τοὺς προηγουμένους 1- 
μῶν, καὶ αἰδεσθῶμεν τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους " 
τιμήσωμεν τοὺς νέους, παιδεύσωμεν τὴν 
παιδείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ. A different punctua- 
tion, καὶ αἰδεσθῶμεν᾽ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους 


ἜΣ , ζ ‘ ΄ , 
᾿ς τιμήσωμεν' τοὺς νέουςπαιδεύσωμενκ.τιλ., 







would bring the quotation somewhat 
nearer to the original. 
9. τοὺς προηγουμένους i.e. the offi- 


cers of the Church; see the note on 
τοῖς ἡγουμένοις ὃ 1. The following 
τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους must therefore refer 
to age, not to office. 

10. τοὺς νέους κιτ.λ.] Copied by Po- 
lycarp Phil. 4 τὰ τέκνα παιδεύειν τὴν 
παιδείαν τοῦ φόβου τοῦ Θεοῦ. Comp. 
Prov. xvi. 4 (xv. 33) φόβος Κυρίου 
παιδεία, and Ecclus. i. 27 where the 
same words are repeated. 

15. σιγῆς] They must be eloquent 
by their silence, for γυναιξὶ κόσμον ἡ 
σιγὴ φέρει. This meaning is so obvi- 
ously required, that I had restored 
σιγῆς in my first edition on the au- 
thority of the Alexandrian Clement 
alone in place of the senseless φωνῆς 
of A. It is now confirmed by our 
two new authorities. Hilgenfeld re- 
fers to 1 Cor. xiv. 34 sq, 1 Tim. ii. 11. 

τὴν ἀγάπην κιτ.λ.}] So too Polyc. 
Phil. 4 ἀγαπώσας πάντας ἐξ ἴσου ἐν 
πάσῃ ἐγκρατείᾳ. The numerous close 
coincidences with this chapter in 
Polycarp show plainly that he had 
our epistle before him. 

16. κατὰ προσκλίσεις] From 1 Tim. 
Vv. 21 μηδὲν ποιῶν κατὰ πρόσκλισιν. 
The word πρόσκλισις occurs again 


§§ 47, 50. 


78 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[ΧΧῚ 


/ ‘ 4 ε , » , \ 
φοβουμένοις Tov Θεὸν ὁσίως ἴσην παρεχέτωσαν' τὰ 
, ~ - a , , 
τέκνα ἡμῶν THs ἐν Χριστῷ παιδείας μεταλαμβανέτωσαν" 
΄ / \ ΄σ ΄ / 
μαθέτωσαν, τί ταπεινοφροσύνη παρὰ Θεῷ ἰσχύει, τί 
> ΄ ε \ \ ΄ ΄ ’ ΄ ε , > ΄σ 
ἀγάπη ὡγνὴ παρὰ τῷ Θεῷ δύναται, πῶς ὁ φόβος αὐτοῦ 
\ \ / \ ’ \ > “ / 
καλος Kal μέγας Kal σώζων πάντας τοὺς ἐν αὐτῷ ὁσίως 5 
/ ΄- 3 \ / 
ἀναστρεφομένους ἐν καθαρᾷ διανοίᾳ" ἐρευνητῆς yap ἐστιν 
> ~ A / Φ \ ΄ ΄ 
ἐννοιῶν καὶ ἐνθυμήσεων" οὗ ἡ πνοὴ αὐτοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν ἐστιν, 
δ' Ἦν / na / 
καὶ ὅταν θέλη ἀνελεῖ αὐτήν. 
XXII. 


\ > \ \ ΄σ , ~ / «“ 
τις" καὶ γὰρ auTos διὰ TOU πνευματος TOU ὧγίου OUTWS 


Ταῦτα δὲ πάντα βεβαιοῖ ἡ ἐν Χριστῷ Tic- 


προσκαλεῖται ἡμάς: Δεῦτε τέκνὰ, ἀκογοὰτέ Moy, φόβον 
Kypioy διλάξω ὑμᾶς. Tic ἐστιν ἄνθρωπος ὁ θέλων ZOHN, 
ἀγαπῶν ἡμέρας ἰδεῖν ἀγαθᾶς; TAYCON τὴν γλῶοοδν Coy ἀπὸ 


KAKOY, Kal χείλη τοῦ μὴ λὰλῆοσδι δόλον" ἔκκλινον ἀπὸ 


2 ἡμῶν] S Clem; ὑμῶν AC. μεταλαμβανέτωσαν] AC; μεταλαβέτωσαν 


Clem. 3 ἰσχύει] wx A. 4 τῷ] A; om. C Clem. αὐτοῦ] ACS; 
τοῦ κυρίου Clem. 5 καὶ σώζων] AC; et liberans et salvans S; σώζων (om. καὶ) 
Clem. ὁσίως] AC; θείως S. See above, 88 2, 14. 6 διανοίᾳ] AC; 


- καρδίᾳ Clem. ἐστι» AC; om. Clem. ἡ ἐνθυμήσεων] C3 ενθυμησαιων 
A; ἐνθυμημάτων Clem. 8 ἀνελεῖ] A; ἀναιρεῖ CS. g δὲ] AC; om. 8. 
10 o’rws] AC; but Bryennios reads οὕτω without indicating that he is departing 
from his Ms. 12 τίς ἐστιν ἄνθρωπος] C omits from here to ῥύσεται αὐτὸν ὁ 
Κύριος, and begins again εἶτα πολλαὶ αἱ μάστιγες τοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ x.7.d. (1. 21). 


I. ὁσίως] This word is best taken ful and God-loving, but threatening 


with παρεχέτωσαν; for it would be an 
unmeaning addition to τοῖς φοβουμέ- 
νοις Tov Θεύν. 


6. ἐρευνητὴς ed.) As Heb. iv. 12 


κριτικὸς ἐνθυμήσεων καὶ ἐννοιῶν Kap- 
δίας. 

7. οὗ..«αὐτοῦῦὶ͵ A Hebraism, for 
which see Winer § xxii. p. 161. 

8. ἀνελεῖ] On the rare future ἑλῶ 
of aipéw see Winer § xv. p. 94 with 
his references: comp. Exod. xv. 9, 
2 Thess, ii. 6. 

XXII. ‘All these things are as- 
sured by faith in Christ. He himself 
speaks to us by the lips of David, 
promising all blessings to the peace- 


utter destruction to the sinful and 
disobedient’. 

9. Ταῦτα δὲ πάντα κ.τ.λ.] 1.6. Faith 
in Christ secures all these good re- 
sults ; for it is He Himself who thus 
appeals to us, not indeed in the flesh, 
but through the Spirit, where David 
says ‘Come etc.’ For αὐτὸς προσκα- 
λεῖται see above, ὃ 16 αὐτός φησιν, with 
the note. 

11. Δεῦτε x.7.A.] From LXX Ps. xxxiv. 
11 sq almost word for word. The 
differences are unimportant. 

18. τὸ μνημόσυνον] See the note on 
ἐνκατάλειμμα above ὃ 14. 

ἐκέκραξεν] In the existing text of 








xx] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


79 


15 KAKOY KAl TOIHCON Arfa@GN* ZHTHCON εἰρήνην Kal AI@ZON 


aYTHN. dOadmol Kypioy ἐπὶ Aikaioyc, Kal ὦτὰ δύὐτοῦ πρὸς 


AEHCIN ἀὐτῶν: πρόοωπον δὲ Κγρίογ ἐπὶ ποιοῦντὰς KAKA 


TOY ἐξολεθρεῦζοὰλι ἐκ γῆς τὸ MNHMOCYNON AYTON. EKEKPAZEN 


ὁ Aikaioc Kai ὁ Κύριος εἰοήκογοεν ayToy Kal ἐκ πὰοῶν 


20 τῶν θλίψεων AYTOY ἐρύολτο δύτόν. 


πολλδὶ al θλίψεις τοῦ 


Alkaloy Kai ἐκ πδοῶν ῥύήοετδι ἀὐτὸν ὁ Κύριος: εἶτα" 


Πολλδὶ δὶ mactirec τοῦ ἁμὰρτωλοῦ, τοὺς δὲ ἐλπίζοντδς 


ἐπὶ Κύριον ἔλεος κγκλώσει. 


XXIII. Ὃ οἰκτίρμων κατὰ πάντα καὶ εὐεργετικὸς 


\ af , > \ \ “4 > / 
25 πατήρ ἔχει σπλάγχνα ἐπὶ τοὺς φοβουμένους αὐτόν, 
f / ΄σ \ lal ~ ΄ 
ἠπίως τε καὶ προσηνῶς τὰς χάριτας αὐτοῦ ἀποδιδοῖ τοῖς 


/ > ~ ¢€ ~ / \ \ “ 
προσερχομένοις αὐτῷ ἁπλῇ διανοίᾳ. διὸ μὴ διψυχώ- 
μεν, μηδὲ ἰνδαλλέσθω ἡ ψυχὴ ἡμῶν ἐπὶ ταῖς ὑπερβαλ- 


14 καὶ] A Clem (with Lxx); om. 8. 


LXX (v. 1.). 
S (with BS of Lxx), 
See below. 20 θλίψεων] θλιψαιων A. 


Orivers...6 Κύριος] S; om. A; def. C. 


χείλη] A; add. cov S Clem with the 


16 ὀφθαλμοὶ] A Clem (with A of Lxx and Hebr); ὅτε ὀφθαλμοὶ 
πρὸς] A; εἰς Clem with the Lxx. 


18 ἐκέκραξεν κ.τ.λ.} 
αὐτοῦ] om. Clem. πολλαὶ al 
21 εἶτα] C; et iterum S, frequently a 


translation of καὶ πάλιν, which possibly we should read here; but see below, § 23, 


μετὰ ταῦτα. 


22 ai] ACS; μὲν γὰρ Clem. 


τοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ] AC; τῶν 


ἁμαρτωλῶν Clem LXX. τοὺς δὲ ἐλπίζοντας] A Clem; τὸν δὲ ἐλπίζοντα CS with the Lxx 


and Hebr. 


Clem. Alex. this is read ἐκέκραξεν δὲ ὁ 
Κύριος καὶ εἰσήκουσε, obviously a cor- 
ruption. 

20. πολλαὶ ai θλίψεις x.7.A.] This is 
from Ps, xxxiv (xxxiii). 20, the verse 
but one following the preceding quo- 
tation. The LxXx however has the 
plural τῶν δικαίων, αὐτούς, and so it is 
quoted in 4 Macc. xviii. 15. The 
Hebrew has the singular, and so the 
Peshito. The words have obviously 
been omitted in A owing to the re- 
currence of Πολλαὶ ai, and should be 
restored accordingly. 

Πολλαὶ ai μάστιγες κ-τ.λ.] An exact 
quotation from Ps. xxxii. τὸ (LXx), 
except that τοὺς ἐλπίζοντας is sub- 


23 ἔλεος] C Clem; eAatoo A. 


24 οἰκτίρμων] οἰκτειρμων A. 


stituted for τὸν ἐλπίζοντα. 

XXIII. ‘God is merciful to all 
that fear Him. Let us not spurn 
His gracious gifts. Far be from us 
the threats which the Scriptures hurl 
against the double-minded, the im- 
patient, the sceptical. The Lord will 
certainly come, and come quickly’. 

28. ἰνδαλλέσθω] ‘indulge in ca- 
prices and humours’. The word is 
generally passive, ‘to be formed as 
an image’, ‘to appear’, and with a 
dative ‘to resemble’; see Ruhnken 
Timaeus sv. Were however it is a 
middle signifying ‘to form images, to 
conjure up spectres’, and so ‘to in- 
dulge in idle fancies’, like the later 


80 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [Xx1II 


/ ΄ - 
λούσαις καὶ ἐνδόξοις δωρεαῖς αὐτοῦ. πόρρω γενέσθω ἀφ᾽ 
΄ ε «“ 4 , ' > ε 
ἡμῶν ἡ γραφὴ αὕτη, ὅπου λέγει" Ταλδίπωροί eicin οἱ 
δίψγχοι, οἱ AICTAZONTEC τὴν YYXHN, οἱ λέγοντεο, Ταῦτὰ ἠκού- 


CAMEN Kal ἐπὶ τῶν TATEPWN ἡμῶν, Kal ἰδοὺ γεγηράἄκδμεν 


1 πόρρω γενέσθω] AS; πόρρω γε γενέσθω C. See below, § 33. 
3 τὴν ψυχήν] A; τῇ ψυχῇ C; dub. 5. 


AS; αὐτοῦ C. 


use of φαντάζεσθαι. The lexicons do 
not recognize this use, but see Dion 
Chrys. Orat. xii. 53 (p. 209 M) mpore- 
pov μὲν yap ἅτε οὐδὲν σαφὲς εἰδότες 
ἄλλην ἄλλος ἀνεπλάττομεν ἰδέαν, πᾶν 
τὸ θνητὸν κατὰ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ δύναμιν καὶ 
φύσιν ἰνδαλλόμενοι καὶ ὀνειρώττοντες, 
Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vii. 249 ἔνιαι 
(φαντασίαι) πάλιν ἀπὸ ὑπάρχοντος μέν 
εἰσιν, οὐκ αὐτὸ δὲ τὸ ὑπάρχον ἰνδάλ- 
λονται κιτιλ., Xi. 122 6 τὸν πλοῦτον 
μέγιστον ἀγαθὸν ἰνδαλλόμενος, Clem. 
Alex. Protr. 10 (p. 81) χρυσὸν ἢ 
λίθον ἢ δένδρον ἢ πρᾶξιν ἢ πάθος 
ἢ νόσον ἢ φόβον ἰνδάλλεσθαι ὡς θεόν, 
Method. Symp. viii. 2 ἔτι ἐνδημοῦσαι 
τοῖς σώμασιν ἰνδάλλονται τὰ θεῖα. (The 
last two passages I owe to Jahn’s 
Method. τι. p. 51; the others I had 
collected before I saw his note.) So 
ἴνδαλμα most frequently suggests the 
idea of an unreal, spectral, appear- 
ance, as Wisd. xvii. 3 ivdaApaow ἐκ- 
ταρασσόμενοι, Clem. Hom. iv. 4 φαν- 
τάσματά τε γὰρ καὶ ἰνδάλματα ἐν μέσῃ 
τῇ ἀγορᾷ φαίνεσθαι ποιῶν δι’ ἡμέρας 
πᾶσαν ἐκπλήττει τὴν πόλιν, Athenag. 
Suppl. 27 αἱ οὖν ἄλογοι αὗται καὶ ἰν- 
δαλματώδεις τῆς ψυχῆς κινήσεις εἰδω- 
λομανεῖς ἀποτίκτουσι φαντασίας, where 
he is speaking of false objects of wor- 
ship. 

2. Ταλαίπωροι x.t.A.] The same pas- 
sage is quoted also in the 2nd Epistle 
ascribed to Clement (§ 11), being there 
introduced by the words λέγει yap καὶ 
ὁ προφητικὸς λόγος. Though the quo- 
tation there is essentially the same, 
yet the variations which it presents 
show that it cannot have been de- 


> 


2 αὕτη] 
5 συνβέβηκεν 


rived directly or solely from the First 
Epistle. Moreover it is there con- 
tinued, οὕτως καὶ ὁ λαός μου ἀκαταστα- 
σίας καὶ θλίψεις ἔσχεν, ἔπειτα ἀπολή- 
Wera τὰ ἀγαθά. As this passage does 
not occur in the Old Testament, it 
must have been taken from some lost 
apocryphal writing. Some writers 
indeed have supposed that Clement 
here, as he certainly does elsewhere 
(e.g. 85 18, 26, 29, 32, 35, 39, 46, 50, 
52, 53, and just below ταχὺ ἥξει 
k.7.A.), is fusing several passages of 
the Canonical Scriptures, such as 
James i. 8, 2 Pet. iii. 4, Mark iv. 26, 
Matt. xxiv. 32 sq (Mark xiii. 28 sq, 
Luke xxi. 29 sq); but the resem- 
blances though striking are not suffi- 
cient, and this explanation does not 
account for the facts already men- 
tioned. The description ὁ προφητικὸς 
λόγος and the form of the quotation 
ὁ λαός μου κοιτιλ., aS given in the 2nd 
Epistle, show that it must have been 
taken from some spurious prophetic 
book formed on the model of the 
Canonical prophecies. I would con- 
jecture that it was E/dad and Modad, 
which was certainly known in the 
early Roman Church; see Herm. Vzs. 
ii. 3 ἐγγὺς Κύριος τοῖς ἐπιστρεφομένοις, 
ὡς γέγραπται ἐν τῷ ᾿Ελδὰδ καὶ Μωδὰδ 
τοῖς προφητεύσασιν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ τῷ 
λαῷ, a passage alleged by Hermas 
for the same purpose as our quota- 
tion, to refute one who is sceptical 
about the approaching afflictions of 
the last times. On this apocryphal 
book see Fabricius Cod, Pseud. V.T. — 
I.p.801. It may have been forged by — 








































ΨᾺ 
νι 


nf 
δι 
past generations, or (as seems more 


XXII] 


Kal OYAEN ἡμῖν TOYT@N CYNBEBHKEN. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


81 


> > , , 
ὦ ANOHTOI, CYMBAAETE 


ἑδυτοὴς ξύλῳ: λάβετε ἄμπελον πρῶτον MEN φυλλοροεῖ, 


εἶτα Βλδοτὸς γίνετδι, εἶτα φύλλον, εἶτὰ ἄνθος, κὰἂὰὶ μετὰ 


TAaYTa ὄμφδξ, εἶτα οταφυλὴ mapectukyia. Ὁρᾶτε, ὅτι ἐν 


Α; συμβέβηκεν C. 


6 πρῶτον μὲν φυλλοροεῖ] AS; om. C. 


7 καὶ μετὰ 


ταῦτα] translated in S as if εἶτα, the καὶ being omitted. 


some Christian to sustain the courage 
of the brethren under persecution 
by the promise of the Lord’s advent; 
and, if so, the resemblances to the 
New Testament writings in this quo- 
tation are explained. Hilgenfeld sug- 
gests the Assumption of Moses (see 
the notes § 17, 25) as the source of 
this quotation, but does not assign 
any reason for this view except his 
own theory that Clement was ac- 
quainted with that work. 

of δίψυχοι κιτ.λ.] Comp. James i. 8 
ἀνὴρ δίψυχος ἀκατάστατος ἐν πάσαις 
ταῖς ὁδοῖς αὐτοῦ. For the parallels in 
Hermas see the note on §11. The 
conjecture in the last note is con- 
firmed by the fact that Hermas gives 
repeated warnings against διψυχία 
and even speaks thereupon in the 
context of the passage referring to 
‘Eldad and Modad.’ For close re- 
semblances to this quotation see V7s. 
iii. 4 διὰ τοὺς διψύχους τοὺς διαλογι- 
ζομένους ἐν ταῖς καρδίαις αὐτῶν εἰ ἄρα 
ἔσται ταῦτα ἢ οὐκ ἔσται, Mand. ix. οἱ 
γὰρ διστάζοντες εἰς τὸν Θεὸν οὗτοί εἰσιν 
οἱ δίψυχοι κ-τιλ. 

3. οἱ λέγοντες κιτ.λ.] 2 Pet. iii. 4 
καὶ λέγοντες Ποῦ ἐστιν ἡ ἐπαγγελία τῆς 
παρουσίας αὐτοῦ; ἀφ᾽ ἧς γὰρ οἱ πατέρες 
ἐκοιμήθησαν, πάντα οὕτως διαμένει ἀπ᾽ 
ἀρχῆς κτίσεως. 

4. καὶ ἐπὶ] ‘also in the time of’. 
Either the speakers use the first 
person ἠκούσαμεν as identifying them- 
selves with the Israelite people of 


probable) ἐπὶ τῶν πατέρων must mean 
‘when our fathers were still alive’, 
i.e. ‘in our childhood and youth,’ It 


CLEM. I, 


will be remembered that this apo- 
cryphal prophecy is supposed to be 
delivered to the Israelites in the 
wilderness. At all events we cannot 
arbitrarily change ἐπὶ into ἀπὸ with 
Young and most subsequent editors 
(Jacobson and Hilgenfeld are excep- 
tions), for ém is read in both our 
MSS, both here and in ii. § 11. 

6. λάβετε ἄμπελον κιτ.λ] The 
words strongly resemble Mark iv. 26 
sq (comp. Matt. xxiv. 32 sq, Mark xiii. 
28 sq, Luke xxi. 29 sq). See also 
Epict. Déss. iii. 24. 86 ὡς σῦκον, ὡς 
σταφυλή, τῇ τεταγμένῃ ὥρᾳ Tov ἔτους, 
iii. 24. ΟἹ τὸ φυλλορροεῖν καὶ τὸ ἰσχάδα 
γίνεσθαι ἀντὶ σύκου καὶ ἀσταφίδας ἐκ 
τῆς σταφυλῆς κιτιλ., M. Anton. xi. 35 
ὄμφαξ, σταφυλή, σταφίς, πάντα μετα- 
βολαὶ οὐκ εἰς τὸ μὴ ὃν ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸ νῦν 


μὴ Ov. 

φυλλοροεῖ] For the orthography 
see the note on ἐξερίζωσεν ὃ 6. 

8, παρεστηκυῖα) ‘rife’; Exod. ix. 
41 ἡ yap κριθὴ παρεστηκυῖα. So Theo- 
phrastus Caus. Plant, vi.7. 5 παριστά- 
μενος καὶ ἐξιστάμενος, of wine ripening 
and going off (see Schneider’s note). 
Similarly παραγίνεσθαι is used, eg. 
Herod. i. 193 παραγίνεται ὁ σῖτος. 
The words ὄμφαξ, σταφυλή, σταφίς 
(ἀσταφίς), denote the sour, ripe, and 
dried grape respectively; see the 
passages in the previous note, and add 
Anthol. Il. p. 3, IV. p. 131 (ed. Jacobs). 

Ὁρᾶτε «.t.A.] This sentence is 
generally treated by the editors as 
part of the quotation, but I think this 
wrong for two reasons; (1) In the 
2nd Epistle, where also the passage 
is cited, after σταφυλὴ παρεστηκυῖα fol- 


ν 6 


82 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT ( [ΧΧΠῚ 


a 9 7 > , ΄ ε \ ΄ / 
καιρᾷ ὀλίγῳ εἰς πέπειρον καταντᾷ ὁ καρπὸς TOU ξύλου. 
a r4 é 
>. fs / \ ἘΠ ὁ , , \ 
ἀπ᾽ ἀληθείας ταχὺ καὶ ἐξαίφνης τελειωθήσεται τὸ βού- 
΄ ΄σ ΄ ε 
λημα αὐτοῦ, συνεπιμαρτυρούσης καὶ τῆς γραφῆς ὅτι 
TAXY ἥξει Kal OY χρονιεῖ, Kal ἐξδίφνης ἥξει ὁ Κύριος εἶς 
TON NAON δὐτοῦ, Kal ὁ ἅγιος ὃν ὑμεῖς προοδοκᾶτε, 5 
΄“ 4 
XXIV. Κατανοήσωμεν, ἀγαπητοί, πῶς ὁ δεσπότης 
> ΄σ a \ > / 
ἐπιδείκνυται διηνεκῶς ἡμῖν τὴν μέλλουσαν ἀνάστασιν 
af v | > \ > / A 7 > - 
ἔσεσθαι, ns THY ἀπαρχὴν ἐποιήσατο τὸν Κύριον ᾿Ιησοῦν 
af > / \ 
ἴδωμεν, ἀγαπητοί, THY 
€ / \ \ 
ἥμερα καὶ we 


΄ / 
Χριστὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστήσας. 


\ ‘ / / 
κατα καιρὸν γινομένην ἀνάστασιν. 


2 ἐξαίφνης} εξεφνησ A. 4 ἐξαίφνης] 
ἐπιδείκνυται διηνεκῶς ἡμῖν] A (but επιδικνυται); διηνεκῶς _ 
ἡμῖν ἐπιδείκνυσι C3; monstrat nobis perpetuo S. 8 τὴν ἀπαρχὴν] AC; add. 
ἤδη S. 9 Χριστὸν] AS; om. C, Io κατὰ καιρὸν] C3; Karaka... 
A; in omni tempore S. γινομένην] AC; add. ἡμῖν 8. 11 κοιμᾶται... 
ἡμέρα] AC; S renders as if it had read κοιμᾶται [ris] νυκτός, ἀνίσταται ἡμέρας. 


I πέπειρον] πεπιρον A. 
εξαιχνησ A. 


lows immediately the sentence οὕτως 
καὶ 6 λαός μου κιτιλ.; the words ὁρᾶτε 
κιτιλ. not only not being quoted but 
being hardly compatible with the form 
of the context as there given ; (2) ὁρᾶτε 
is an expression by which Clement 
himself elsewhere, after adducing a 
quotation or an example, enforces its 
lesson; as § 4, 12, 16, 41, 50. 

I. εἰς πέπειρον] ‘to maturity’. The 
construction καταντᾶν eis is common 
in the Lxx and N.T.; see also above 
§ 5. 

4. ταχὺ ἥξει κιτ.λ.] A combina- 
tion of Is. xiii. 32 ταχὺ ἔρχεται καὶ οὐ 


χρονιεῖ (comp. Hab. ii. 3, Heb. x. 37), | 


and Mal. iii. 1 καὶ ἐξαίφνης ἥξει εἰς 
τὸν ναὸν αὐτοῦ Κύριος ὃν ὑμεῖς ζητεῖτε 
καὶ 6 ἄγγελος τῆς διαθήκης ὃν ὑμεῖς 
θέλετε. The substitution of ὁ ἅγιος 
for ὁ ἄγγελος κιτιλ. may have been 
intentional, but is much more pro- 
bably an inadvertence of Clement, 
who quotes from memory largely but 
loosely and is influenced by the in- 
terpretation which he has in view 


(e.g. § 42 καταστήσω τοὺς ἐπισκόπους 
x.7.A., where he cites Is, lx.17). This 
portion of Malachi’s prophecy is 
quoted much less frequently in early 
Christian writers than we should have 
expected. On the other hand the 
first part of the same verse ἰδοὺ dzo- 
στέλλω τὸν ἄγγελόν μου is quoted 
Matth. xi. το, Mark i. 2, Luke vii. 27, 
and not seldom by the early fathers, 
by whom, following the evangelists, it 
is explained of John the Baptist. 

XXIV. ‘All the works of the 
Creator bear witness to the resur- 
rection. The day arises from the 
grave of the night. The young and 
fruitful plant springs up from the 
decayed seed’. 

The eloquent passage in Tertullian 
de Resurr. Carn, 12, 13, where the 
same analogies are adduced, is pro- 
bably founded on this passage of 
Clement (see above, I. p. 160). Com- 
pare also Theoph. ad Aut. i. 13, 
Tertull. AZo. 34, Minuc. Fel. 48, 
especially the passage of Theophilus, 











TO THE CORINTHIANS. 83 


xxv] 


> , conan ΄σ » fol e / ee 

ἀνάστασιν ἡμῖν δηλοῦσιν" κοιμᾶται ἡ νυξ, ἀνίσταται 

ε ε : Pee 4 of \ > , / 

nuEepa* ἡ ἡμέρα ἀπεισιν, νυξ ἐπέρχεται. λάβωμεν 

\ , / “ \ / / 

TOUS καρπούς" ὁ σπόρος πῶς καὶ τίνα τρόπον γίνεται; 

or ε ͵ ᾽" \ - / - 

ἐξῆλθεν ὁ οπείρων καὶ ἔβαλεν εἰς τὴν γῆν ἕκαστον τῶν 

/ e/ / > \ ΄σ \ 

15 σπερμάτων, ἅτινα TETOVTA εἰς THY γῆν Enpa καὶ γυμνὰ 
/ ΠΕ fe -~ / ε ΄ 

διαλύεται. εἶτ᾽ ἐκ τῆς διαλύσεως ἡ μεγαλειότης τῆς 


/ - / 7 / > “ 
προνοίας τοῦ δεσπότου ἀνίστησιν αὐτά, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ ἑνὸς 


πλείονα αὔξει καὶ ἐκφέρει καρπόν. 


XXV. Ιδωμεν τὸ παράδοξον σημεῖον, τὸ γινό- 


- > ~ / - 
20 μενον ἐν τοῖς ἀνατολικοῖς τόποις, τουτέστιν τοῖς περὶ 


ἀνίσταται ἡμέρα] ἀνίσταται ἡ ἡμέρα C; ανισταταιη... A. After the Η Tisch. thinks 
he sees part of a second Η and would therefore read ἡ ἡμέρα. Having more than 
once inspected this Ms, I could only discern a stroke which might as well belong to 
a M as to an H; and the parallelism of the clauses suggests the omission of the 


article. 


which has many points in common 
with Clement. 

8, τὴν ἀπαρχὴν] 1 Cor. xv. 20 
Χριστὸς ἐγήγερται ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀπαρχὴ 
τῶν κεκοιμημένων ; COMP. ver. 23. Τί 
is evident from what follows that 
Clement has this 15th chapter in his 
mind. 

10. κατὰ καιρὸν] ‘at its proper 
season’. Inmy first edition I adopted 
the reading κατὰ καιρούς, ‘at each 
recurring season’; as in the parallel 
_ passage Theoph. ad Aut. i. 13 κατὰ 
καιροὺς προφέρουσιν τοὺς καρπούς, but 
in deference to the recently dis- 
covered authorities, I now adopt 
κατὰ καιρόν. 

12. λάβωμεν] So again ὃ 37 λά- 
βωμεν τὸ σῶμα ἡμῶν. 

14. ἐξῆλθεν κιτ.λ.] The expression 
is borrowed from the Gospel narra- 
_ tive; Matt. xiii. 3, Mark iv. 3, Luke 
| xiii. 5. 

15. γυμνὰ] See 1 Cor. xv. 36 54, 
_ from which this epithet is derived. 
| It denotes the absence of germina- 
_ tion; see the rabbinical passages 









15 ξηρὰ καὶ γυμνὰ] AC; ξηρὰν 8. 


quoted by Wetstein on 1 Cor. lL. c., 
and Methodius in Epiphan. Haer. 
Ixiv. 44 (p. 570) κατάμαθε yap ra σπέρ- 
ματα πῶς γυμνὰ Kal ἄσαρκα βάλλεται 
εἰς τὴν γῆν κιτ.λ. 

16. διαλύεται] ‘vot’. Comp. Theoph. 
ad Aut. i. 13 πρῶτον ἀποθνήσκει 
καὶ Avera. This analogy is derived 
from 1 Cor. xv. 36; comp. John xii. 
24. 

18, αὔξει] Intransitive, as in Ephes. 
11, 21, Col. ii. 19. It is treated how- 
ever as a transitive in the Syriac, 
where αὔξει and ἐκφέρει have the 
same subject as ἀνίστησιν. 

XXV. ‘The phoenix is a still more 
marvellous symbol of the resurrec- 
tion. After living five hundred years 
he dies. From his corpse the young 
bird arises. When he is fledged and 
strong, he carries his father’s bones 
and lays them on the altar of the sun 
at Heliopolis. This is done in broad 
daylight before the eyes of all: and 
the priests, keeping count of the 
time, find that just five hundred 
years have gone by’. 


6—2 


84 


τὴν ᾿λραβίαν. 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


[xxv 


A / 
ὄρνεον γάρ ἐστιν ὃ προσονομάζεται 


1 ὄρνεον ορναιον A. 


I. ὄρνεον κιτ.λ.] The earliest men- 
tion of the phoenix is in Hesiod 
(Fragm. 50 ed. Gaisf.), who however 
speaks merely of its longevity. It is 
from Herodotus (ii. 73) that we first 
hear the marvellous story of the burial 
of the parent bird by the offspring, 
as it was told him by the Egyptian 
priests, but he adds cautiously ἐμοὶ 
μὲν ov πιστὰ λέγοντες. It is men- 
tioned again by Antiphanes (Athen. 
xiv. p. 655 B) ἐν Ἡλίου μέν φασι γίγ- 
νεσθαι πόλει φοίνικας. From the 
Greeks the story passed to the Ro- 
mans. In B.C. 97 a learned senator 
Manilius (Plin. V. 7. x. 2) discoursed 
at length on the pheenix, stating that 
the year in which he wrote was the 
215th since its last appearance. He 
was the first Roman who took up the 
subject. At the close of the reign of 
Tiberius—A.D. 36 according to Pliny 
(following Cornelius Valerianus) and 
Dion Cassius (lviii. 27), but A.D. 34 
as Tacitus reports the date—the 
marvellous bird was said to have 
reappeared in Egypt. The truth of 
the statement however was ques- 
tioned by some, as less than 250 
years had elapsed since the reign of 
the third Ptolemy when it was seen 
last (Tac. Amn. vi. 28). But the 
report called forth many learned dis- 
quisitions from savants in Egypt 
both native and Greek. A few years 
later (A.D. 47) the bird was actually 
exhibited in Rome (‘in comitio pro- 
positus, guwod actis testatum est, are 
Pliny’s words) and may have been 
seen by Clement, but no one doubted 
that this was an imposture. The 
story of the phoenix of course has a 
place in Ovid’s Metamorphoses (xv. 
392 ‘Una est quae reparet seque ipsa 
reseminet ales’ etc.), and allusions 
to it in Latin poets are naturally 


not unfrequent. Claudian devotes a 
whole poem to it. Another ascribed 
to Lactantius (Corp. Poet. Lat. p. 1416 
ed. Weber) also takes this same sub- 
ject. The references to the phoenix 
in classical and other writers are 
collected by Henrichsen de Phoenicis 
Jabula Havn., 1825. 

The main features of the account 
seem to have been very generally 
believed by the Romans. Thus Mela 
(iii. 8), who seems to have flourished 
in the reign of Claudius, repeats the 
marvellous story without any expres- 
sion of misgiving. Pliny indeed de- 
clines to pronounce whether it is 
true or not (‘haud scio an fabulose’); 
but Tacitus says no doubt is enter- 
tained of the existence of such a bird, 
though the account is in some points 
uncertain or exaggerated. Again 
Elian (Hist. An. vi. 58), who lived - 
in Hadrian’s reign, alleges the phoenix 
as an instance of the superiority of 
brute instinct over human reason, 
when a bird can thus reckon the time 
and discover the place without any 
guidance; and somewhere about the 
same time or later Celsus (Origen ὦ 
Cels. iv. 98, I. p. 576), arguing against 
the Christians, brings it forward to 
show the greater piety of the lower — 
animals as compared with man. 
Still later Philostratus (Vit. Afpoll. 
iii. 49) mentions the account without 
recording any protest. I do not lay 
any stress on such passing allusions 
as Seneca’s (12. Mor. 42 ‘Ille alter 
fortasse tamquam phoenix semel anno 
quingentesimo nascitur’), or on de- 
scriptions in romance writers like 
Achilles Tatius (iii. 25), because no 
argument can be founded on them. 

It thus appears that Clement is 
not more credulous than the most 
learned and intelligent heathen wri- 








xxv] 


ters of the preceding and following 
generations. Indeed he may have 
thought that he had higher sanction 
than the testimony of profane authors. 
Tertullian (de Resurv. Carn. 10) took 
Ps. xcii. 12 δίκαιος ὡς φοῖνιξ ἀνθήσει 
to refer to this prodigy of nature, and 
Clement may possibly have done the 
same. Even Job xxix. 18 is trans- 
lated by several recent critics, ‘With 
my nest shall I die and like the 
phoenix lengthen my days’ (comp. 
Lucian Hermot. § 53 ἣν μὴ φοίνικος 
ἔτη βιώσῃ), therein following some 
rabbinical authorities: but even if 
this be the correct rendering, the Lxx 
version, through which alone it would 
be known to Clement, gives a different 
sense to the words, ἡ ἡλικία μου ynpa- 
get ὥσπερ στέλεχος φοίνικος, πολὺν 
χρόνον βιώσω. The passage of Job 
xxix, 18, in relation to the pheenix, is 
the subject of a paper by Merx in 
his Archiv. f. Wiss. Forsch. d. Alt. 
Test. 11. p. 104 sq (1871), 

At all events, even before the Chris- 
tian era the story had been adopted by 
Jewish writers. In a poem on the 
Exodus written by one Ezekiel, pro- 
bably an Alexandrian Jew in the 2nd 
or 3rd century B.C. (see Ewald Gesch. 
IV. p. 297), the phoenix, the sacred 
bird of Egypt, is represented as ap- 
pearing to the Israelite host (see the 
passage quoted by Alexander Poly- 
histor in Euseb. Praep. Evang. ix. 
29, Ρ. 446). Though the name is not 
mentioned, there can be no doubt 
that the phcenix is intended; for the 


Ἧ description accords with those of 


Herodotus, Manilius (in Pliny), and 
Mela, and was doubtless taken from 
some Egyptian painting such as He- 
rodotus saw and such as may be seen 
on the monuments to the present day 
(see Wilkinson’s “πο. Egypt. 2nd 
ser. I. p. 304, Rawlinson’s Herod. 11. 
p. 122). Inthe Assumption of Moses 
too, if the reading be correct (see 
| Hilgenfeld Nov. Test. extra Can. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


85 


Rec, 1. p. 99), the ‘profectio phoenicis’ 
is mentioned in connexion with the 
exodus, and it seems probable that 
the writer borrowed the incident from 
Ezekiel’s poem and used it in a simi- 
lar way. The appearance of the 
phcenix would serve a double pur- 
pose; (1) It would mark the epoch; 
(2) It would betoken the homage paid 
by heathen religion to the true God 
and to the chosen people: for Alex- 
andrian Jews sought to give expres- 
sion to this last idea in diverse ways, 
through Sibylline oracles, Orphic 
poems, and the like; and the atten- 
dance of the sacred phoenix on the 
departing host would not be the least 
eloquent form of symbolizing this 
homage in the case of Egypt. But 
this Ezekiel, though he coloured the 
incident and applied it to his own 
purpose, appears not to have invent- - 
ed it. According to Egyptian chro- 
nology the departure of the Israelites 
was coincident or nearly coincident 
with an appearance of a phoenix (i.e. 
with the beginning of a phcenix- 
period). Tacitus (Azm. vi. 28) says 
that a phoenix had appeared in the 
reign of Amasis. If this were the 
earlier Amosis of the 17th or 18th 
dynasty and not the later Amoszs of 
the 26th dynasty (the Amasis of 
Herod. ii. 172), the time would coin- 
cide; for the Israelites were consi- 
dered by some authorities (whether 
rightly or wrongly, it is unnecessary 
here to enquire) to have left Egypt 
in the reign of this sovereign; e.g, 
by Ptolemy the priest of Mendes 
(Apion in Tatian ad Graec. 38 and 
Clem. Alex. Strom. i. 21, p. 378) and 
by Julius Africanus (Routh’s Re/. Sacr. 
Il. p. 256). For rabbinical references 
to the phoenix, which seem to be 
numerous, see Buxtorf Ler. Rad. s. v. 
Sin, Lewysohn Zoologie des Talmuds 
Ρ. 352 sq; comp. Henrichsen l. c. 
Il. p. 19. The reference in a later 
Sibylline too (Orac. Sib. viii. 139 


86 


ὅταν φοίνικος ἐπέλθῃ πενταχρόνοιο) Was 
probably derived from δῇ earlier 
Jewish poem. 

Thus the mere fact that the phoenix 
is mentioned in the Assumption of 
Moses affords no presumption (as 
Hilgenfeld supposes) that Clement 
was acquainted with that work; for 
the story was well known to Jewish 
writers. In the manner and purpose 
of its mention (as I interpret it) the 
Assumption presents no coincidence 
with Clement’s Epistle. The pas- 
sage in the Assumption of Moses is 
discussed by Rénsch in Hilgen- 
feld’s Zettschr. f. Wissensch. Theol. 
XVII. p. 553 sq, 1874. Rénsch takes 
the reading frofectio Phoenices, and 
explains it of the ‘migration from 
Phoenicia’, i.e. Canaan, into Egypt 
under Jacob. And others also take 
Jynicis to mean Pheenicia, explaining 
it however in different ways. See 
Hilgenfeld’s note to Mos. Assumpt. 
p. 130. In this way the phoenix en- 
tirely disappears from the passage. 

Of subsequent Christian fathers, 
Tertullian, as we saw, accepted the 
story without misgiving. As Theo- 
philus of Antioch (ad Aut. i. 13) fol- 
lows Clement’s analogies for the re- 
surrection up to a certain point, but 
omits all mention of the phcenix, 
I infer that his knowledge of Egyp- 
tian antiquities (see ii. 6, iii. 20 sq) 
saved him from the error. For the 
same reason, as we may conjecture, 
Origen also considers the fact to be 
very questionable (¢. Ce/s. iv. 98, I. 
p. 576). But for the most part it 
was believed by Christian writers. 
S. Cyril of Jerusalem (Caz. xviii. 8), 5. 
Ambrose (see the quotations, I. 167, 
172), Rufinus (γιό. Apost. 11, p. 73), 
and others, argue from the story of 
the phoenix without a shadow of mis- 
giving. In Afost. Const. v. 7 it is 
urged against the heathen, as a fact 
which they themselves attest; and 
Epiphanius (A cor. 84) says εἰς ἀκοὴν 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[Χχν 


ἀφῖκται πολλῶν πιστῶν τε καὶ ἀπίστων. 
On the other hand Euseb. (22. Const. 
iv. 72) gives it merely as a report, 
Greg. Naz. (Orat. xxxi. ὃ 10, 1. p. 
562 Ὁ) says cautiously εἴ τῳ πιστὸς 
ὁ λόγος, and Augustine de Anim. iv. 
33 (20) (X. p. 404) uses similar lan- 
guage, ‘Si tamen ut creditur’; while 
Photius (24, 126) places side by 
side the resurrection of the phoenix 
and the existence of lands beyond 
the Atlantic (§ 20) as statements in 
Clement to which exception may be 
taken. Other less important patris- 
tic references will be found in Suicer’s 
Thes. s.v. φοῖνιξ. 

It is now known that the story 
owes its origin to the symbolic and 
pictorial representations of astrono- 
my. The appearance of the phoenix 
is the recurrence of some prominent 
astronomical phenomenon which 
marked the close of a period. Even 
Manilius (Plin. VV. H. x. 2) had half 
seen the truth; for he stated ‘cum 
hujus alitis vita magni conversionem 
anni fieri iterumque significationes 
tempestatum et siderum easdem re- 
verti’. For the speculations of 
Egyptologers and others on the 
phoenix period see Larcher Mém. de 
l’Acad. des Inscriptions etc. 1. p. 166 
sq (1815), Lepsius Chronol. d. Aegypt. 
p. 180 sq, Uhlemann Handb, d, Ae- 
gypt. Alterthumsk. 111. p. 39 8q, 79 
sq, IV. p. 226 sq, Poole Horae Ae- 
gyptiacae p. 39 sq, Ideler Handb. der 
Chron. 1. p. 183 sq, Creuzer Symd. u. 
Mythol. τι. p. 163 sq, Brugsch Aegyf- 
tische Studien in Zettschr. d, Deutsch. 
Morgenl. Geselisch.X. p. 250 sq (1856), 
Geograph. Inschrift. der Altaegypt. 
Denkmdaler 1. p. 258 (1857), Wiede- 
mann Die Phoenix-Sage in Zettsc hr. 
J. Aegyptische Sprache etc. XVI. p. 89 
sq (1878), Lauth Die Phoentx-Periode 
1880 (a separate issue of a paper in 
Abhandl. d. Bayer. Akad. der Wiss.). 
The actual bird, around which this 
mass of symbolism and of fiction has — 



















































; Xxv| 


gathered, bears the name Jennu in 
the Egyptian language and appears 
to be the ardea cinerea (or purpurea), 
a bird of passage; see Wiedemann 
Lc. p. 104. 

Thus the phoenix was a symbol 
from the very beginning. Horapollo 
says that in the hieroglyphics this 
bird represented a soul, or an inun- 
dation, or a stranger paying a visit 
after long absence, or a restoration 
after a long period (ἀποκατάστασιν 
πολυχρόνιον), Hzerogl. i. 34, 35, ii. 57. 
The way was thus prepared for the 
application of Clement. This Apo- 
stolic father however confines the 
symbolism to the resurrection of 
man. But later patristic writers di- 
versified the application and took 
the phoenix also as a type of the Per- 

- son of our Lord. The marvellous 
_ birth and the unique existence of 
this bird, as represented in the myth, 
were admirably adapted to such a 
symbolism: and accordingly it is so 
taken in Epiphan. (l.c.), Rufinus (l.c.), 
and others; see especially an un- 
known but apparently very ancient 
author in Sfpicil. Solesm. 11. p. 345. 
_ Some of these writers press the par- 
allel so far as to state that the phoenix 
arises after three days. The fact 
that a reputed appearance of the 
phoenix was nearly coincident with 
the year of the Passion and Resur- 
_ rection (see above, p. 84) may have 
assisted this application. At a later 
_ date the Monophysites alleged the 
| phcenix as an argument in favour of 
_ their peculiar doctrines (see Piper 
| Mythol.u. Symbol.der Christl. Kunst. 
I. 1, p. 454). 
_ For the representations of the 
_ phoenix in early Christian art see 
_ Piper Le. p. 456 sq. Before it ap- 
_ pears as a Christian symbol, it is 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


87 


- ΄σ A , a 
φοῖνιξ * τοῦτο μονογενες ὑπάρχον ζ ἔτη πεντακύσια" 


I μονογενὲς] μονογενησ A. 


found on coins and medals of the 
Roman emperors (for instances see 
Piper p. 449) to denote immortality 
or renovation, with the legend SAEC. 
AVR., Or AETERNITAS, or alwn. It is 
significant that this use begins in the 
time of Hadrian, the great patron 
and imitator of Egyptian art. 

I. povoyeves] ‘alone of its hind, 
unique’, This epithet is applied to 
the phoenix also in Origen, Cyril, and 
Apost. Const. v. 7, and doubtless as- 
sisted the symbolism mentioned in 
the last note. The statement about 
the phoenix in AZos¢. Const. φασὶ yap 
ὄρνεόν τι povoyeves ὑπάρχειν K.T.r. is 
evidently founded on this passage of 
Clement; comp. e.g. εἰ roivuy...d¢ 
ἀλόγου ὀρνέου δείκνυται ἡ ἀνάστασις 
κιτιλ, with Clement’s language in 
§ 26. So also in Latin it is ‘unica’, 
‘semper unica’, Mela iii. 9, Ovid Am. 
ii. 6. 54, Lactant. Phoen. 31, Claudian 
Laud. Stil. ii. 417. Thus Milton 
Samson Agonistes 1699 speaks of 
‘that self-begotten bird...That no 
second knows nor third,’ and again 
Paradise Lost V.272 ‘A phoenix gaz’d 
by all, as that so/e bird, When to 
enshrine his reliques in the Sun’s 
Bright temple to Aigyptian Thebes 
he flies’. Why does Milton despatch’ 
his bird to Thebes rather than Heli- 
opolis? 

ἔτη πεντακόσια] The longevity of 
the phcenix is differently stated. 
Hesiod gives it (9x4x3x9=) 972 
generations of men; Manilius (Plin. 
NV. H. x. 2) 509 years; Solinus (Polyh. 
36) 540 years; authorities mentioned 
in Tacitus 1461 years, which is the 
length of the Sothic period; Martial 
(v. 7), Claudian, Lactantius, and 
others, 1000 years; Chzremon (in 
Tzetzes Chil. v. 6. 395) 7006 years, 
But, says Tacitus, ‘maxime vulgatum 


88 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xxv 


γενόμενόν TE ἤδη πρὸς ἀπόλυσιν τοῦ ἀποθανεῖν αὐτό, 
σηκὸν ἑαυτῷ ποιεῖ ἐκ λιβάνου καὶ σμύρνης καὶ τῶν 
λοιπῶν ἀρωμάτων, εἰς ὃν πληρωθέντος τοῦ χρόνου 
εἰσέρχεται καὶ τελευτᾷ. σηπομένης δὲ τῆς σαρκὸς 
σκώληξ τις γεννάται, ὃς ἐκ τῆς ἰκμάδος τοῦ τετε- 
λευτηκότος ζώου ἀνατρεφόμενος πτεροφυεῖ: εἶτα γεν- 
ναῖος γενόμενος αἴρει τὸν σηκὸν ἐκεῖνον ὅπου τὰ 
ὀστᾶ τοῦ προγεγονότος ἐστίν, καὶ ταῦτα βαστάζων 
διανύει ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿λραβικῆς χώρας ἕως τῆς Αἰγύπτου 
εἰς τὴν λεγομένην ᾿Ἡλιούπολιν: καὶ ἡμέρας, βλεπόν- 
των πάντων, ἐπιπτὰς ἐπὶ τὸν τοῦ ἡλίου βωμὸν τίθησιν 


1 re] A; δὲ CS. 3 τοῦ xpovod] AC; add. vitae suae 8. 4 τελευτᾷ] 


AC; add. zn illo 8. δὲ] AS; τε C. 5 γεννᾶται] A; éyyevara CS, 
the latter translating mascitur in ea illic. 6s] AC; ὅστις (apparently) S. τετε- 
λευτηκότος] τελευτηκοτοσ A; τελευτήσαντος C; see 1. p. 126. ἡ σηκὸν 


ἐκεῖνον] AC; 5 adds ATTN PD (Ξε κυκλόθεν αὐτοῦ). 


quingentorum spatium’; and this is 
adopted by almost all the Christian 
fathers together with most heathen 
writers; of the latter see a list in 
Lepsius Chron. p. 180. 

I. τοῦ ἀποθανεῖν αὐτό] ‘so that it 
should die, explaining the preceding 
γενόμενον πρὸς ἀπόλυσιν ‘at the eve of 
its dissolution’; comp. ὃ 46 ἐρχόμεθα 
ὥστε ἐπιλαθέσθαι ἡμᾶς. This con- 
struction seems to me preferable to 
connecting αὐτὸ with what follows, 
as in the Syriac version; for in this 
case I should expect that αὐτὸ ἑαυτῷ 
would stand in juxtaposition, as e.g. 
Rom. vili. 23, 2 Cor. i. 9. 

5. σκώληξ τις γεννᾶται] This mode 
of reproduction is not mentioned by 
Herodotus (ii. 73); but it formed part 
of the story as related by Manilius to 
the Romans and is frequently men- 
tioned by subsequent writers. To 
this account is sometimes added the 
incident that the parent bird lights 
its own pyre and that the worm is 


8 βαστάζων] βασταζον 


found in the smouldering ashes; e.g. 
Artemid. Onetrocr. iv. 47 αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ 
ποιησάμενος ἐκ κασίας τε καὶ σμύρνης 
πυρὰν ἀποθνήσκει" καυθείσης δὲ τῆς πυ- 
ρᾶς μετὰ χρόνον ἐκ τῆς σποδοῦ σκώληκα 
γεννᾶσθαι λέγουσιν κιτιλ. (comp. Mar- 
tial ν. 7). Itis interesting to observe 
the different stages in the growth of 
the story, as follows; (1) The lon- 
gevity alone (Hesiod); (2) The en- 
tombment and burial of the parent 
by the offspring (Herodotus) ; (3) The — 
miraculous birth of the offspring from 
the remains of the parent (Mani- 
lius); (4) The three days’ interval 
between the death of the parent and 
resuscitation of the offspring (Epi- 
phanius). 

6. γενναῖος] ‘strong, lusty, as e.g. 
Dion Chrys. vii. p. 228 R ἰσχυροὶ ἔτ — 
νέοι kal γενναῖοι τὰ σώματα. It corre- — 
sponds to Ovid’s ‘Quum dedit huic 
aetas vires’, 

9. διανύει} ‘makes its way’, fre-— 
quently used absolutely, e.g. Polyb, — 





TO THE CORINTHIANS. 89 


xxv1| 
αὐτά, καὶ οὕτως εἰς τοὐπίσω ἀφορμᾷ. οἱ οὖν ἱερεῖς 
ἐπισκέπτονται τὰς ἀναγραφὰς τῶν χρόνων καὶ εὑρίσ- 
κουσιν αὐτὸν πεντακοσιοστοῦ ἔτους πεπληρωμένου ἐλη- 
15 λυθέναι. 


ΧΧΥΙ. 


A ~ / / / 
εἰ ὁ δημιουργὸς τῶν ἁἅπαντων ἀνάστασιν ποιήσεται 


Uy \ ‘ φ / Ψ 
Μέγα καὶ θαυμαστὸν οὖν νομίζομεν εἶναι, 


- δι > ~ Ul ? / / 
τῶν ὁσίως αὐτῷ δουλευσάντων ἐν πεποιθήσει πίστεως 

΄“ ε ‘\ > / , ΄ A 
ἀγαθῆς, ὅπου καὶ δι᾿ ὀρνέου δείκνυσιν ἡμῖν τὸ μεγα- 
a a > -- , , x 
20elov THs ἐπαγγελίας αὐτοῦ; λέγει yap που" Kai 


€ZANACTHCEIC ME Kal 


‘ a > , sy > a ? 
Kal YTIN@CA, EZHTEPOHN, ὅτι CY MET EMOY εἰ. 


A. 9 διανύει] C; diavevee A; migrat volans S. 


ἁπάντων (. 
12 ἱερεῖ] AC; add. οἱ τῆς Αἰγύπτου 8. 


Cc. 19 ὀρνέου δείκνυσιν] opyaov δικνυσιν A. 


20 ἐπαγγελίας] επαγγελειασ A. 


iii. 56. I (ἀπό), iv. 70. 5 (ἐκ), ii, 54. 6 
(πρός). The word occurs above, ὃ 20. 
The reading of A, d:avever, is out of 
place, for it could only mean ‘turns 
aside’, i.e. for the purpose of avoiding. 
Several instances of the confusion of 
διανύειν and διανεύειν by transcribers 
are given by Jahn Methodius 11. p. 
110. 

13. τὰς ἀναγραφὰς] ‘the public re- 
cords’; comp. Tatian ad Graec. 38 
Αἰγυπτίων δέ εἶσιν ai ἐπ᾽ ἀκριβὲς xpo- 
vev ἀναγραφαί. For the Egyptian 
ἀναγραφαὶ see also Diod. Sic. i. 44, 69, 
xvi. 51, Joseph. c. Ag. i.6sq. The 
recently discovered register of the 
epiphanies of the bulls Apis is a par- 
allel instance of such chronological 
records; see Bunsen’s Egyf¢ I. p. 62 
(2nd ed.), 

XXVI. ‘Is it then strange that 
God should raise the faithful, when 
He has given this marvellous sign? 
To such a resurrection we have the 
testimony of the Scriptures’. 

16. Μέγα καὶ θαυμαστὸν] For the 





> ’ ‘ 
€ZOMOAOFHCOMAI! CO!’ 


KAl ἐκοιμήθην 
\ , 
Kat παλιν 


11 πάντων] A; 


émurras] AS; om. C, doubtless owing to the following ἐπὶ. 


14 πεπληρωμένου] AS ; πληρουμένου 
μεγαλεῖον] μεγαλιον A. 
22 ἐξηγέρθην] A; καὶ ἐξηγέρθην CS. 


same combination of epithets see 
δὲ 50, 53. 

17. ὁ δημιουργὸς κιτ.λ.] See above 
§ 20, On this Platonic phrase com- 
pare Jahn Methodius 11. pp. 39, 91. 

18. ἐν πεποιθήσει κ-τ.λ.] ‘in the con- 
Jjidence which comes of honest faith’: 
comp. Ephes. iii. 12 ἐν πεποιθήσει διὰ 
τῆς πίστεως αὐτοῦ, and below ὃ 35 
πίστις ἐν πεποιθήσει. The phrase πίσ- 
τις ἀγαθὴ occurs Tit. ii, 10, where 
however πίστις seems to mean ‘fi- 
delity.’ 

19. τὸ μεγαλεῖον] ‘the greatness’; 
comp. §§ 32,49. It occurs Acts ii. 11, 
Luke i. 49 (v.1), and several times in 
the LxXx. 

20. λέγει yap που] Taken apparently 
from Ps. xxviii. 7 καὶ dvéOadev ἡ σάρξ 
μου καὶ ἐκ θελήματός pou ἐξομολογήσο- 
μαι αὐτῷ (comp. Ps. lxxxvii. 11). 

21. ἐκοιμήθην κιτ.λ.] A confusion of 
Ps. iii, 5 ἐγὼ ἐκοιμήθην καὶ ὕπνωσα, 
ἐξηγέρθην ὅτι Κύριος ἀντιλήψεταί μου, 
and Ps. xxiii. 4 οὐ φοβηθήσομαι κακὰ 
ὅτι σὺ per ἐμοῦ εἶ. 


gO THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [XXVI 


> A ’ ‘ ͵ ’ 
la λέγει" Kai anactHceic THN CAPKA MOY TAYTHN THN 
ANANTAHCACAN TAYTA TIANTA. 


XX VII. 


ε \ ε ΄σ ΄σ ΄“ > ~ ? / \ ΄σ 
αι ψυχαὶ μων τῷ πιστῳ EV ταῖς ἐπαγγελίαις καὶ τῷ 


Ταύτη οὖν τῆ ἐλπίδι προσδεδέσθωσαν 


/ > a / 
δικαίῳ ἐν τοῖς κρίμασιν. 
΄“ ~ > \ > Ld \ 
πολλῴ μᾶλλον αὐτὸς οὐ ψεύσεται" οὐδὲν yap ἀδύνα- 
\ ond - > \ \ / ? 
Tov mapa τῷ Θεῴ, εἰ μὴ TO ψεύσασθαι. ἀναζωπυρη- 
φ ν᾿ / “~ a. 3 \ / ε 
σάτω οὖν ἢ πίστις αὐτοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν, καὶ νοήσωμεν ὅτι 
/ > \ ᾽ id > > / ΄ ͵ 
TWavTa eyyus avTw ἐστιν. ἐν λόγῳ τῆς μεγαλωσύνης 
΄ A \ , \ , / 
αὐτοῦ συνεστήσατο Ta πάντα, Kal ἐν λόγῳ δύναται 


> \ ΄ ' > a > a, ' 9 ͵ n” ’ 
auTa καταστρέψαι. Tic Epel AYTW" TI ETTOIHCAC; H TIC 


ANTICTHCETAl τῷ κρᾶτει τῆς icyyoc ayToT; ὅτε θέλει καὶ 

1 σάρκα] σαρκαν A. 2 ἀναντλήσασαν] A; ἀντλήσασαν C; toleravit 
(ἀνατλήσασαν ὃ) 8. 3 προσδεδέσθωσαν] AS; προσδεχέσθωσαν C. 4 ἐν] 
A; om. C; dub. 8. τῷ δικαίῳ] A; δικαίῳ (om. τῷ) C, and so apparently 8. 
7 τῷ] A; om. C3; see above, § 21. τὸ] A, and so apparently S; om. C. 
το τὰ πάντα] A, and so probably S; πάντα C. 13 ποιήσει] AS; ποιήσαι C. 
15 of) A; om. C. 16 ποίησιν] ποιήσειν A. χειρῶν] ACS; Bryennios 
accidentally omits χειρῶν in recording the reading of C (p. 51). 17 τὸ στε- 
ρέωμα κ.τ.λ.1 C runs τὸ στερέωμα" καὶ ἀκούονται αἱ φωναὶ πάντων βλεπομένων καὶ 
ἀκουομένων" φοβηθῶμεν x.7.d., omitting many words. The omissions here are not 


ὁ παραγγείλας μὴ ψεύδεσθαι 5 


I. Ἰὼβ λέγει] From LXx Job xix. 
26 ἀναστήσει δέ μου τὸ σῶμα τὸ ἀναν- 
τλοῦν ταῦτα as read in A, but XB have 
ἀναστῆσαι τὸ δέρμα μου τὸ ἀναντλοῦν (or 
ἀντλοῦν) ταῦτας, The Hebrew original 
is different from either. For the con- 
fusion of dvarAjoa and ἀναντλῆσαι 
in this passage of Job and in Prov. 
ix. 12 see Schleusner Lex. Vet. Test. 
s.v. ἀναντλέω, Field Orig. Hexapl. 11. 
p. 36. It may be a question what 
reading the Syriac translator had 
here, but the same word bap is used 
elsewhere (e.g. Eus. 4. £. viii. 14) to 
render ἀνατλάντες; see Payne Smith 
Thes. Syr. 8. V. 

Harnack refers to the discussion 
of this passage of Clement in Caspari 
Quellen 5. Gesch. d. Taufsymobols 111. 


p. 158. 


XXVII. ‘Let us therefore cling 
fast to God. He has promised, and 
Hecannot lie. Whatsoever He wills, 
He is able to perform. To His power 
no bounds are set. To His eye and 
His mind all things are open. The 
heavens declare His glorious works’. 

4. τῷ πιστῷ κιτ.λ.] Comp. Heb. x. 
23 πιστὸς γὰρ ὁ ἐπαγγειλάμενος, and 
xi. II. 

6. οὐδὲν yap ἀδύνατον κ-ιτ.λ.] Com- 
pare Heb. vi. 18 ἐν οἷς ἀδύνατον ψεύ- 
σασθαι [τὸν] Θεόν, with Matt. xix. 26 
(Mark x. 27); see also Tit. i. 2. 

7. ἀναζωπυρησάτω] Intransitive; see 
the note on Ign. Hphes. 1. The con- 
text seems to suggest that ἡ πίστις 
αὐτοῦ should be rendered ‘His faith- 
fulness’, as in Rom. iii. 3; see Ga/a- 
tians Ὁ. 155. 





15 


20 


——— στον, 





XXVIII] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


ΟΙ 


ὡς θέλει ποιήσει πάντα, καὶ οὐδὲν μὴ παρέλθη τῶν 
δεδογματισμένων vm αὐτοῦ. πάντα ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ 
εἰσιν, καὶ οὐδὲν λέληθεν τὴν βουλὴν αὐτοῦ, εἰ Οἱ οὐ- 
PANO! διηγοῦνται δόξὰν Θεοῦ, ποίησιν δὲ χειρῶν AYTOY 
ἀνἀγγέλλει τὸ οτερέωμδ᾽ H ἡμέρὰ TH ἡμέρᾳ ἐρεύήγετδι PAma, 
κδὶ NYZ νυκτὶ ἀνὰγγέλλει γνῶοιν: KAl οὐκ EICIN λόγοι οὐδὲ 
λδλιδί, ὧν οὐχὶ AKOYONTAI Al φωνδὶ AYTAN. 


XXVITI. 


~ ᾽ 3 , 7 
νων, φοβηθῶμεν αὐτὸν καὶ ἀπολείπωμεν φαύλων ἔργων 


, εἰ , \ > / 
Πάντων οὖν βλεπομένων καὶ ἀκουομέ- 


\ > / ΄σ > / lol ~ 
puapas ἐπιθυμίας, iva τῷ ἐλέει αὐτοῦ σκεπασθῶμεν 

‘\ ~ / / “ “ ΄“ 
ἀπο τῶν μελλόντων κριμάτων. ποῦ γάρ τις ἡμῶν 


altogether explained by the practice of abridging quotations (see 1. p. 128). 


18 ἀναγγέλλει] A; ἀναγγελεῖ 5 (with Hebr. and Lxx A); def. C. 


line S has the present (ἀναγγέλλει). 
words, as in the Lxx. 


In the previous 
18, 19 λόγοι, λαλιαί] S transposes these 


19 αἱ φωναὶ] The text of S is perhaps corrupt here. 


As it stands, the translator would appear to have had ταῖς φωναῖς N?P3, instead of 


N2P, unless it is a very loose paraphrase. 


(see the note on τὸ στερέωμα κ.τ.λ.). 


22 papas] AS; βλαβερὰς C (see Bryennios Did. p. py). 


20 οὖν] A; re (TN) S; om. C 
21 ἀπολείπωμεν)] A; ἀπολίπωμεν C, 
23 τῶν μελλόν- 


των κριμάτων] AC; τοῦ μέλλοντος κρίματος (Ἴ ΓΙ Ἵ NI) 5. The variation cannot 
be explained by rzéui here, and must have been deliberate; see also § 21. 


9. ἐγγὺς αὐτῷ] So Ign. Zphes. 15 
οὐδὲν λανθάνει τὸν Κύριον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ 
κρυπτὰ ἡμῶν ἐγγὺς αὐτῷ ἐστιν, which is 
perhaps a reminiscence of this pas- 
sage: compare § 21 above. 

ἐν λόγῳ κιτ.λ.)] See Heb. i. 3 φέρ- 
oy Ta πάντα τῷ ῥήματι τῆς δυνάμεως 
αὐτοῦ : comp. Wisd. ix. 1. See the 
introduction, I. p. 398, on the relation 
of Clement to the Logos doctrine. 

11. Tis ἐρεῖ αὐτῷ κιτ.λ.] From Wisd. 
xil, 12 τίς γὰρ ἐρεὶ Τί ἐποίησας ἢ τίς 
ἀντιστήσεται τῷ κρίματί σου; Comp. 
Wisd. xi. 22 κράτει βραχίονός σου τίς 
ἀντιστήσεται; The expression τὸ κρά- 
τος τὴς ἰσχύος αὐτοῦ occurs in Ephes. 
i. 19, vi. 10, The κράτος is the ἰσχὺς 
exerted on some object. 

13. οὐδὲν μὴ παρέλθῃ κιτ.λ.] Comp. 
Matt. ν. 18. 

15. εἰ Οἱ οὐρανοὶ κ-τ.λ.}] ‘seeing 


that The heavens etc? The εἰ is no 
part of the quotation. So treated 
the passage presents no difficulty; 
and the corrections proposed (e.g. 
the omission of εἰ, or the reading καὶ 
oi οὐρανοί) are unnecessary. Perhaps 
also the καὶ before οὐκ εἰσὶν should be 
excluded from the quotation in the 
same way. The quotation is then 
word for word (except the interchange 
of λόγοι and Aadiai) from the LXx 
Ps, xix. I—3. 

19. ὧν.. αὐτῶν) See above the note 
on § 20. 

XXVIII. ‘Therefore, since He 
sees and hears all things, let us for- 
sake our vile deeds and take refuge in 
His mercy. We cannot escape His 
powerful arm; neither in the height 
of heaven nor in the abyss of ocean 
nor in the farthest parts of the earth’, 


92 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xxvii 


δύναται φυγεῖν ἀπὸ τῆς κραταιᾶς χειρὸς αὐτοῦ; ποῖος 
δὲ κόσμος δέξεταί τινα τῶν αὐτομολούντων ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ; 
λέγει γάρ που τὸ γραφεῖον: Ποῦ ἀφήξω καὶ ποῦ κργ- 
Βήσομδι ἀπὸ τοῦ προοώπου οοὺ ἐὰν ANAB εἰς τὸν οὐρὰ- 
NON, οὐ εἶ ἐκεῖ: ἐὰν ἀπέλθω εἰς τὰ EcyaTa τῆς Lac, ἐκεῖ ἡ 


λεξιὰ οογ᾽ ἐὰν κἀτδοτρώοω εἰς TAC ABYCCOYC, ἐκεῖ τὸ πνεῦμά 


5 εἶ ἐκεῖ] A (with Lxx ABS); ἐκεῖ εἶ CS. 
7 οὖν] AC; om. 5. 


ἐκεῖ ἡ δεξιά σου] AS; σὺ ἐκεῖ εἶ C, 
ἀποδράσῃ] A; ἀποδράσῃ (or ἀποδράσει) S; τις ἀποδρά- 


2. αὐτομολούντων] See above, λι- 
ποτακτεῖν ὃ 21, and the note on δεσέρ- 
τωρ Ign. Polyc. 6. 

3. τὸ γραφεῖον] ‘the writing” 5. 
Clement here seems to adopt the 
threefold division of the Old Testa- 
ment books which appears in Ecclus. 
(prol.), in 5. Luke (xxiv. 44), in Philo 
(de Vit. cont. 3, Il. p. 475), in Jose- 
phus (c. 42. 1. 8), and generally. The 
third division is called τὰ ἄλλα βιβλία 
and ra λοιπὰ τῶν βιβλίων in Ecclus., 
ψαλμοὶ in S. Luke, ὕμνοι in Philo and 
Josephus. Its more general name in 
Hebrew was 0°31N5, ‘the writings’, 
translated sometimes by ypadeia, 
sometimes by ἁγιόγραφα: comp. Epi- 
phan. Haer. xxix. 7 (I. p. 122) οὐ yap 
ἀπηγόρευται map αὐτοῖς νομοθεσία καὶ 
προφῆται καὶ γραφεῖα τὰ παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις 
καλούμενα, and again παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς γὰρ 
πᾶς ὁ νόμος καὶ οἱ προφῆται καὶ τὰ 
γραφεῖα λεγόμενα κ-.τ.λ., Mens. et Pond. 
4 (Il. p. 162) τὰ καλούμενα γραφεῖα 
παρά τισι δὲ ἁγιόγραφα λεγόμενα. In 
the first of these passages however 
Epiphanius includes the historical 
books among the γραφεῖα, and in the 
second he confines the term to them, 
placing the Psalms, Job, Proverbs, 
etc., in a separate section which he 
calls of ortynpets. This does not 
truly represent the Jewish tradition, 
in which 1, 2 Chronicles alone be- 
longed to the 0°21N3, while the his- 
torical books generally were ranged 


with the Prophets; see Fiirst Der 
Kanon des Alten Testaments p. 10 
sq, Ρ. 55 sq. Elsewhere he uses 
γραφεῖα more widely, Haer. xxvi. 12 
(p. 94) ἄλλα μυρία παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς πεπλασ- 
μένα γραφεῖα ; comp. Deut. x. 4 (Aq.). 
John Damascene likewise (de Fid. 
Orthod, iv. 17, 1. p. 284), following 
Epiphanius, describes the historical 
books from Joshua to 2 Chronicles, 
as τὰ καλούμενα ypadeia παρά τισι δὲ 
ἁγιόγραφα. In the Classical language 
(as also LXx Job xix. 24, Hex. Jer. 
xvii. 1) γραφεῖον is not ‘a writing’ but 
‘a pen.’ 

Ποῦ ἀφήξω)] A very loose quota- 
tion from Ps. cxxxix. 7—10, where 
the slight variations of the principal 
MSS of the LXx do not affect the wide 
divergences in Clement’s quotation. 
Compare also the parallel passage in 
Amos ix. 2, 3, to which Clement’s 
quotation presents some faint resem- 
blances. It is important to observe 
that in using καταστρώσω, ‘make my 
couch,’ Clement conforms to the ori- 
ginal HYSS, where the LXx has κα- 
ταβῶ. ‘This is the more remarkable, 
as he elsewhere shows no knowledge 
of the Hebrew, and in the Psalms 
generally quotes pretty accurately 
from the LXxX. Whence then did he 
get this word? We may conjecture 
that he was acquainted with one of 
the versions afterwards included by 
Origen in his Hexapla. The 5th 





XXIX] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


93 


a φ > / a “ > / > \ ~ \ 
coy. ποῖ οὖν τις ἀπέλθη ἢ που ἀποδράση απὸ του τα 


“ / 
πάντα ἐμπεριέχοντος 5 


XXIX. Προσέλθωμεν οὖν αὐτῷ ἐν ὁσιότητι ψυ- 


΄σ \ 3 - of \ > / 
ο χῆς, ayvas Kal ἀμιάντους χεῖρας αἴροντες πρὸς αὐτόν, 


~ Α > ~ A » / c ~ 
ἀγαπῶντες TOV ἐπιεικῆ καὶ εὐσπλαγχνον πατέρα ἡμῶν 


« > ΄σ / > , € ~ 
os ἐκλογῆς μέρος ἐποίησεν εαυτῳ. 


ΟΥ̓ 8s δ 


ραπται" Ὅτε διεμέριζεν ὁ ὕψιοτος ἔθνη, ὧς διέσπειρεν 


oe C. 
11 ἐπιεικῆ] επιεικὴν A. 


version (ε in Origen) has στρώσω or 
καταστρώσω (see Field’s Hexapl. ad 
loc.), and as this seems to have been 
the one found in an old cask either 
at Jericho or Nicopolis (Euseb. 1. Z. 
vi. 16, Epiphan. AZens. et Pond. 18, 
Ρ. 174; see Hody de Bibl. Text. Orig. 
etc. p. 587 sq), it may very well have 
been an ancient Jewish tradition prior 
to the age of Clement. Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 22 (p. 625) quotes the 
passage nearly in the form which it 
has here (though substituting the Lxx 
καταβῶ for καταστρώσω), and doubt- 
less derived it through the medium 
of the Roman Clement, so that he is 
not an independent authority. 
ἀφήξω] The verb ἀφήκειν is not 
found in the Lxx or N.T., and is 
altogether a rare word ; comp. Plato 
Resp. vii. p. 530 E, Antiphon in 
Bekker Amecd. p. 470 5.ν. ἀφήκοντος. 

XXIX. ‘Therefore let us approach 
Him in prayer with pure hearts and 
undefiled hands. We are God’s spe- 
cial portion and inheritance, of which 
the Scriptures speak once and again’. 

See on the liturgical character of 
this portion of Clement’s Epistle 
which follows, the introduction, 1. 
Ρ. 386 sq. 

10, ἁγνὰς κιτ.λ.] 1 Tim. ii. 8 ἐπαί- 
povras ὁσίους χεῖρας, Athenag. Suppl. 
13 ἐπαίρωμεν ὁσίους χεῖρας αὐτῷ ; see 
also Heliodorus the tragedian in Ga- 


τὰ] A; om. C, and so probably S. 
12 μέρος] A; add. ἡμᾶς CS. 


9 οὖν] AC; om. 8, 


οὕτω] οὕτως C. 


len. de Antid. ii. 7 (XIV. p. 145, ed. 
Kiihn) ἀλλ᾽ ὁσίας μὲν χεῖρας ἐς ἠέρα 
λαμπρὸν ἀείρας (quoted by Wetstein 
on I Tim. ii. 8). The expression de- 
scribes the attitude of the ancients 
(as of Orientals at the present day) 
when engaged in prayer, with ex- 
tended arms and uplifted palms. 

12. ἐκλογῆς μέρος κ.τ.λ.7 ‘has made 
us His special portion, or rather ‘has 
set apart for Himself a special por- 
tion’, In either case the ἐκλογῆς μέρος 
is the Christian people, the spiritual 
Israel, who under the new covenant 
have taken the place of the chosen 
people under the old; as 1 Pet. ii. 9 
ὑμεῖς δὲ γένος ἐκλεκτόν, βασίλειον ἱερά- 
τευμα, ἔθνος ἅγιον, λαὸς εἰς περιποίησιν 
καιιλ. See the notes on παροικοῦσα 
and ἡγιασμένοις (ἢ 1). Thus μέρος ἐκ- 
λογῆς here is coextensive with οἱ ἐκλε- 
λεγμένοι ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ διὰ Ἰησοῦ Χρισ- 
τοῦ ὃ 50 (comp. ὃ 64). The words 
μέρος ἐκλογῆς are not to be translated 
‘a portion of his elect’ but ‘a portion 
set apart by election,’ ἐκλογῆς being a 
genitive of the same kind as in Acts 
ix. 15 σκεῦος ἐκλογῆς, Iren. i. 6. 4 σπέρ- 
para ἐκλογῆς. The expression therefore 
has no bearing on the question whe- 
ther Clement was a Jewish or Gentile 
Christian. See the note on λαὸς below. 

13. “Ore διεμέριζεν κιτ.λ.] From the 
LXx Deut. xxxii. 8, 9, almost word 
for word. 








94 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XxXIX 


yioyc “Addm, ECTHCEN ὅριὰ ἐθνῶν KATA ἀριθμὸν ἀγγέλων 


θεΟΥ̓͂. 


ἐγενήθη μερὶς Kypioy Aaoc αὐτοῦ ‘lakwB, cyoinicma 


' > nan? ͵ \ > ε / / / 
KAHPONOMIAC αὐτοῦ ‘IcpaHA. καὶ ἐν ETENW τόπῳ λεγει" 
ἸδλοΥ Κύριος λὰμβάνει ἑδυτῷ ἔθνος ἐκ μέοου ἐθνῶν, ὥςπερ 


1 ἀριθμὸν] αριθον A. 


I. κατὰ ἀριθμὸν κ-ιτιλ.] The idea 
conveyed by the LXxx which Clement 
quotes is that, while the Gentile na- 
tions were committed to His inferior 
ministers, God retained the people 
of Israel under His own special 
guardianship: comp. Dan. x. 13 sq, 
xii. 1, but esp. Ecclus. xvii. 17 ἑκάστῳ 
ἔθνει κατέστησεν ἡγούμενον καὶ μερὶς 
Κυρίου Ἰσραήλ ἐστιν, and Fudilees § 15 
(Ewald ¥ahré. 111. p. 10) ‘ Many are 
the nations and numerous the people, 
and all are His, and over all hath 
He set spirits as lords...but over 
Israel did He set no one to be Lord, 
neither angel nor spirit, but He alone 
is their ruler etc.’, with the context. 
See also Clem. Hom. xviii. 4, Clem. 
Recogn. ii. 42 (references which I 
should have overlooked but for Hil- 
genfeld Afost. Vat. p. 65). Clem. 
Alex. Strom. vii. 2 (p. 832) uses the 
text to support his favourite idea that 
heathen philosophy is the handmaid 
of revelation ; οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ διδοὺς καὶ 
τοῖς Ἕλλησι τὴν φιλοσοφίαν διὰ τῶν ὑ- 
ποδεεστέρων ἀγγέλων᾽ εἰσὶ γὰρ συνδιανε- 
νεμημένοι προστάξει θείᾳ τε καὶ ἀρχαίᾳ 
ἄγγελοι κατὰ ἔθνη, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ μερὶς Κυρίου ἡ 
δόξα τῶν πιστευόντων. On the other 
hand the present text of the Hebrew 
runs ‘ He set the boundaries of the na- 
tions according to the number of the 
sons of Israel (sw 2 ἼΒΟΡ) ; for 
(or ‘while’, 3) the portion of Jehovah 
is His people, Jacob is the rod of His 
inheritance’. So too the Peshito and 
Targum of Onkelos. But it is diffi- 
cult to get any good sense out of this 
reading, and the parallelism of the 
verses is thus shattered. I can hardly 
doubt therefore that the LXx is right, 


2 ἐγενήθη] AC; καὶ ἐγενήθη S with LXx. 


and the error can be easily explained. 
The ends of the lines have got out of 
gear; byw, which in the present text 
occupies the end of ver. 8, has been 
displaced from its proper position at 
the end of ver. 9,,and thrust out the 
original word D°MONN, which has thus 
disappeared. The ‘sons of God’ are 
mentioned Job i. 6, ii. 1, xxxviii. 7, 
and in all places are translated (as it 
appears, correctly) by ἄγγελοι [rod 
Θεοῦ] in the LXx; see Gesen. Thes. 
p. 215. This conjecture is confirmed 
by the fact that the Samar. Pent. reads 
‘Israel’ at the end of both verses, 
thus presenting an intermediate read- 
ing between the LXx and the present 
Hebrew text. Justin Martyr Déad. 
§ 131 (p. 360 Β) refers to the difference 
between the Hebrew and LxxX texts; 
see also Origen Jz Num. Homa. xxviii. 
§ 4 (11. p. 385), Zz Ezech. Hom. xiii 
(ΠῚ. p. 401). The reading of the He- 
brew text is naturally adopted in 
Clem. Hom, xviii. 4, as it is by 
Justin’s Jewish opponents. The writer 
lived late enough to have got it from 
one of the Judaizing versions. On. 
the other hand the Lxx is quoted by 
Philo de Post. Ca. 25 (1. p. 241), de 
Plant. 14 (1. p- 338). 

2. λαὸς] We have here the com- 
mon antithesis of Aads ‘the chosen 
people’, and ἔθνη ‘the Gentiles’ ; as 
eg. Luke ii. 32, Acts iv. 27, xxvi. 
17, 23, Rom. xv. I0, II, etc. By 
becoming the Aads however the Is- 
raelites do not cease to be called an 
ἔθνος (see esp. Joh. xi. 50), but are 
rather ἔθνος ἅγιον (as Exod. xix. 6, 
1 Pet. ii. 9) or ἔθνος ἐκ μέσου ἐθνῶν 
(as below): so Justin Déal. 24 (p. 242) 








Xxx] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. . 95 


5 AAMBANE! ἄνθρωπος THN ἀπαρχὴν αὐτοῦ τῆς ἅλω, Kal ἐξε- 


͵ > a “ἃ > ͵ oe ie Lae 
A€YCETAI EK TOY EONOYC EKEINOY ALIA ἁγίων. 


XXX. ‘Ayiov οὖν μερὶς ὑπάρχοντες ποιήσωμεν τὰ 


ΟΥ 


7 ᾿Αγίου οὖν] ΔΓΊΟΥΝ (the oy above the line being written prima manu) A; 
ἁγία οὖν μερὶς S; ἅγια οὗν μέρη. 8661. p. 143. 


ἵνα γένηται ἔθνος δίκαιον, λαὸς φυλάσ- 
cor πίστιν (from Is. xxvi. 2). All such 
titles, referring primarily to the Israel 
after the flesh, are transferred by 
Clement, following the Apostolic wri- 
ters, to the Israel after the spirit ; see 
- abovethe notes on §1,and comp. below 
ὃ 64 els λαὸν περιούσιον, and especially 
Justin Dzad. 119 (p. 347). I call at- 
tention to this, because Hilgenfeld 
(Zettschr. f. Wissensch. Theol. 1858, 
p- 585, and here) distinguishes the 
λαὸς of the first passage and the ἔθνος 
of the second, as though they referred 
to the Jewish and Gentile Christians 
respectively. Of such a distinction 
the context gives no indication; and 
the interpretation moreover supposes 
that Clement departs from the ob- 
vious meaning of the passages in- 
corporated in the second quotation, 
where the original reference of ἔθνος 
is plainly to the Israelites. See the 
note on ἐκλογῆς μέρος above. 

σχοίνισμα] ‘a portion measured out 
by a line’ (see the note on κανών, 
§ 7), ἃ common word in the Lxx 
exactly representing the Hebrew 53n. 

4. ᾿Ἰδοὺ Κύριος κιτ.λ.] A combina- 
tion of several passages ; Deut. iv. 34 
εἰ ἐπείρασεν ὁ Θεὸς εἰσελθὼν λαβεῖν 
ἑαυτῷ ἔθνος ἐκ μέσου ἔθνους ἐν πειρασ- 
μῷ κιτὰλ., Deut. xiv. 2 καὶ σὲ ἐξελέξατο 
Κύριος ὁ Θεός σου γενέσθαι σε λαὸν 
αὐτῷ περιούσιον ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν 
κιτιλ. (comp. vii. 6). 

ὥσπερ λαμβάνει κιτλ.} The pas- 
_ Sages most nearly resembling this 
are, Num. xviii. 27 λογισθήσεται ὑμῖν 
a ἀφαιρέματα ὑμῶν ὡς σῖτος ἀπὸ ἅλω 
καὶ ἀφαίρεμα ἀπὸ ληνοῦ, 2 Chron. xxxi. 





14 δοῦναι τὰς ἀπαρχὰς Κυρίου καὶ τὰ 
ἅγια τῶν ἁγίων, Ezek. xlviii. 12 ἔσται 
αὐτοῖς ἡ ἀπαρχὴ δεδομένη ἐκ τῶν ἀπαρ- 
χῶν τῆς γῆς, ἅγιον ἁγίων ἀπὸ τῶν ὁρίων 
x.7.A. with the context; but in all these 
passages the reference of the ‘ first- 
fruits’ is different. As Clement’s quo- 
tations elsewhere are so free (e.g. $§ 
18, 26, 32, 35, 39, etc.), he may only 
have combined these passages and 
applied them from memory; but 
the alternative remains that he is 
quoting from some apocryphal wri- 
ting, such as the spurious or interpo- 
lated Ezekiel quoted above (see the 
notes S$ 8, 13, 17, 23, 46). The ἅγια 
ἁγίων are the specially consecrated 
things, the offerings or first-fruits, as 
in the passages just quoted ; see also 
Lev. xxi. 22, Ezek. xlii. 13. The ex- 
pression is applied here either to the 
people of God themselves, or to their 
spiritual oblations (see below, §§ 40, 
44). 

XXX. ‘Therefore, as the portion of 
the Holy One, let us be holy our- 
selves; let us lay aside all sins which 
defile ; let us shun pride and ensue 
peace ; let us be on our guard against 
slander and backbiting ; let us seek 
not our own praise, but the praise of 
God.  Self-will is accursed in His 
sight ; but His blessing rests on the 
gentle and lowly-minded’. 

7. ‘Ayiov οὖν μερὶς] i.e. ‘As the 
special portion of a Holy God’: 
comp. I Pet. i. 15 sq κατὰ τὸν καλέ- 
σαντα ὑμᾶς ἅγιον καὶ αὐτοὶ ἅγιοι ἐν 
πάσῃ ἀναστροφῇ γενήθητε, διότι γέ- 
γραπται (Lev. xi. 44) ἽΛγιοι ἔσεσθε ὅτ: 
ἐγὼ ἅγιος. On the liturgical charac- 








96 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xxx 


΄- r / ΝᾺ / 
TOU ἁγιασμοῦ πάντα, φεύγοντες καταλαλιας, μιαράς τε 
/ / / \ 
καὶ ἀνάγνους συμπλοκάς, μέθας TE Kal νεωτερισμοὺς 
\ , \ \ 
καὶ βδελυκτὰς ἐπιθυμίας, μυσερὰν μοιχείαν, βδελυκτην 
/ ἢ , 4 ς ἢ > , 
ὑπερηφανίαν. Θεὸς γάρ, φησιν, ὑπερηφάνοις. Antitacce- 
a ‘ ' ’ e& oO > 
TAI, τὰπεινοῖς δὲ δίδωοιν χάριν. KoAAnOw@pmev οὖν ἐκεί- 5 
@ ε Ud > \ a ΄ 7 ? / 
νοις οἷς ἡ χάρις ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ δέδοται. ἐνδυσώμεθα 
\ / ~ > \ 
τὴν ὁμόνοιαν, ταπεινοφρονοῦντες, ἐγκρατευόμενοι, ἀπο 
\ ~ \ ΄σ , ε \ 
παντὸς Ψψιθυρισμοῦ καὶ καταλαλιᾶς πόρρω εαυτοὺς 
rad ru / \ / 
ποιοῦντες, ἔργοις δικαιούμενοι καὶ μὴ λόγοις. λέγει 
“ ε ‘ ‘ ‘ > , ~ « ” 
yap° O τὰ πολλὰ λέγων KAI ANTAKOYCETAI’ H O EYAAAOC FE 
oietal εἶνδι δίκδιος; εὐλογημένος γεννητὸς γυνδικὸς ὀλι- 
γόβιοο: μὴ πολὴς ἐν ῥήμδοιν rinoy. Ὁ ἔπαινος ἡμῶν 


2 ἀνάγνου] C; αγνουσ A. συμπλοκάς] AC; καὶ συμπλοκάς S, rendering 
the word however by contentiones (jurgia), and connecting μιαράς τε καὶ ἀνάγνους 
with καταλαλιάς. τε] AS; om. C. 3 μυσερὰν] A; μυσεράν (μυσαράν 
C) τε CS. μοιχείαν] μοιχιαν A, βδελυκτὴν] A; καὶ βδελυκτὴν CS. 
4 Θεὸς] AC. Bryennios reads ὁ Θεὸς, as if it had some manuscript authority. 


6 ἀπὸ] AS; om. C. 


λιὰς.. ἑαυτῶν, connecting ἀπὸ παντὸς ψιθυρισμοῦ with ἐγκρατευόμενοι. 


AS; om. C. 


ter of the language here used, see 
above, I. p. 387. 

1. φεύγ. καταλ.} τ Pet. ii. 1 ἀποθέμε- 
νοι.. «πάσας καταλαλιάς. 

2. dvdyvovs] Something may still 
be said for Adyvous which I read in 
my first edition after Colomiés ; comp. 
Athenag. Suppl. 19 τοῖς ἀκολάστοις 
καὶ Adyvois, 21 Aayvelas ἢ Bias ἢ πλεο- 
νεξίας, Clem. Recogn. ix. 17 (the Greek 
is preserved in Czsarius) μεθύσους, 
Adyvous, δαιμονῶντας, Acta Petri in 
Isid. Pelus. 22. ii. 99 (see Hilgenfeld’s 
Nov. Test. extr. Can. Rec. τν. p. 70) 
ὁ yap φιλοχρήματος οὐκ ἐχώρησε τὸν 
τῆς ἀκτημοσύνης λόγον οὐδὲ ὁ λάγνος 
τὸν περὶ σωφροσύνης k.t.A., Clem. Alex. 
Paed. ii. 10 (p. 222---225). The com- 
mon form was λάγνος, the Attic 
Adyyns; see Lobeck Phryn. p. 184. 
Neither word (avayvos or λάγνος) oc- 


8 καταλαλιᾶς... ἑαυτοὺς] AC; S translates as if xaraha- 


9 καὶ] 


10 ἢ] » A; εἰ C; ἣ (apparently) S, for it translates ie gud 


curs in the Lxx or New Testament. 

3. μυσερὰν] For this form see the 
note on 14. 

4. Θεὸς γάρ κιτ.λ.] From Prov. iii. 
34 Κύριος ὑπερηφάνοις κιτιλ. Int Pet. 
v. 5, James iv. 6, it is quoted ὁ Θεὸς 
ὑπερηφάνοις x.t.A. The Hebrew has 
simply S17 ‘he’. 

8. Wid. καὶ καταλ.] See below, § 35. 
The words occur together also 2 Cor. 
xii. 20; comp. Rom. i. 30 Ψιθυριστάς, 
καταλάλους. ᾿ 

9. ἔργοις δικαιούμενοι] See the note — 
at the beginning of § 33, and the in- 
troduction, I. pp. 96, 397. 

10. .“οτὰπολλὰ «.t.A.] Fromthe LXX 
of Job xi. 2, 3, almost word for word. 
It diverges widely from the Hebrew, 
and the sentiment εὐλογημένος κοτιλ. 
has no connexion with the context. 
It may be conjectured that the words 





15 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 97 


ΧΧΧΙ] 


at > “ ‘ \ > > a 3 ‘\ \ 
ἔστω ἐν Θεῷ καὶ μὴ ἐξ αὐτῶν, αὐτεπαινετοὺς yap 
~ / ~ “~ / ~ 
μισεῖ ὁ Θεός. ἡ μαρτυρία τῆς ἀγαθῆς πράξεως ἡμῶν 
4 » \ / ~ , a 
διδόσθω ὑπ᾽ ἄλλων, καθὼς ἐδόθη τοῖς πατράσιν ἡμῶν 
΄σ / / A > / \ / ~ 
τοῖς δικαίοις. θράσος καὶ αὐθάδεια καὶ τόλμα Tots 
/ ~ ΄ ͵ 
κατηραμένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ: ἐπιείκεια καὶ ταπεινο- 
4 ΝΑ \ ΄ / \ ΄σ΄ 
φροσύνη καὶ πραὕτης παρὰ τοῖς ηὐλογημένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ 
Θεοῦ. 


ΧΧΧΙ. 


10. , ε ε Α ΄- ᾽ Ψ' 
ἴδωμεν τίνες αἱ ὁδοὶ τῆς εὐλογίας. 


΄ > ΄ ~ 

Κολληθῶμεν οὖν τῇ εὐλογίᾳ αὐτοῦ, Kal 
> / \ 
ἀνατυλίξωμεν τα 
> - ’ / > / ε \ 

ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς γενόμενα. Tivos χάριν ηὐλογήθη ὁ πατὴρ 

“ > ’ > / \ > / \ , 

ἡμῶν ᾿Αβραάμ; οὐχὶ δικαιοσύνην καὶ ἀλήθειαν διὰ πίσ- 
/ \ \ / ’ A 

Tews ποιήσας; ᾿Ισαὰκ μετὰ πεποιθήσεως γινώσκων TO 


multum dicit et audit in hac (hoc) quod quit bene loguitur, etc. 11 εὐλογημέ- 
vos] A; om. C; S substitutes γεννητός, thus repeating the same word, sb ney», 
12 ἡμῶν] AS; ὑμῶν C. 13 Θεῷ] A; τῷ θεῷ C. yap] AC; om. 8. 
14 ἀγαθῆ:] AS; om. Ὁ. ἡμῶν] A; ὑμῶν CS. 15 ἐδόθη] εδεηθη A. 
17 ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ] AS; om. Ὁ. See I. p. 125. ἐπιείκεια] επιεικια A. 
18 mpairns] A; πραότης C. S transposes ταπεινοφροσύνη and πραὕτης, probably 
for convenience of translation; see I. p. 137. 23 διὰ πίστεως] AS; om. C. 


γεννητὸς γυναικὸς ὀλιγόβιος crept in 
from xiv. I βροτὸς γὰρ γεννητὸς γυναι- 
Kos ὀλιγόβιος, which may have stood 
next to this passage in a parallel 
column, and the εὐλογημένος will have 
come from the first word of the next 
verse, 9! misread ἽἼ2. 

11. γεννητὸς] See the note on Ign. 
Ephes. 7. 

12. ‘O ἔπαινος x.r.r.| See Rom. ii. 
29 οὗ 6 ἔπαινος οὐκ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐκ τοῦ Θεοῦ, 2 Cor. x. 18 οὐ γὰρ ὁ 
ἑαυτὸν συνιστάνων κ-τ.λ. ; Comp. I Cor. 
iv. 5. 

13. αὐτῶν] So read for αὑτῶν. On 
the forms αὑτοῦ, αὐτῷ, etc., as inad- 
missible here, see §§ 9, 12, 14, 32 
(notes). 


εν avremawerovs| No other instance of 


the word is given in the lexicons. 
15. ὑπ᾽ ἄλλων] See Prov. xxvii. 2. 


CLEM. II. 


18. πραὔτης] This word is distin- 
guished from ταπεινοφροσύνη, Trench 
N. T. Syn. ist ser. § xliv, and from 
ἐπιείκεια 2b, § xliii. 

XXXI. ‘Let us therefore cling to 
His blessing: let us study the re- 
cords of the past, and see how it was 
won by our fathers, by Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob’. 

21. dvatvAigoper| ‘unroll’, and so 
‘pore over’; comp. Lucian Wigr. 7 
τοὺς λόγους ovs τότε ἤκουσα συναγεί- 
ρὼν καὶ ἀνατυλίττων. 

22. ὁ πατὴρ ἡμῶν] See the note on 
§ 4. 

23. οὐχὶ δικαιοσύνην x.t.A.] Com- 
bining the statement of 5. Paul (Rom. 
iv. 1 sq, Gal. iii. 6 sq) with that of 
S. James (ii. 21 sq). See the note at 
the beginning of § 33, and the intro- 
duction, I. p. 96. 


7 


98 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


[ΧΧΧῚ 


μέλλον ἡδέως προσήγετο θυσία. ᾿Ιακὼβ μετὰ ταπει- 
νοφροσύνης ἐξεχώρησεν τῆς γῆς αὐτοῦ δι’ ἀδελφὸν καὶ 


ἐπορεύθη πρὸς Λαβὰν καὶ ἐδούλευσεν, καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ 





τὸ δωδεκάσκηπτρον τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ. 

XXXII. Ἐάν τις καθ᾽ ἕν ἕκαστον εἰλικρινῶς κατα- 5. 
νοήση, ἐπιγνώσεται μεγαλεῖα τῶν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ δεδομένων 
δωρεῶν. ἐξ αὐτοῦ γὰρ ἱερεῖς καὶ λευῖται πάντες οἱ 
λειτουργοῦντες τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ τοῦ Θεοῦ: ἐξ αὐτοῦ 


1 ἡδέως] AC; καὶ ἡδέως 8. 
ἃ ἐὰν) S, which is perhaps correct. 
A. 7 δωρεῶν] δωραιων A. 
ἱερεῖς C. 


I. ἡδέως κιτ.λ.] There is nothing in 
the original narrative which suggests 
that Isaac was a willing sacrifice ; 
Gen. xxii. 7,8. According to Jose- 
phus however, Azz. i. 14. 4, on hear- 
ing his father’s purpose he δέχεται 
πρὸς ἡδονὴν τοὺς λόγους and ὥρμησεν 
ἐπὶ τὸν βωμὸν καὶ τὴν σφαγήν. See also 
Beer’s Leben Abraham’s p. 65 sq 
with the notes p. 709 sq, where ample 
rabbinical authorities are collected 
for this addition to the narrative. The 
idea is brought out strongly by Melito 
(Routh’s Rel. Sacr. 1. p. 123) ὁ δὲ 
Ἰσαὰκ σιγᾷ πεπεδημένος ὡς κριός, οὐκ 
ἀνοίγων τὸ στόμα οὐδὲ φθεγγόμενος 
φωνῇ τὸ γὰρ ξίφος οὐ φοβηθεὶς οὐδὲ 
τὸ πῦρ πτοηθεὶς οὐδὲ τὸ παθεῖν λυπη- 
θεὶς ἐβάστασεν τὸν τύπον τοῦ Κυρίου 
k.r.A., Where there is an obvious 
reference to Is. liii. 7 in οὐδὲ φθεγ- 
yopevos φωνῇ. Philo de Abr. 32 (II. 
p. 26) is seemingly ignorant of this 
turn given to the incident. 

4. τὸ δωδεκάσκηπτρον] Equivalent 
to τὸ δωδεκάφυλον, which occurs below 
§ 55 and Acts xxvi. 7; for σκῆπτρον 
(wav), ‘a branch or rod’, is a syn- 
onym for ‘a tribe’; e.g. 1 Kings xi. 
31, 32 καὶ δώσω σοι δέκα σκῆπτρα καὶ 
δύο σκῆπτρα ἔσται αὐτῷ, and again 
ver. 35, 36 (see § 32); comp. Zest. xii 


of] AC; om. (apparently) S. 


5 Edy] conj.; def. A; ὃ ἂν C; quae si (as if 
See the lower note. 
αὐτοῦ] S; αὐτών AC. 


εἱλικριν ὥς] uKpw... 
ἱερεῖς} A; οἱ 
8 λειτουργοῦντες] λιτουργ... 


Patr. Nepht. 5 τὰ δώδεκα σκῆπτρα τοῦ 
Ἰσραήλ. 

XXXII. ‘If any one will consider, 
he may see what blessings God show- 
ers on the faithful. What great ho- 
nours did He confer on this patriarch 
Jacob! From him was derived the 
priestly tribe of Levi: from him came 
the great High-priest, the Lord Jesus; 
from him are descended kings and 
rulers through Judah. And by the 
other tribes also he was the father of 
countless multitudes. It was God’s 
will, not their own righteous doing, 
whereby they were glorified. And 
by His will also, not by our own 
piety or wisdom, are we and all — 
men justified through faith—by His 
Almighty will to whom be glory for 
ever’. 

5. ’Eav] Previous editors read εἰ; 
but, though εἰ with the conjunc- 
tive is possible (see Philippians iii. 
11), it is rare and ought not to be © 
introduced unnecessarily. 

εἰλικρινῶς] ‘distinctly, severally’. 
It seems to be a military metaphor — 
from εἴλη ‘turma’; see the note, © 
Philippians i. το. P 

6. ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ] i.e. τοῦ Θεοῦ. There 
is a little awkwardness in the sudden © 
transition to ἐξ αὐτοῦ, which must re- 


XXxII] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


99 


ὁ Κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς τὸ κατὰ σάρκα" ἐξ αὐτοῦ βασιλεῖς 


Bowe \ ε / \ \ 3 “4 ‘\ \ 
καὶ ἀρχοντες καὶ ἡγούμενοι, κατὰ τὸν *lovdav: Ta δὲ 


\ ΄σ 3 “ > > ΄- ε , 
λοιπὰ σκήπτρα αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἐν μικρᾷ δόξη ὑπάρχουσιν, 


ε > / 4“. ~ ed » ’ : 
ws ἐπαγγειλαμένου τοῦ Θεοῦ ὅτι “Ectai τὸ crépma coy 


ὡς οἱ &ctépec τοῦ οὐρὰνοῦ. 


Πάντες οὖν ἐδοξάσθησαν 


δ' “(ὦ ΄ 3 > > ζω * ~ ᾿' > ~ \ 
Kal ἐμεγαλύνθησαν ου δι QUTWV ἢ Τῶν Epyov αὐτῶν ἢ 


o , ΜῈ / > \ \ -“- 
τῆς δικαιοπραγίας ἧς κατειργάσαντο, ἀλλὰ διὰ τοῦ 


τεσ Α. 
ἡγούμενοι. δὲ] A; τε CS. 
τάξει C. 12 τοῦ Θεοῦ] A; θεοῦ Ὁ. 


fer to Jacob; but τῶν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ded. 
δωρεῶν can only be said of God (as 
in §§ 19, 23, 35), nor can ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
be translated ‘fer eum’, as in the 
Latin version of Young. Lipsius (de 
Clem. Rom. Ep. p. §5) explains ‘De 
beneficiis a Jacobo in nobis collo- 
catis’ and Harnack adds ‘haec dona 
sunt sacerdotes, ipse Dominus se- 
cundum carnem, reges.’ 

ἐξ αὐτοῦ] i.e. from Jacob. The 
following clauses render it necessary 
to read αὐτοῦ for αὐτῶν, which might 
otherwise stand. For the whole pas- 
sage comp. Rom. ix. 4, 5 ὧν.. ἡ Aa- 
τρεία καὶ ai ἐπαγγελίαι, ὧν of πατέρες 
καὶ ἐξ ὧν Χριστὸς τὸ κατὰ σάρκα. 

9. ὁ Κύριος Ἰησοῦς] He is men- 
tioned in connexion with the Leviti- 
cal tribe, as being the great High- 
priest, a favourite title in Clement : 
see the note ὃ 36. Comp. Ign. Phz/lad. 
Q καλοὶ καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς, κρεῖσσον δὲ ὁ ἀρ- 
χιερεύς. With Levi He is connected 
as a priest; from Judah He is de- 
scended as a king. Hence His name 
is placed between the two, as the 
_ link of transition from the one to the 
_ Other. But there is no ground for 
assuming that by this collocation Cle- 
ment implies our Lord to have de- 
᾿ scended from Levi, as Hilgenfeld (4- 
post. Vat. p. 103, and here p. 98, ed. 2) 

_ thinks. The Epistle to the Hebrews, 





το κατὰ] AC; οἱ κατὰ S, this being a repetition of the last syllable of 


11 αὐτοῦ] AS; om. C. δόξῃ} ΑΒ; 


14 αὐτῶν] αὑτῶν C. 


which Clement quotes so repeatedly, 
and from which his ideas of Christ’s 
high-priesthood are taken, would dis- 
tinctly teach him otherwise (vii. 14). 
A double descent (from both Judah 
and Levi) is maintained in the Zes¢. 
xii Patr. (see Galatians p. 308), but 
this writing travels in a different 
cycle of ideas. And even in this 
Judaic work the Virgin herself is 
represented as belonging to Judah. 
In Iren. Fragm. 17 (p. 856, Stieren) 
likewise a double descent is ascribed 
to our Lord ἐκ δὲ τοῦ Λευὶ καὶ τοῦ 
Ἰούδα τὸ κατὰ σάρκα ὡς βασιλεὺς καὶ 
ἱερεὺς ἐγεννήθη. On the descent from 
Levi see Sinker Zest. of Twelve Patr. 
Pp. 105 sq. 

10. κατὰ τὸν Ἰούδαν] ‘after fudah,’ 
i.e. as descended from him and 
thereby inheriting the attribute of 
royalty, Gen. xlix. 10. This idea of 
the royalty of the patriarch Judah 
runs through the 752. xiz Patr., e.g. 
Jud. I ὁ πατήρ pov Ἰακὼβ ηὔξατό μοι 
λέγων, Βασιλεὺς ἔσῃ κατευοδούμενος ἐν 
πᾶσι. 

12. Ἔσται κιτ.λ.] Comp. Gen. xv. 5, 
xxii. 17, xxvi. 4. It is not an exact 
quotation from any of these passages, 
but most closely resembles the first. 

14. δι αὐτῶν] Not αὑτῶν. See 
above the notes on §§ 9, 12, 14, 30. 

15. τῆς δικαιοπραγίας x.r.A.] Comp. 


77-2 


COLL. CHRIST! REGIS 


BIB, MAJ, 
TORONTON 





I0O THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xxx 


/ > ~ 4, 2 - > \ “ > lal 

θελήματος αὐτοῦ. καὶ ἡμεῖς οὖν, διὰ θελήματος αὐτοῦ 
΄ ΄σ , ε ~ / 

ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ κληθέντες, οὐ δι᾿ ἑαυτών δικαιούμεθα 


ΣΝ \ ΄σ ε / / \ / 3. > 7 vA * 
οὐδὲ Sia τῆς ἡμετέρας σοφίας ἢ συνέσεως ἢ εὐσεβείας ἢ 


of - ᾽ὔ > ε ’ / > \ 
Epywv wy κατειργασάμεθα ἐν ὁσιότητι καρδίας, ἀλλα 
\ “ 7 ΠΑ, ἡ / \ > IA ε 
διὰ τῆς πίστεως, Ol ἧς πάντας τοὺς ἀπ᾽ αἰῶνος ὁ παν- 
͵ Α 3 / < of ε > \ 
τοκράτωρ Θεὸς ἐδικαίωσεν: ᾧ ἔστω ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς 
3 “σ᾿ ~ δὲ 4 ’ὔ 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 
= , > / 
XXXII. Ti οὖν ποιήσωμεν, ἀδελφοί ; ἀργήσωμεν 
> ΄σ ᾿ \ > \ / 
ἀπὸ τῆς ἀγαθοποιΐας Kat ἐγκαταλείπωμεν THY ἀγα- 


1 αὐτοῦ] AC; τοῦ θεοῦ 5. 
homceoteleuton. 
τοὺς] του A. 
below, § 45. 


3 ἡμετέρας] nuepac A. 
6 τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων] AS; αἰῶνας C. See also 
8 Τί οὖν ποιήσωμεν, ἀδελφοί] AS; τί οὖν ἐροῦμεν, ἀγαπητοί C. 


καὶ ἡμεῖς...θελήματος αὐτοῦ] AS; om. C, by 


5 πάντας] A; ἅπαντας C. 


This variation is obviously suggested by Rom. vi. 1, where the argument is the 
same; see I. p. 125. For ἀδελφοί translated as if ἀγαπητοί see above, 881, 4. 


ἀργήσωμεν] A; ἀργήσομεν C. 
A; καταλίπομεν C; dub. 5. 


Tit. iii. 5 οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων τῶν ἐν δικαι- 
οσύνῃ ἃ ἐποιήσαμεν ἡμεῖς ἀλλὰ κατὰ 
τὸ αὐτοῦ ἔλεος κ-.τ.λ. 

2. δι’ ἑαυτῶν] i.e. ἡμῶν αὐτῶν, as 
e.g. Rom. viii. 23, 2 Cor. i. 9, iii. 1, 5, 
and commonly. 

3. σοφίας ἢ συνέσεως] The words 
occur together 1 Cor. i. 19 (from Is. 
xxix. 14), Col. i. 9; so too σοφοὶ καὶ 
συνετοί, Matt. xi. 25 (Luke x. 21). 
They are explained in Arist. Zh. 
Nic. vi. 7, το. The first is a creative, 
the second a discerning faculty. 

6. ἡ δόξα] See the notes on Gala- 
tans i. 5. 

XXXIII. ‘What then? If we are 
justified by facth, shall we leave off 
doing good? God forbid. We must 
needs work. The Almighty Himself 
rejoices in His own beneficent works. 
The heaven, the earth, the ocean, the 
living things that move on the land 
and in the sea, are His creation. 
Lastly and chiefly He made man 
after His own image. All these He 
created and blessed. As we have 


9 καὶ] AS; om. C. 
10 ἐάσαι ὁ δεσπότη:] A; ὁ δεσπότης ἐάσαι C. 


ἐγκαταλείπωμεν 


seen before that the righteous have 
ever been adorned with good works, 
so now we see that even the Creator 
thus arrayed Himself. Having such 
an example, let us do good with all 
our might’. 

In § 31 we have seen Clement com- 
bining the teaching of S. Paul and 
S. James in the expression οὐχὶ δικαιο- 
σύνην καὶ ἀλήθειαν διὰ πίστεως ποιήσας; 
So here, after declaring emphatically 
that men are not justified by their 
own works but by faith (§ 32 οὐ δὲ 
αὐτῶν ἢ τῶν ἔργων αὐτῶν κιτιλ., and 
again οὐ διὰ... ἔργων ὧν κατειργασάμεθα 
ἐν ὁσιότητι καρδίας ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς πίστεως 
κιτιλ.), he hastens to balance this 
statement by urging the importance 
of good works. The same anxiety 
reveals itself elsewhere. Thus, where 
he deals with the examples adduced 
in the Apostolic writings, he is care- 
ful to show that neither faith alone 


nor works alone were present: ὃ 10 
of Abraham διὰ πίστιν καὶ φιλοξενίαν 
ἐδόθη αὐτῷ υἱὸς κιτιλ., § 12 of Rahab 


ΧΧΧΙΠ] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


IOI 


“ - ΩΝ ε / > > δ᾿ wae 
lo mv; μηθαμῶς τοῦτο ἐάσαι ὁ δεσπότης ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν γε 


΄ \ / \ > / \ 
γενηθῆναι, ἀλλὰ σπεύσωμεν μετὰ ἐκτενείας Kal προ- 


/ “ ᾽»" > \ > - 
θυμίας πᾶν εργον ἀγαθὸν ἐπιτελεῖν. 


> \ \ ε 
αὐτος yap oO 


; \ , - ς / ars Ae - ᾿ 
δημιουργὸς καὶ δεσπότης τῶν ἁπάντων ἐπὶ τοῖς ἔργοις 


αὐτοῦ ἀγαλλιάᾶται. 


“ \ / ΄ 
τῷ γαρ παμμεγεθεστάτῳ αὐτοῦ 


/ > Ἁ Γ \ rad ͵ὕ rs 
5 κράτει οὐρανοὺς ἐστήρισεν, καὶ τῆ ἀκαταλήπτῳ αὐτοῦ 


> ΄σ ὔ \ 
συνέσει διεκόσμησεν αὐτούς" γῆν TE διεχώρισεν ἀπὸ 


A , > \ / \ A \ 
τοῦ περιέχοντος αὐτὴν ὕδατος καὶ ἥδρασεν ἐπὶ τὸν 


γε γενηθῆναι] A; γενηθῆναι (om. γε) CS. Above, § 23, we have the same pheno- 
menon, though there the relations of A and C are reversed, A omitting and C re- 


taining γε. 


μεγεστάτῳ Leont Damasc. 


dpacev] AC Damasc; ἔδρασεν Leont. 


διὰ πίστιν καὶ φιλοξενίαν ἐσώθη. See 
Westcott Canon p. 23. Nor is it 
only where doctrine is directly con- 
cerned that Clement places the teach- 
ing of the Apostles of the Circum- 
cision and the Uncircumcision in 
juxtaposition, as e.g. ὃ 49 ἀγάπη κα- 
λύπτει πλῆθος ἁμαρτιῶν, ἀγάπη πάντα 
ἀνέχεται κιτιλ. (see the note there). 
This studied effort to keep the balance 
produces a certain incongruous effect 
in the rapid transition from the one 
aspect of the antithesis to the other; 
but it is important when viewed in 
connexion with Clement’s position as 
ruler of a community in which the 
two sections of the Church, Jewish 
and Gentile, had been in direct an- 
_ tagonism and probably still regarded 
_ each other with suspicion. On this 
_ Position of Clement, as a reconciler, 
ἢ see Galatians p. 323, and the intro- 


duction here, I. p. 96. A part of this 
_ chapter is quoted by Leontius and 
John Res Sacr. ii (see above, I. p. 188) 
with considerable variations. 

8. Τί οὖν ποιήσωμεν] Evidently 
- modelled on Rom. vi. 1 sq. 


δ, 





It is wanted here for the sense. 
14 ἀγαλλιᾶται] A; ἀγάλλεται C Leont Damasc. 


11 éxrevelas] exrevia... A. 
παμμεγεθεστάτῳ] AC ; παμ- 


15 ἐστήρισεν] AC; ἐστήριξεν Leont Damasc. 
τῇ] A Leont Damasc; ἐν τῇ C; dub. S. 
Thay TIE ρισεν A; γῆν δὲ διεχώρισεν Leont ; γῆν δὲ ἐχώρισεν Damasce. 


16 γῆν τε διεχώρισεν] ( ; γὴν 
17 7 


10. ἐάσαι ὁ δεσπότης «.t.A.] True 
to his dictum that everything is διὰ 
θελήματος αὐτοῦ and nothing δὲ éav- 
τῶν, he ascribes the prevention of 
this consequence solely to God’s pro- 
hibition. On ὁ δεσπότης see the note 
above, ὃ 7. For the preposition in 
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, ‘zn our case,’ comp. John xii. 
16, Acts v. 35, xxi. 24, 2 Cor. ix. 14. 

12. αὐτὸς γὰρ κιτ.λ.] This passage 
as far as αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε is 
quoted (with some omissions and va- 
riations) by John of Damascus Sacer. 
Parall. (11. p. 310). 

13. δημιουργὸς κιτ.λ.}] So Clem. Hom. 
xvii. ὃ πάντων δημιουργὸν καὶ δεσπότην. 

15. ἐστήρισεν] See the note on 
στήρισον § 18. 

17. περιέχοντος) This has been 
thought to imply an acceptance of 
the theory of the ὠκεανὸς ποταμὸς 
supposed to encircle the earth ; comp. 
e.g. Herod. ii. 21 τὸ δ᾽ ὠκεανὸν γῆν 
περὶ πᾶσαν ῥέειν, M. Ann. Seneca Suas. 
i. 1 ‘de Oceano dubitant utrumne 
terras velut vinculum circumfluat.’ 
But, as Clement does not use the 
word ὠκεανός, and as it is not un- 




















102 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [XXXII 


~ ~ as / / 3 
ἀσφαλῆ τοῦ ἰδίου βουλήματος θεμέλιον: τά τε ἐν 
7, 7 ΄σ la ΄σ΄ ε cal / τ of 
αὐτῇ ζῶα φοιτῶντα TH ἑαυτοῦ διατάξει ἐκέλευσεν 
« [2 
᾿ Α / \ \ ᾽ > ~ “ / 
εἶναι θάλασσαν καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ ἴϑα; προδημιουργή- 
93 ~ ες ~ ΄σ > 
σας ἐνέκλεισεν τῇ ἑαυτοῦ δυνάμει: ἐπὶ πᾶσι TO ἐξο- 
ὔ \ / \ / " ΄. 
χώτατον καὶ παμμέγεθες κατὰ διάνοιαν, ἄνθρωπον Tats 
ε an \ / \ af a ΄“ / 
ἱεραῖς Kal ἀμώμοις χερσὶν ἔπλασεν τῆς ἑαυτοῦ εἰκόνος 
a / 'é ε / , ” 
χαρακτῆρα. οὕτως yap φησιν ὁ Θεός: Ποιήσωμεν ἂν- 
θρωπον KAT εἰκόνὰ καὶ καθ᾽ ὁμοίωοιν ἡμετέραν. Kal ἐποί- 


ς ‘ ‘ »” » \ a > ' > 
ηοεν ὁ Oedc TON ANOPOITTON, OPCEN Kal ΘΗ͂ΛΥ ETTOIHCEN aAY- 


1 BovAnuaros] AC; θελήματος Leont Damasc. 
2 ἑαυτοῦ] AS; ἑαυτῶν C. 


om. Leont Damasc. 
TPOONML «sees σασ A; προετοιμάσας CS. 


τά τε ἐν αὐτῇ.. δυνάμει] 
3 προδημιουργήσας] 
4 ἐνέκλεισεν] ἐνέκλισεν A. ἐπὶ 


πᾶσι... ἄνθρωπον] AC; ἐπὶ τούτοις τὸν ἐξοχώτατον (ἐξότατον Leont) καὶ παμμεγέθη 


ἄνθρωπον Leont Damasc 5. 
the other authorities see the last note. 


natural to speak of the water ‘ gird- 
ling’ the land independently of this 
theory, the inference is questionable. 
See the note on § 20. 

3. προδημιουργήσας] i.e. before ra 
ἐν τῇ γῇ ζῶα φοιτῶντα, which have 
been already mentioned out of their 
proper place. 

4. ἐνέκλεισεν)] ‘inclosed within 
their proper bounds’: see above § 20 
τὰ περικείμενα αὐτῇ κλεῖθρα. 

τὸ ἐξοχώτατον κιτ.λ.}] Is this an 
accusative after ἔπλασεν, ἄνθρωπον 
being in apposition? Or is it ἃ 
nominative absolute, referring to the 
whole sentence which follows, ἄνθρω- 
mov...xapaxtipa? On the construction 
adopted depends the sense assigned 
to κατὰ διάνοιαν which will mean 
respectively either (1) ‘2x intellectual 
capacity’, referring to man; or (2) ‘as 
an exercise of His creative intelli- 
gence’, referring to God. The former 
appears to be generally adopted ; but 
the latter seems to me preferable ; for 
a sentiment like Hamlet’s ‘How 
noble in reason! how infinite in 
faculty !’ is somewhat out of place on 


5 παμμέγεθες] A; παμμεγεθέστατον C. For 


6 ἱεραῖς] AC; ἰδίαις αὐτοῦ Leont 


the lips of Clement, and such a strong 
expression as παμμέγεθες κατὰ διά- 
νοιαν jars with his language elsewhere 
about human intellect, e.g. §§ 13, 32, 
36. The παμμέγεθες κατὰ διάνοιαν 
therefore seems to have the same 
bearing as τῇ ἀκαταλήπτῳ αὐτοῦ συνέσει 
above. John of Damascus indeed 
takes the sentence otherwise, but he 
omits κατὰ διάνοιαν. 

5. παμμέγεθες) The word does 
not occur either in the LXX or in the 
G.T., but is found in Symmachus Ps. 
Ixvii (Ixviii). 31 συνόδῳ παμμεγεθῶν 
(Field’s Orig. Hexapl. τι. p. 204). 

6. ἀμώμοις] ‘faultless’. See the 
note on μωμοσκοπηθέν, ὃ 41. 

7. Ποιήσωμεν x.t.A.] A broken quo- 
tation from the LXx Gen. i. 26, 27, 
clauses being left out. 

8. εἰκόνα, ὁμοίωσιν] These words 
are distinguished in reference to this 
text by Trench WV. 7. Sym. ist ser. 
§ xv, 

Dorner (Person Christi 1. p. 100, 
Engl. trans.) considers it probable 
that ‘under the expression εἰκὼν Θεοῦ, 
whose χαρακτῆρα man bears, we are 


XXXIV | 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


103 


’ ΄σ ed / δ , > 
,toYc. Ταῦτα οὖν πάντα τελειώσας ἐπήνεσεν αὐτὰ καὶ 


ηὐλόγησεν καὶ εἶπεν" Αὐξάνεοθε Kal πληθήνεοθε. Eldo- 


.« > af ? σ΄ / > 7 ε / 

μεν OTL ἐν ἔργοις ἀγαθοῖς πάντες ἐκοσμήθησαν οἱ δί- 
\ 3 ς a », \ 7 

καιοι" καὶ αὐτὸς οὖν ὁ Κύριος ἔργοις ἑαυτὸν κοσμήσας 


ἐχάρη. 


4 + ~ \ \ / 
ἔχοντες οὖν τοῦτον τὸν ὑπογραμμοὸν ἀόκνως 


᾿ προσέλθωμεν τῷ θελήματι αὐτοῦ, ἐξ ὅλης ἰσχύος ἡμῶν 


ἐργασώμεθα ἔργον δικαιοσύνης. 


XXXIV. ‘O ἀγαθὸς ἐργάτης μετὰ παρρησίας λαμ- 


Damasc. 


avéaverOar A. 
ACS. 
AC; ἐκοιμήθησαν 8. 


A; τῆς ἰσχύος C. 


to understand the Son’. Though the 
text in Genesis is so interpreted by 
later fathers (e.g. Clement of Alex- 
andria and Origen), I see no indi- 
cation in the context that this idea 
was present to the mind of the Roman 
Clement. See the remarks on the 
logos-doctrine above, I. p. 398. 

11. Αὐξάνεσθε κιτ.λ] From the 
LXX Gen. i. 28. 

Εἴδομεν] The sense seems to re- 
quire this substitution for ἴδωμεν ; see 
the introduction I. p. 120 for similar 
errors of transcription. ‘We saw be- 
fore,’ says Clement, ‘that all the 
righteous were adorned with good 
works (§ 32), and now I have shown 
that the Lord God Himself etc.’ By 
ὁ Κύριος is meant ὁ δημιουργὸς καὶ 
δεσπότης τῶν ἁπάντων, as appears 
from οὖν and from ἐχάρη taken in 
connexion with what has gone before 
(compare ἀγαλλιᾶται above). 

12. ὅτι κιτ.λ.] If the reading τὸ be 
retained, we must understand a cog- 
nate accusative such as κόσμημα: e.g. 
Soph. £7. 1075 τὸν dei πατρὸς (sc. 
στόνον) δειλαία στενάχουσα. This is 
possible ; but the reading of A is dis- 


q 


8 εἰκόνα] Damasc adds ἡμετέραν and omits it after ὁμοίωσιν. 

10 ἐπήνεσεν] AC; ἐπαίνεσεν Leont; ἐποίησεν Damasc. 
πληθύνεσθε] πληθύνεσθαι A. 

12 ὅτι]  ΟΚ; add τὸ A. 

13 οὖν] A; δὲ CS. 

See above, § 30, and comp. I. pp. 126, 141. 


11 Αὐξάνεσθε) 
Εἴδομεν] Young (marg.); ἐδωμεν 
ἔργοις] eyyoo A. ἐκοσμήθησαν 
épyos] A; add ἀγαθοῖς CS. 

15 ἐξ] A; καὶ ἐξ CS. ἰσχύος] 


credited by the fact that the scribe’s 
attention was flagging here, for he 
writes eyyos for epyos and (as we 
have seen) ἰδωμεν for εἰδομεν. On 
these grounds I proposed the omis- 
sion in my first edition, and it has 
since been confirmed by our new 
authorities. 

14. ὑπογραμμὸν] See the note on 
ὃ 5. 

15. προσέλθωμεν] The verb προσ- 
έρχεσθαι occurs several times of 
approaching God in the Epistle to 
the Hebrews, and in the imperative 
προσερχώμεθα more especially twice, 
iv. 16, x. 22. See also above § 29 
προσέλθωμεν οὖν αὐτῷ κιτιλ. ; Comp. 
δὲ 23, 63. 

XXXIV. ‘The good workman re- 
ceives his wages boldly: but the 
slothful dares not face his employer. 
The Lord will come quickly with 
His reward in His hand. He will 
come attended by myriads of angels, 
hymning His praises. Let us there- 
fore with one voice and one soul cry 
to Him, that we may be partakers of 
His glorious promises, which surpass 
all that man can conceive’. 





104 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [XxxIV 


\ of ~ / > ΄σ΄ 
βάνει τὸν ἄρτον τοῦ ἔργου αὐτοῦ, ὁ νωθρὸς καὶ παρ- 
, > ? ΄ ~ 29 , 3 “ ζ 
ειμένος οὐκ ἀντοφθαλμεῖ τῷ ἐργοπαρέκτη αὐτοῦ. δέον 
A / 4 ᾿ς: > 3 “Δ 
οὖν ἐστιν προθύμους ἡμᾶς εἶναι εἰς ἀγαθοποιΐαν" ἐξ 
΄σ \ U ΄ \ ~ 3 ‘ 
αὐτοῦ γάρ ἐστιν Ta TavTa* προλέγει yap ἡμῖν" ἸΔΟΥ͂ 
ὁ Κύριος, kai 6 μιοθὸς δὐτοῦ πρὸ προοώπογ δ τοῦ, ἀποδλοῦ- 5 
ee \ δ τ > a 4 > vey 
Nal ἑκάστῳ κἀτὰ τὸ ἔργον ayto¥. Tlporpemera οὖν ἡμᾶς 
, 3 « ~ / 39. 9 δι. οὟἋΝ \ ᾽ \ 
πιστεύοντας ἐξ ὅλης τῆς καρδίας ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ μὴ ἀργοὺς 
\ / > - af / \ / 
μηδὲ παρειμένους εἶναι ἐπὶ πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθόν" TO καύ- 
~ ε ’ » > ων 
χήμα ἡμῶν καὶ ἡ παρρησία ἔστω ἐν αὐτῷ ὑποτασ- 


1 ὁ νωθρὸς] AC; ὁ δὲ νωθρὸς 5. 


AC. S translates as if it referred to προθύμους ὑμᾶς κ.τ.λ. 
6 Προτρέπεται] προτρεπετε A. 


κύριος (om. ὁ) C. 


I. ὁ νωθρὸς x.t.r.] Both these 
words occur in the epistle to the He- 
brews, and nowhere else in the N.T. 
For νωθρὸς see Heb. v. 11, vi. 125 
for παρειμένος, ib. xii. 12. The com- 
bination appears in Ecclus. iv. 29 
νωθρὸς καὶ παρειμένος ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις 
αὐτοῦ, which passage perhaps Cle- 
ment had in his mind. 

2. ἀντοφθαλμεῖ) ‘faces’, as Wisd. 
xii. 14, Acts xxvii. 15, Barnab. § 5. 
The word occurs frequently in Poly- 
bius. Comp. ἀντωπεῖν Theoph. ad 
Autol. i. 5, ἀντομματεῖν Apost. Const. 
vi. 2. For ἀντοφθαλμεῖν itself see 
Lit. D. Facob. p. 25 (ed. Hammond). 

ἐργοπαρέκτῃ] ‘his employer’. Lhave 
not found any other instance of 
this word, which is equivalent to 
ἐργοδότης. Compare also ἐργολάβος, 
ἐργοδιώκτης (Exod. iii. 7, v. 6, etc.). 

3. ἐξ αὐτοῦ] i.e. rod ἐργοπαρέκτου 
ἡμῶν. 

4. ᾿ἸἸδοὺ ὁ Κύριος κιτ.λ.} The be- 
ginning is a confusion of Is. xl. 10 
ἰδοὺ Κύριος (ὁ θεὸς ὑμῶν 5) Κύριος (om. 
Κύριος sec. A) μετὰ ἰσχύος ἔρχεται καὶ 


᾿ 6 βραχίων add. αὐτοῦ A) μετὰ κυρίας " 


> ‘A c ‘4 > -“ > > -“ Ν A 
ἰδοὺ ὁ μισθὸς αὐτοῦ per αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ 
ἔργον ἐναντίον αὐτοῦ, and Is. Ixii, 11 
> ‘ c , c 
ἰδοὺ ὁ σωτήρ σοι παραγέγονεν (σοι ὁ 


3 quads] AC; ὑμᾶς S. ἐξ αὐτοῦ] 
5 ὁ Κύριο:] A; 
ἡ πιστεύοντας] CS ; 


σωτὴρ παραγίνεται SA) ἔχων τὸν éav- 
τοῦ μισθόν, καὶ τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ (om. 
αὐτοῦ A) πρὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ: but the 
ending comes from Prov. xxiv. 12 ὃς 
ἀποδίδωσιν ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ, 
unless (as seems more probable from 
the connexion) it is taken from Rev. 
xxil. 12 ἰδοὺ ἔρχομαι ταχὺ καὶ ὁ μισθός 
μου μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἀποδοῦναι ἑκάστῳ ὡς τὸ 
ἔργον ἔσται αὐτοῦ. Clem. Alex. Strom. 
iv. 22 (p. 625) has the same quo- 
tation, but is copying the Roman 
Clement. 

7. ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ] 1.6. τῷ μισθῷ, ‘with 
our reward in view’, The position 
of ἐξ ὅλης τῆς καρδίας is opposed to 
such corrections as ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ or ἐπὶ 
τὸ for the Ms reading én’ αὐτῷ ; nor 
does any alteration seem needed. 

8. μηδὲ παρειμένους x.t.A.] Comp. 
2 Tim. il. 21 εἰς πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν 
ἡτοιμασμένον, 20. iii. 17, Tit. iii. 1, and 
see above, § 2. The μήτε after μὴ in 
A was so suspicious (see Winer § lv. 
p. 513, A. Buttmann p. 315) as to call 
forth the suggestion in my first edition 
that it should probably be read μηδέ; 
see the vv. ll. in Luke vii. 33, Eph. iv. 
27. Our new authorities have con- 
firmed the justice of this suspicion. 

12. Μύριαι x.t.A.] Dan. vii. 10 (Theo- 





XXXIV] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 105 


΄σ / ΄ 7 \ ΄σ 
10 σώμεθα τῷ θελήματι αὐτοῦ: κατανοήσωμεν τὸ πὰν 
΄ ΄ > ἤ > ΄σ ΄-ς ΄σ , > ΄“ 
πλῆθος τῶν ἀγγέλων αὐτοῦ, πῶς τῷ θελήματι αὐτοῦ 
nn a 7 \ c ὅς, ’ 
λειτουργοῦσιν παρεστῶτες" λέγει yap ἡ ypadn* Mypiai 
μυριάλες TIAPEICTHKEICAN ἀὐτῷ, καὶ χίλιδι χιλιάδες ἐλειτούρ- 
roYN ἀὐτῷ: Kai éxékparon’ ἅγιος, Arioc, ἅγιος Κύριος ca- 
Καὶ ἡμεῖς 
5 ᾽ ε , > \ A ᾿ \ θέ ΄ δή 
οὖν, ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ ἐπὶ TO AUTO συναχθέντες TH συνειδήσει; 
c \ ’ / \ \ - > 
ὡς ἐξ EVOS στόματος βοήσωμεν προς QUTOV ἐκτενῶς εἰς 
‘ ’ ε ~~ , ΄σ ,ὔ \ > 4 
TO μετόχους Mas γενέσθαι τῶν μεγάλων Kal ἐνδόξων 



























om. A. See I. p. 124. 
Toupyovow] λιτουργουσιν A. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
‘ n ε , - > n 
15 ΒΔΩθ, πλήρης πᾶοὰ H κτίοιο τῆς AGZHC δΥ̓ΤτοΥῦ. 
͵ 
| 
| 
| 
| 


both this word and παρειστήκεισαν as presents. 


Lxx and Hebr. 


dot.) χίλιαι χιλιάδες ἐλειτούργουν αὐτῷ 
(ἐθεράπευον αὐτόν LXX) καὶ μύριαι μυ- 
ριάδες παρειστήκεισαν αὐτῷ, the clauses 
being transposed by Clement. The 
order of the clauses in the Hebrew is 
the same as in the Greek versions. 
Yet Iren. Haer. ii. 7, 4, Euseb. Praep. 
Ev. vii. 15 (p. 326), Greg. Nyss. Hom. 
vit in Eccles. (1. p. 463), Cyril. Hier. 
Catech. xv. 24 (p. 237), and others, 
give the quotation with the inverted 
clauses as here; but, as it is quoted 
with every shade of variation in dif- 
ferent fathers and even these same 
fathers in some cases give the right 
order elsewhere, no stress can be 
laid on this coincidence which seems 
to be purely accidental. 

14. Kal ἐκέκραγον] A loose quotation 
from LXX Is. vi. 3. ᾿Εκέκραγον is an 
imperfect of a new verb kexpayo 
formed from κέκραγα ; see Buttmann 
Ausf. Griech. Sprachl. ὃ 111 (1. p. 
37). 

15. Καὶ ἡμεῖς οὖν x.7.A.] The con- 
nexion of this passage with the li- 
turgical services had struck careful 
observers, even before the discovery 
of the liturgical ending of the epistle 
(§§ 60, 61) had furnished a solid ba- 


8 μηδὲ] C, and so probably 5; μήτε A. 
13 ἐλειτούργουν] C3; λιτουργουν A. S translates 


12 λει- 


15 «rlow] AS; γῆ C with 


16 τῇ συνειδήσει] AC; im una conscientia S. 


sis for such conjectures. Probst more 
especially (Liturg. d. drei ersten 
Fahrh. 41 sq) emphasizes this con- 
nexion. The phenomena which ex- 
pressly point to it are (1) the ‘ter 
sanctus’, and more especially the 
connexion of Is. vi. 3 with Dan. vii. 
10; (2) The expressions ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ 
συναχθέντες (comp. Ign. Ephes. 13, 
Philad. 4, Smyrn. 7, 8), ἐξ ἑνὸς στό- 
ματος (comp. Rom. xv. 6), ἐκτενῶς (see 
I. p. 385), etc.; (3) The quotation 
ὀφθαλμός κιτλ. For more on this 
subject see the introduction, I. p. 
386 sq. 

16. τῇ συνειδήσει] ‘in heart, in con- 
sciousness’; comp. Eccles. x. 20 καί ye 
ἐν συνειδήσει σου βασιλέα μὴ καταράσῃ, 
i.e. ‘in your secret heart’. The pre- 
sence of their hearts, and not of their 
bodies only, is required. The com- 
mentators however either translate 
as though it were ἐν ἀγαθῇ συνειδήσει, 
or give τῇ συνειδήσει the unsupported 
sense ‘harmony, unanimity’. This 
last is apparently the sense assigned 
to it by the Syriac translator ; see 
the upper note. Others have pro- 
posed to read συνδήσει or συνωδίᾳ. 





106 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


ἐπαγγελιῶν αὐτοῦ. 


[XXXIV 


λέγει γάρ" Ὀφθδᾶλμὸς OYK εἶδεν 


καὶ OYC οὐκ HKOYCEN, KAI ἐπὶ KAPAIAN ἀνθρώπου οὐκ ἀνέβη, 


OCA HTOIMACEN τοῖς ὑπομένουοιν AYTON. 


1 ᾿Οφθαλμὸς] A; ἃ ὀφθαλμὸς CS (with 1 Cor. ii. 9). 


ἡτοίμασεν] A; add. κύριος CS. 
the lower note). 


I. ᾿Οφθαλμὸς «.7.A.] This quotation 
occurs also in S. Paul 1 Cor. ii. 9 
(where it is introduced by καθὼς yé- 
γραπται), in the form ἃ ὀφθαλμὸς οὐκ 
εἶδεν καὶ οὖς οὐκ ἤκουσεν καὶ ἐπὶ καρδίαν 
ἀνθρώπου οὐκ ἀνέβη ὅσα ἡτοίμασεν ὁ 
Θεὸς τοῖς ἀγαπῶσιν αὐτόν. It is cited 
again in ii. § 11 (comp. § 14), Marz. 
Polyc. 2, Clem. Ep. ad Virg. i. 9; see 
also Lagarde’s Gesamm. Abhandl. p. 
142. It is apparently taken from 
Isaiah lxiv. 4, which runs in the 
LXX ἀπὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος οὐκ ἠκούσαμεν 
οὐδὲ οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ ἡμῶν εἶδον θεὸν πλὴν 
σοῦ καὶ τὰ ἔργα σου ἃ ποιήσεις τοῖς 
ὑπομένουσιν ἔλεον, but more nearly in 
the Hebrew, ‘From eternity they 
have not heard, they have not heark- 
ened, neither hath eye seen a god 
[or ‘O God’] save thee (who) worketh 
[or ‘(what) He shall do’] to him 
that awaiteth Him’ (see Delitzsch 
ad loc.); combined with Is. lxv. 16, 
17 οὐκ ἀναβήσεται αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὴν Kap- 
δίαν...οὐ μὴ ἐπέλθῃ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὴν καρ- 
δίαν. Clement mixes up 5. Paul’s 
free translation or paraphrase from 
the Hebrew (the latter words ὅσα 
ἡτοίμασεν k.t.A. being apparently the 
Apostle’s own explanatory addition) 
with the passage as it stands in the 
LXX; just as above, § 13, in quoting 
Jer. ix. 23, 24 (or 1 Sam. ii. 10) he con- 
denses it after S. Paul. Fora similar 
instance see above ὃ 34 ἰδοὺ ὁ Κύριος 
k7.A. The passages, which Hilgen- 
feld suggests as the sources of the 
quotation (4 Esdr. x. 35 sq, 55 sq), 
diverge more from the language of 
S. Paul and Clement, than these 
words of Isaiah. 


The passage, if we may trust S. Je- 
rome, occurred as given by S. Paul, 
both in the Ascension of Isaiah and 
in the Apocalypse of Elias (Hieron. 
in 75. \xiv. 4, IV. p. 761; Prol.in Gen. 
Ix. p. 3) And Origen, zz Matth. 
XXVii. 9 (III. p. 916), says that S. Paul 
quotes from the latter, ‘In nullo re- 
gulari libro hoc positum invenitur, 
nisi (εἰ μή, ‘but only’) in Secretis 
Eliae prophetae’. This assertion is 
repeated also by later writers (see 
Fabricius Cod. Ps. V. T. 1. p. 1073) 
doubtless from Origen, but combated 
by Jerome (Il. cc. and 2 2252. lvii. § 9, 
I. p. 314), who refers the quotation to 
Is. Ixiv. 4. If it could be shown that 
these apocryphal books were prior to 
S. Paul, this solution would be the 
most probable ; but they would ap- 
pear to have been produced by some 
Christian sectarians of the second 
century, for Jerome terms them ‘Ibe- 
rae naeniae’ and connects them with 
the Basilideans and other Gnostics 
who abounded in Spain (Il. cc.; see 
also ας. Vigil. 11. p. 393, and comp. 
Fabricius p, 1093 sq). If so they 
incorporated the quotation of S. 
Paul in their forgeries. For a simi- 
lar instance of incorporation see the 
notes on Galatians vi. 15. At all 
events both these works appear from 
the extant remains to have been 
Christian. For the Afocalypse of 
Elias see Epiphan. Haer. xlii (p. 372), 
who says that the quotation in Eph. 
v. 14 (which is obviously Christian) 
was found there; and for the Ascen- 
sion of Isaiah, this same father Haer. 


Ixvii. 3 (p. 712), where he quotes ἃ 


3 ὅσα AC; om. S.. 


τοῖς ὑπομένουσιν] A; τοῖς ἀγαπῶσιν CS (see 









Ὶ 


ΧΧΧΥ] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


107 


XXXV. ‘Ws paxapia καὶ θαυμαστὰ τὰ δῶρα τοῦ 


5 Θεοῦ, ἀγαπητοί. 


passage referring to the Trinity. In- 
deed there is every reason to believe 
that the work known to Epiphanius 
and several other fathers under this 
name, is the same with the Ascension 
and Vision of Isaiah published first 
by Laurence in an AXthiopic Version 
and subsequently by Gieseler in a 

* Latin. The two versions represent 
different recensions ; and the passage 
‘Eye hath not seen, etc” appears in 
the Latin (xi. 34) but not in the 
“Ethiopic (see Jolowicz Himmelfahrt 
u. Vision des Propheten Iesaia p. 90, 
Leipzig 1854). The Latin recension 
therefore must have been in the hands 
of Jerome ; though this very quotation 
seems to show clearly that the A£thi- 
opic more nearly represents the ori- 
ginal form of the work (see Liicke 
Offenbarung d. Fohannes p. 179 sq). 
Both recensions alike are distinctly 
Christian. 

It was at all events a favourite 
text with certain early Gnostic sects, 
who introduced it into their formula 
of initiation and applied it to their 
esoteric teaching ; see Hippol. Haer. 
Vv. 24, 26, 27, vi. 24. This perverted 
use of the text was condemned by 
their contemporary Hegesippus (as 
reported by Stephanus Gobarus in 
Photius 5201. 232), as contradicting 
our Lord’s own words μακάριοι oi 
ὀφθαλμοὶ ὑμῶν κιτιλ. In other words 
he complained that they would re- 
strict to the initiated few the know- 
ledge which Christ declared to be 
laid open to all. But Stephanus Go- 
barus himself, writing some centuries 
later and knowing the text only as it 
occurs in S. Paul, is not unnaturally 
at a loss to know what Hegesippus 


_ means by this condemnation (οὐκ οἶδ᾽ 


6 τι καὶ παθὼν μάτην μὲν εἰρῆσθαι ταῦτα 


ἶ λέγει κιτ.λ.. On the use which some 





\ 3 
ζωὴ ἐν ἀθανασίᾳ, λαμπρότης ἐν δι- 


modern critics have made of this re- 
ference to Hegesippus in Stephanus 
Gobarus, see Galatians p. 320. 

For the connexion of this quotation 
ὀφθαλμὸς οὐκ εἶδεν κιτιλ. with the 
earlier liturgies, see the introduction, 
I. p. 389 sq. 

Fabricius (p. 1073) quotes a par- 
allel from Empedocles (Fragm. Phi- 
Zos. 1. p. 2, ed. Mullach) οὔτ᾽ ἐπιδερκτὰ 
τάδ᾽ ἀνδράσιν οὔτ᾽ ἐπακουστά, οὔτε νόῳ 
περιληπτά. 

3. ὑπομένουσιν] It is clear that 
Clement wrote ὑπομένουσιν from the 
words which follow at the beginning of 
the next chapter τίνα οὖν dpa ἐστὶν ra 
ἑτοιμαζόμενα τοῖς ὑπομένουσιν; where 
he picks up the expression according 
to his wont; see the note on § 46 
τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν pou διαστρέψαι. On the 
other hand S, having broken the 
connexion by substituting ἀγαπῶσιν 
for ὑπομένουσιν, re-establishes it by 
the expedient of adding καὶ ἀγαπώντων 
to ὑπομενόντων in ὃ 35. On this 
reading (ὑπομένουσιν) see also 1. p. 
390, note. 

XXXV. ‘Great and marvellous 
are God’s gifts even in the present ! 
How then can we conceive the glory 
that hereafter awaits His patient ser- 
vants? Let us strive to attain this 
reward. And to this end let us do 
what is well-pleasing to Him: let us 
shun strife and vainglory; let us 
lay aside all selfish and unbrotherly 
sins. Remember how in the Psalms 
God denounces those who hearken 
not to His warning voice, who persist 
in wronging their neighbours, count- 
ing on His forbearance. He tells us 
that the sacrifice of praise is the path 
of salvation’. 

5. λαμπρότης] ‘cheerfulness, ala- 
crity, strenuousness’, as e.g. Plut. 
Vit. Cim. 17, Polyb. xxxii. 23. 1 (see 

















108 THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [Xxxv 





καιοσύνη, ἀλήθεια ἐν παρρησίᾳ, πίστις ἐν πεποιθήσει, 
ἐγκράτεια ἐν ἁγιασμῷ" καὶ ταῦτα ὑπέπιπτεν πάντα ὑπὸ 
τὴν διάνοιαν ἡμῶν. τίνα οὖν ἄρα ἐστὶν τὰ ἑτοιμαζό- 
μενα τοῖς ὑπομένουσιν; ὁ δημιουργὸς καὶ πατὴρ τῶν 
αἰώνων ὁ πανάγιος αὐτὸς γινώσκει τὴν ποσότητα καὶ 


\ \ > ΄σ ε ΄ 
τὴν καλλονὴν αὐτών. ἡμεῖς 


> ΄': ΄ lol / / e/ / 
ἐν τῷ ἀριθμῷ τῶν ὑπομενόντων αὐτόν, ὅπως μεταλά- 
é ‘ 
~~ > / ΄ 
βωμεν τῶν ἐπηγγελμένων δωρεῶν. 
> / \ , 3 / ΄σ \ 
TO, ἀγαπητοί; ἐὰν ἐστηριγμένη ἡ ἡ διάνοια ἡμῶν διὰ 
/ \ \ / > \ ~ \ "ἢ 
πίστεως πρὸς τὸν Θεόν: ἐὰν ἐκζητώμεν τὰ εὐάρεστα 


> / ΄σ \ 
Kal εὐπρόσδεκτα αὐτῷ" ἐαν 


2 ἐγκράτεια) εγκρατια A. 
πίπτοντα S, some letters having dropped 


πατὴρ τῶν αἰώνων ὁ πανάγιο5] AS; τῶν αἰώνων καὶ πατὴρ πανάγιος C. 
μενόντων] AC; add. καὶ ἀγαπώντων S. For the reason of this addition see the note 
αὐτόν] A; om. CS. 


on ὃ 34 ὀφθαλμὸς x.7.2. 
τωνεπηγγελμενωνδωραιων A; τῶν δωρεῶν 
9 ἀγαπητοί] AC; om. 85. 
fidem S; πίστεως (om. διὰ) A; πιστῶς C. 
τὰ εὐάρεστα καὶ εὐπρόσδεκτα αὐτῷ) AS; 


Schweigh. Lex. s.v. λαμπρός). Com- 
pare the similar word φαιδρότης. The 
position of λαμπρότης here seems to 
require this sense, for all the words 
in the parallel clauses ζωή, ἀλήθεια, 
πίστις, ἐγκράτεια, refer to the moral 
consciousness, not to any external 
advantages. 

I. πίστις ἐν πεποιθήσει] See the 
note above, § 26. 

2. καὶ ταῦτα x.t.A.] ‘These,’ Cle- 
ment argues, ‘are already within our 
cognisance. What then are the joys 
in store for those who remain sted- 
fast to the end?’ Comp. 1 Joh. iii. 2 
νῦν τέκνα Θεοῦ ἐσμὲν καὶ οὔπω ἐφανε- 
ρώθη τί ἐσόμεθα. 

5. πανάγιος) Apparently the first in- 
stance of the word, which afterwards 
takes a prominent place in the 
language of Greek Christendom ; un- 


ὑπέπιπτεν πάντα] A; ὑποπίπτει πάντα C; ὑπο- 


ἦ ἡ] ἤη A; ἡ (om. 7) C. 


would require αἱ διάνοιαι τῆς πίστεως. 



















Ψ > , ε The 
οὖν ἀγωνισώμεθα εὑρεθῆναι 


΄ XN. of κι 
πώς δὲ ἔσται TOU- - 


> ’ \ 
ἐπιτελέσωμεν TA ἀνήκοντα 


out, Ὑττοττιτττε[ ᾿ττὰ Ϊντὰ. 4 καὶ 


ἡ ὑπο- 


8 τῶν ἐπηγγελμένων δωρεῶν] 
τῶν ἐπηγγελμένων C, and so probably 8. 
διὰ πίστεως) Young; fer 

Io ἐκζητῶμεν] A; ἐκξζητήσωμεν C. 
τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ εὐάρεστα αὐτῷ καὶ εὐπρόσ- 


less indeed the occurrences in4 Macc. 
vii. 4, xiv. 7, are earlier. 

9. διὰ πίστεως] The reading of the 
Syriac version is unquestionably 
right ; see I. p. 143. The omission of 
διὰ in A may perhaps be explained by 
the neighbourhood of διάνοια. Hil- 
genfeld and Gebhardt read πιστῶς. 
Lipsius (p.15) defends πίστεως, trans- 
lating ‘cogitationes fidei’, but this 





11. εὐπρόσδεκτα] See the notes on 
ὃ 7; 40. 

13. πᾶσαν ἀδικίαν κιτ.λ.] The whole 
passage which follows is a reminis- 
cence of Rom. i. 29 sq ποιεῖν τὰ μὴ 
xaOnkovra...raon ἀδικίᾳ πονηρίᾳ πλεο- 
νεξίᾳ.. ἔριδος δόλου κακοηθείας, ψιθυρισ- 
τὰς καταλάλους θεοστυγεῖς.. ὑπερηφά- 
νους ἀλαζόνας... ἐπιγνόντες ὅτι οἱ τὰ 
τοιαῦτα πράσσοντες ἄξιοι θανάτου εἰσίν, 








15 


20 


XXXV] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 109 


΄σ > , , 3 ~ \ > / a ¢ “- 
TH ἀμώμῳ βουλήσει αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀκολουθήσωμεν TH ὁδῷ 
ῇ > / > / Cl ee 6 ~ ~ ? / 
τῆς ἀληθείας, ἀπορρίψαντες ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν πᾶσαν ἀδικίαν 
/ 7 / \ / 
καὶ ἀνομίαν, πλεονεξίαν, Epes, κακοηθείας τε καὶ δόλους, 
/ ΄ , 
ψιθυρισμούς τε καὶ KaTadaduas, θεοστυγίαν, ὑπερη- 
/ > ’ \ 
φανίαν τε καὶ ἀλαζονείαν, κενοδοξίαν τε Kai ἀφιλο- 
~ \ / \ A ΄σ 
ξενίαν. ταῦτα γὰρ οἱ πράσσοντες στυγητοὶ TH Θεῷ 
ε ¢ 3 / \ ε / > / > \ \ 
ὑπαρχουσιν" οὐ μόνον δὲ οἱ πράσσοντες αὐτά, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
΄ > ~ tA Ἁ ε / σι ᾿ 
οἱ συνευδοκοῦντες αὐτοῖς. Ἀέγει γὰρ ἡ γραφή" Τῷ δὲ 
AMAPTM@AG εἶπεν ὁ Θεόο: “Ina τί οὐ δλιηγη τὰ δικδιώματά 
MOY, KAl ANAAAMBANEIC THN διδθήκην MOY ἐπὶ CTOMATOC Coy; 


cy Δὲ EmMicHcac πδιδείδν, KAl ἐξέβαλλες TOYC λόγογς MOY eic 


dexra Ο. 14 ἀνομίαν] A; πονηρίαν CS (comp. Rom. i. 29). 
AS; om. C. 15 καταλαλιάς] καταλιλιασ A, 

ὑπερηφανίαν S. 16 ἀλαζονείαν] αλαζονιὰ A. 

A. 18 μόνον] μον A. 


v.l. in the Lxx also. 


πλεονεξίαν 
ὑπερηφανίαν τε] AC; καὶ 
ἀφιλοξενίαν] CS; φιλοξενίαν 


20 διηγῇ] A; ἐκδιηγῇ C; dub. S. This is a 
ar ἐπὶ] A (as the Hebr. 5Y); διὰ CS with the Lxx. 


gov] μου A. So the MS seems clearly to read (as even the photograph shows), 


though Tisch. gives it cov. 
1. 1) inclusive. 
παιδείαν] παιδιαν A, 


οὐ μόνον αὐτὰ ποιοῦσιν (Vv. 1. ποιοῦντες) 
ἀλλὰ καὶ συνευδοκοῦσιν (v. 1. συνευδο- 
κοῦντες) τοῖς πράσσουσι. On the 
reading ποιοῦντες, συνευδοκοῦντες, SUP- 
ported by Clement’s language here, 
see Tischendorf’s note. 

16. ἀφιλοξενίαν)] This was the sim- 
plest emendation of the reading of A 
(see the note on μὴ ἀτημελείτω ὃ 38), 
and it is now confirmed by our new 
authorities. The word occurs Orac. 
Sibyll. viii. 304 τῆς ἀφιλοξενίης ταύτην 
τίσουσι πράπεζαν. Other proposed 
readings were φιλοτιμίαν, φιλοδοξίαν, 
φιλονεικίαν. The suggestion of Lip- 
sius (p. 115), that the Corinthians 


had failed in the duty of providing 


for others, appears to be correct. 
But the word seems to point rather 
to their churlishness in not enter- 
taining foreign Christians at Corinth, 
than (as he maintains) to the niggard- 


22 σὺ δὲ x.7.d.] C omits all to ὁ ῥυόμενος (p. 111, 
After the omission comes καὶ ἐν τῷ τέλει θυσία αἰνέσεως x.7.d. 
ἐξέβαλλες] εξαβαλλεσ A; ἐξέβαλες S; def. C. 


liness of their contributions towards 
the needs of poor Christians abroad, 
though they may have failed in this 
respect also (see the note § 38). The 
duty of entertaining the brethren 
from foreign churches was a re- 
cognized obligation among the early 
Christians. In former times the 
Corinthians had obtained a good re- 
port for the practice of this virtue 
(δ I τὸ μεγαλοπρεπὲς τῆς φιλοξενίας 
ὑμῶν ἦθος), but now all was changed. 
Hence the stress laid on the hos- 
pitality of Abraham (§ 10), of Lot 
(§ 11), of Rahab (§ 12); for this 
virtue cannot have been singled out 
in all three cases without some special 
reference. 

19. Τῷ δὲ ἁμαρτωλῷ x.t.A.] From 
the Lxx Ps. 1. 16—23, with slight va- 
riations, of which the more important 
are noted below. 


IIo 


‘ > , 
τὰ OTTICW. 


MOIX@N THN μερίδὰ coy ἐτίθειο᾽ 
KAKIAN, KAl H FA@CCA COY TEPIETIAEKEN AOAIGTHTA’ KABHMENOC 
KATA TOY ἀδελφοῦ COY KATEAAAEIC, KAL KATA τοῦ γίοῦ τῆς 
μητρός COY ἐτίθεις CKANAAAON® TAYTA ἐποίησοδο Kal ἐοίγησδ'᾽ 5 


yméAaBec, ANOME, ὅτι 


TTAPACTHCW CE KATA πρόσωπόν Coy. 
ETIIAANOANOMENO! TOY Θεοῦ, μήποτε ἁρπάσῃ ὧς λέων, 


2 ἐπλεόνασεν] A; ἐπλεόναζεν 8. 


avoua A; ἀνομίαν S. See the lower note. 
κατὰ πρόσωπόν cov τὰς ἁμαρτίας σου ὃ. See the lower note. 
see below; ἣν ACS (with some mss of the Lxx). 


τοῦ Θεοῦ] AS; μου C. 


3. καθήμενος] Implying deliberate 
conspiracy ; see Perowne on Ps. i. 1. 

6. ἄνομε] LXX ἀνομίαν (B); but 5 
has avope, though it is afterwards cor- 
rected into avopevay (ἀνομίαν). ᾿᾽Ανο- 
μίαν is read by Justin Déa/. 22 (p. 
240), Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 14 (p. 
798); but ἄνομε Clem. Alex. Strom. 
iv. 24 (p. 634). The Syriac does not 
favour ἄνομε (as Wotton states), ex- 
cept that the existing pointing in- 
terprets it thus. The reading of 
our MS A here shows how easy was 
the transition from the one to the 
other, avopat (ἄνομε) and avoid (= ἀνο- 
μίαν). See the notes on ἀναστήσομαι 
ὃ 5, and ἡ δείξω just below. Though 


ἄνομε makes better sense, the original » 


reading of the LXx here must have 
been ἀνομίαν (not ἄνομε as Wotton 
thinks); for the translators must 
have misread MAN NYA ΠῚ ‘Thou 
thoughtest, I shall surely be’, as if 
max nin nn ‘Thou thoughtest 
destruction (or iniquity), I shall be’, 
since myn is elsewhere translated by 
ἀνομία, Ps. lvii. 2, xciv. 20; and Theo- 
dotion, whose version agreed with the 
Lxx (see Field’s Hexafi/. ad loc.), 
must have read it in the same way. 
7. παραστήσω oe Kt.) “17. will 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


> > , , , 3 φὸ \ ‘ 
Εἰ EBEWPEIC KAETITHN, CYNETPEYEC AYTW, KAI META 


ECOMAI 


13 ἀσθενείας] ασθενιασ A. 


[Χχχν 


τὸ CTOMA οου ἐπλεόνδοεν 






co! ὅμοιοο: ἐλέγζω ce Kal 


͵ \ Ὁ ε 
cynete δὴ Tafta, οἱ 
κἀὶ 


4 ἀδελφοῦ] adeAgove A. 6 dvope] 
ἡ σε κατὰ πρόσωπόν σου] A; 

10 ἡ] Lxx (BS) 
αὐτῷ] AC; αὐτοῖς 8. 
14 τούτου] C; TOYTOY 


bring thee face to face with thyself, 
show thee to thyself in thy true light.’ 
The σε is omitted in BS of the LXx 
and doubtless had no place in the © 
original text of this version which — 
agreed with the Hebrew, ‘I will lay — 
in order (the matter) before thee’. 
Justin Déa/. 22 (lc.) and other wri- 
ters supply an accusative ras ἁμαρτίας 
gov, which is found also in a large — 
number of MSS (see Holmes and — 
Parsons). 

8. ὡς λέων] 1.6. ‘lest he seize you 
as tt were a lion’. The words ὡς λέων 
are absent from the LXx (and Justin 
Dial. 22 p. 402), as also from the — 
Hebrew. They must have come © 
from Ps. vii. 3, either as a gloss in — 
Clement’s text of the LXxX or as — 
inadvertently inserted by him ina — 
quotation made from memory. ἃ 

10. 7 δείξω] As 7 is read in the LXX — 
(BS) and in Justin 1. c., and as the © 
parallelism in the opening of the © 
next chapter (ἡ ὁδὸς ἔν 7 εὕρομεν τὸ 
σωτήριον κ-τ.λ.) seems to require it, — 
I have restored it for ἥν. For similar — 
corruptions in the MS A see § 15 ava- — 
στησομεν (note), § 36 οσων, ὃ 41 outa a 
Snow, ii. ὃ 6 αιχμαλωσιαν. If ἣν be 


retained, σωτήριον must be taken as a 






























XXXVI] 


MH ἢ ὁ PydMeENOC. 


XXXVI. 


or p.112 1. 2. 


χθησαν] A; ἀνεώχθησαν C; 
τωμένη] AC; ἐσκοτισμένη Clem 613. 


nominative in apposition with ὁδός. 
XXXVI. ‘On this path let us tra- 
vel. This salvation is Jesus Christ 
our High-priest. Through Him our 
- darkness is made light, and we see 
the Father: for He is the reflexion of 
God’s person. He has a place far 
above all angels, being seated on 
God’s right hand and endowed with 
universal dominion and made tri- 
umphant over His enemies. These 
enemies are they that resist God’s will.’ 
12. τὸν ἀρχιερέα] This is founded 
on the teaching of the Epistle to the 
Hebrews (ii. 17, iii. 1, iv. 14, 15, etc.), 
of which Clement’s language through- 
out this section is an echo. See 
again §§ 61, 64. Photius (221. 126) 
alludes to these two passages in his 
criticism of Clement, ἀρχιερέα καὶ 
προστάτην τὸν Κύριον ἡμῶν᾽ Ἰησοῦν ἐξο- 
᾿ ᾿γομάζων οὐδὲ τὰς θεοπρεπεῖς καὶ ὑψηλο- 
᾿ τέρας ἀφῆκε περὶ αὐτοῦ φωνάς (δες the 
_ note, ὃ 2). The term ἀρχιερεὺς is 
very frequently applied to our Lord 
| by the earliest Christian writers of 
_ all schools; Ign. Philad. 9, Polyc. 
| Phil. 12, Test. xii Patr. Rub. 6, 
- Sym. 7, etc., Clem. Recogn. i. 48, Jus- 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


θγοίὰ ainécew@c Aozdcel 


II! 


ME, KAl ἐκεῖ 


το ὁλὸς H λείξω δὐτῷ τὸ cwTHPION τοῦ Θεοῦ. 

Αὕτη ἡ ὁδός, ἀγαπητοί, ἐν ἡ εὕρομεν τὸ 
σωτήριον ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν τὸν ἀρχιερέα τῶν προσ- 
φορῶν ἡμῶν, τὸν προστάτην καὶ βοηθὸν τῆς ἀσθενείας 
ἡμῶν. διὰ τούτου ἀτενίσωμεν εἰς τὰ ὕψη τῶν οὐρανῶν" 

5 διὰ τούτου ἐνοπτριζόμεθα τὴν ἄμωμον καὶ ὑπερτάτην 
ὄψιν αὐτοῦ: διὰ τούτου ἠνεώχθησαν ἡμῶν οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ 
τῆς καρδίας" διὰ τούτου ἡ ἀσύνετος καὶ ἐσκοτωμένη διά- 

(the superscribed y being 2γέηεα manu) A; τοῦτο S, and so Il. 15, 16, but not 1. 17, 

ἀτενίσωμεν) A; contemplemur (or contemplabimur) S; ἀτενίζομεν C. 


15 ἐνοπτριζόμεθα] AC; videamus (or videbimus) tanguam in speculo 8. 
et aperti sunt 8. 


16 ἠνεώ- 


ἡμῶν] AC; ὑμῶν 8. 17 ἐσκο- 


tin Dial. 116 (p. 344). 

13. προστάτην] ‘guardian, patron, 
who protects our interests and pleads 
our cause’. To a Roman it would 
convey all the ideas of the Latin ‘ pa- 
tronus,’ of which it was the recognized 
rendering, Plut. Vit. Rom. 13, Vit. Ma- 
vii 5. Comp. προστάτις Rom. xvi. 2. 

τῆς ἀσθενείας] In connexion with 
the work of the great High-priest, as 
in Heb. iv. 15. 

15. ἐνοπτριζόμεθα] Christ is the mir- 
ror in whom is reflected the faultless 
countenance of God the Father (av- 
τοῦ) ; comp. 2 Cor. iii. 18 τὴν δόξαν 
Κυρίου κατοπτριζόμενοι, Philo Leg. AZ/. 
iil. 33 (I. p. 107) μηδὲ κατοπτρισαίμην 
ἐν ἄλλῳ τινὶ τὴν σὴν ἰδέαν ἢ ἐν σοὶ τῷ 
Θεῷ ; comp. John i. 14. 

ἄμωμον] ‘faultless’, ‘feckless’, be- 
cause the mirror is perfect. For the 
meaning of ἄμωμος, see the note on 
μωμοσκοπηθέν, § 41. 

17. διὰ τούτου κιτ.λ.] Quotedin Clem. 
Alex. Strom. iv. 16 (p. 613) ὃ ἐν τῇ 
πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπιστολῇ γέγραπται, 
Διὰ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ ἡ ἀσύνετος... ἡμᾶς 
γεύσασθαι. 


ἡ ἀσύνετος κιτ.λ.] Rom. i. 21 καὶ 





4 


[12 THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT [xxxvi 


νοια ἡμῶν ἀναθάλλει εἰς TO [θαυμαστὸν αὐτοῦ] φώς" διὰ 


« 


, 532! / “~ > / 4 

τούτου ἠθέλησεν ὁ δεσπότης τῆς ἀθανάτου γνώσεως 
coe 4 a Ἂ > ’ A ! ΕἸ 
ἡμάς γεύσασθαι: OC WN ἀπδλυγδομὰ THC MEPAAWCYNHC AY- 
τοῦ TOCOYT® μείζων ECTIN ἀγγέλων, ὅοῳ διὰφορώτερον 

ΕἾ , / ες ε a 
ὄνομὰ KEKAHPONOMHKEN. γέγραπται yap οὕτως" Ὁ ποιῶν 
τοὺς ἀγγέλογο aYTOY MNEYMATA κἀὶ TOYC λειτουργοὺς αὐτοῦ 

\ ' \ \ ΄σ cn a A > 

mypdc φλόγα. Ἐπὶ δὲ τῴ υἱῷ αὐτοῦ οὕτως εἶπεν ὁ 
/ cr , > ‘ ’ : , bs 
δεσπότης" Yidc MOY εἶ ΟΥ, ΕγΓγῶ CHMEPON ΓΕΓΕΝΝΗΚὰ (δ΄ Al- 
THCAI πὰρ᾽ ἐμοῦ, KAI δώσω COI ἔθνη τὴν κληρονομίδν COY, 
1 τὸ θαυμαστὸν αὐτοῦ φῶς] A (with 1 Pet. ii. 9); τὸ φῶς 5 with Clem; τὸ 
θαυμαστὸν φῶς C. 2 τῆς ἀθανάτου γνώσεως] AC ; mortis scientiae S (θανάτου 
γνώσεως), where τῆς has been absorbed in the preceding syllable of δεσπότης and 
θανάτου is written for ἀθανάτου. For an instance of θάνατος for ἀθάνατος see ii. 
§ 19, and conversely of ἀθάνατος for θάνατος Ign. Zphes. 7. 5 ὄνομα κεκλη- 
ρονόμηκεν] A; κεκληρονόμηκεν ὄνομα C (with Heb. i. 4). ἡ πυρὸς φλόγα] 
A (with Heb. i. 7); φλόγα πυρὸς C (as Rev. ii. 18). 13 τῷ θελήματι αὐτοῦ] 
CS; τωθεληματιτωθελημα....... A, as correctly read by Tisch. The lacuna has space 
for seven letters and should probably be filled up (with Tisch.) rcavrov, the words 


τῷ θελήματι being written twice over. 


ἐσκοτίσθη ἡ ἀσύνετος αὐτῶν καρδία, 
Ephes. iv. 18 ἐσκοτωμένοι [v. 2. ἐσκο- 
τισμένοι] τῇ διανοίᾳ. These passages 
are sufficient to explain how Clem. 
Alex. in quoting our Clement writes 
ἐσκοτισμένη, but not sufficient to justify 
the substitution of this form for ἐσκο- 
τωμένη in our text. See A. Jahn’s 
Methodius 11. p. 77, note 453. 

I. ἀναθάλλει κ-τ.λ.7 1.6. ‘Our mind, 
like a plant shut up in a dark closet, 
had withered in its growth. Removed 
thence by His loving care, it revives 
and shoots up towards the light of 
heaven.’ Comp. 1 Pet. ii. 9 τοῦ ἐκ 
σκότους ὑμᾶς καλέσαντος εἰς τὸ Oav- 
μαστὸν αὐτοῦ φῶς. See also Clem. 
Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 117) πρὸς τὸ ἀΐδιον 
ἀνατρεχόμενον φῶς and the note on 
§ 59 below ἐκάλεσεν ἡμᾶς κιτιλ. It is 
strange that editors should have 
wished to alter ἀναθάλλει, which con- 
tains so striking an image. 

3. ὃς ὧν κιτιλ.] The whole passage 
is borrowed from the opening of the 


18 εἰκτικῶς] ἑκτικῶς C; leniter 


Epistle to the Hebrews, from which 
expressions, arguments, and quota- 
tions alike are taken: see esp. i. 3, 4, 
5, 7, 13. For the meaning see the 
commentators on that epistle. On 
ὄνομα, ‘title, dignity’, see Philippians 
ii. 9. 

5. Ὁ ποιῶν x.t.A.] From LxXx Ps. 
civ. 4. It is quoted exactly as in Heb, 
i. 7, πυρὸς φλόγα being substituted 
for πῦρ φλέγον of the LXx (BS, but A 
has πυροσ φλεγὰ which shows the 
reading in a transition state). 

8. Υἱός μου x.7.A.] From LXxX Ps, ii.7 
word for word, after Heb. i. 5: comp. 
Acts xiii. 33 (in S. Paul’s speech at 
the Pisidian Antioch), where it is 
again quoted. In both these passages 
the 7th verse only is given; Clement 
adds the 8th, αἴτησαι x.r.d. 

11. Κάθου κ.τ.λ.}] From LXX Ps. cx. I 
word for word, after Heb. i. 13. 

XXXVII. ‘We are fighting as 
soldiers under our heavenly captain. 
Subordination of rank and obedience 

















oKAl τῆν. KATACYECIN Coy τὰ πέρὰτὰ TAC LAC. 


5 


ΧΧΧΥΠ] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 113 


\ / 
καὶ παλιν 


7 \ / ’ > ΄ o ΕῚ a 
λέγει προς avTov: Κἄάθογ ἐκ δεξιῶν MOY, EWC ἂν θῶ 


TOYC ἐχθροήο οου ὑποπόλιον τῶν ποδῶν coy. 


/ Φ 
Τίνες οὖν 


/ “ / ΄' 
οἱ ἐχθροί; οἱ φαῦλοι καὶ ἀντιτασσόμενοι τῷ θελήματι 


αὐτοῦ. 


ΧΧΧΥΙΠ. 


Οτρατευσώμεθα οὖν, ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί, 


\ , 3 / ΄- / / 
μετὰ πάσης ἐκτενείας EV τοῖς ἀμωμοις προσταγμασιν 


- / \ / ΄ 
αὐτοῦ" κατανοήσωμεν τοὺς στρατευομένους τοῖς ἡγου- 


’ cr ~~ ’ ΄ ΄ al 
μένοις ἡμῶν, πῶς εὐτάκτως, πῶς ELKTIKWS, πῶς ὑποτε- 


(placide) TYR 5; εγέκτιι... A, as I read it. The first part has originally 
been written e1€KT, but the 1 is prolonged and altered into an y, and an ! is 
superscribed between € and k, so that it becomes evexr-. So far I agree with 
Tischendorf prol. p. xix. After this he reads w (‘non integra’); it seems to me 
more like an 1 with a stroke of another letter which might be k, so that I read the 
part before the lacuna evecxrix. But the Ms is so worn, that it is impossible to 
speak confidently. The lacuna seems too great for a single letter, and this again 
is an objection to ευεικτω[σ], the reading of Tisch. But the uneven length of the 


lines diminishes the force of this objection. See the lower note. 


to orders are necessary conditions in 
an army. There must be harmonious 
working of high and low. So it is 
with the human body. The head 
must work with the feet and the feet 
with the head, for the health and 
safety of the whole.’ 

15. Srparevowpeba]2 Cor. x. 3, 1 Tim. 
i. 18, 2 Tim. ii. 3, 4, Ign. Polyc. 6. 

17. κατανοήσωμεν κιτ.λ.] So Seneca 
de Trang. An. 4 ‘Quid si militare 
nolis nisi imperator aut tribunus? 
etiamsi alii primam frontem tene- 
bunt, te sors inter triarios posuerit, 
inde voce, adhortatione, exemplo, 
animo, milita’. 

τοῖς ἡγουμένοις ἡμῶν] ‘under our 
temporal γη1ε7γ5.. For this sense of 
of ἡγούμενοι see the note ὃ 5. On the 
other hand οἱ ἡγούμενοι is used else- 
where of the officers of the Church: 


see §1 (note). For the dative after 


᾿ στρατεύεσθαι see Ign. Polyc. 6 ἀρέσ- 


_ kere ᾧ στρατεύεσθε, Appian Bell. Civ. 


CLEM. II. 


i. 42 τοῖς ἐν αὐτῇ Ῥωμαίοις... ἐκήρυξεν... 
στρατεύσειν ἑαυτῷ (where στρατεύσειν 
is transitive). 

18, εἰκτικῶς] ‘ concesstvely’. In 
my former edition I had proposed, 
with the evidence then before me, to 
read εὐεικτικῶς. The adverb εὐείκ- 
τως is recognized in the Etym. Magn., 
and of the adjective εὔεικτος the Lexi- 
cons give several instances, e.g. Dion 
Cass. lxix. 20. On the other hand 
of εὐεικτικός, -κῶς, though legitimate 
forms, no examples are given in the 
lexicons. But in the light of the 
recently discovered authorities, εἰκ- 
τικῶς seems to me more probable. 

The alternative would be to read 
ἑκτικῶς with C. The word ἑκτικῶς 
means ‘habitually’, and so ‘fami- 
liarly’, ‘easily’, ‘readily’ (1.6. as a 
matter of habit’); comp. Epict. Déss. 
iii. 24. 78 συλλογισμοὺς ἵν᾿ ἀναλύσῃς 
ἑκτικώτερον, Plut. Mor. 802 F ἑκτικῶς 
ἢ τεχνικῶς ἢ διαιρετικῶς, Porph. de 


8 


OT δον οι νοι σοι 


114 


3 ~ \ 
ταγμένως ἐπιτελοῦσιν τὰ 


Ae, | ot ΦΧ 7 2Q\ ε ΄ Ν᾿ 
εἰσὶν ἔπαρχοι οὐδὲ χιλίαρχοι οὐδὲ ἑκατόνταρχοι οὐδὲ 
, 29\ \ A > ἘΝ ἐσ, 3 ~ 
πεντηκόνταρχοι οὐδὲ TO καθεξῆς" ἀλλ᾽ ἕκαστος ἐν TH 
A U a , \ 

ἰδίῳ τάγματι Ta ἐπιτασσόμενα ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως Kal 


΄σ / > ΄ 
τῶν ἡγουμένων ἐπιτελεῖ. 


, Ὁ »" ε \ ’ a ’ ͵ 
οὐ δύνανται εἶναι, οὔτε οἱ μικροὶ δίχὰ τῶν μεγάλων. οὐγ- 

' , > > a“ \ / - "§ 
Kpacic Tic ἐοτιν ἐν πᾶσιν, καὶ ἐν τούτοις χρῆσις. AaBw- 


1 ἐπιτελοῦσιν] A; τελοῦσι C; dub. 85. 
2 ἔπαρχοι] AC; S adopts the Greek word ὕπαρχοι, but it 
does not necessarily imply any variation in the Greek text. 


διατασσόμενα 8. 


Abst. iv. 20 τὸ αἴτιον τοῦ συμμένειν 
εἴποις ἂν καὶ τοῦ ἑκτικῶς διαμένειν, Diod. 
Sic. ili. 4 μελέτῃ πολυχρονίῳ καὶ μνήμῃ 
γυμνάζοντες τὰς ψυχὰς ἑκτικῶς ἕκαστα 
τῶν γεγραμμένων ἀναγινώσκουσι, ἷ.6. 
‘fluently’ (where he is speaking of 
reading the hieroglyphics). So here, 
if the reading be correct, it will mean 
‘as a matter of course’, ‘promptly’, 
‘readily’. The adjective is used in 
the same sense, e.g. Epict. D7ss. ii. 
18. 4 εἴ τι ποιεῖν ἐθέλεις ἑκτικόν. The 
reading of C confirms my account of 
A as against Tischendorf’s, though 
he still adhered to his first opinion 
after my remarks. There can be little 
doubt now, I think, that the account 
in my upper note is correct; for the 
reading of Tischendorf has no re- 
lation to the ἑκτικῶς of Ὁ. The ey 
(altered from εἰ, as it was first written) 
must be explained by the preceding 
ey of εὐτάκτως catching the scribe’s 
eye as he was forming the initial 
letters of either exTiKwc Or EIKTIKWC. 
He had written as far as εἰ, and at 
this point he was misled by the same 
conjunction of letters mwcey just 
before. Whether this εἰ was the be- 
ginning of e1KkTiKwc, or an incom- 
plete ex as the beginning of extikwe, 
may be doubtful. In the latter case 
we must suppose that the second 1, 
written above the line, was a de- 
liberate (and perhaps later) emenda- 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 





[XXXVII 


, 
διατασσόμενα. οὐ πάντες 


4 



































οἱ μεγᾶλοι AlyA τῶν μικρῶν 5 


τὰ διατασσόμενα] AC; πάντα τὰ 


4 ἐπιτασσόμενα] 


tion to get a word with an adequate 
sense; but on the whole it seems 
more probable that he had eixtikwe 
in his copy, and not extikwe as read 
inC. If so, εἰκτικῶς has the higher 
claim to be regarded as the word 
used by Clement. It is difficult to — 
say whether the rendering in S repre- 
sents εἰκτικῶς or ἑκτικῶς. In the Pe- 
shito Luke vii. 25 ἐς) stands for — 
μαλακός, and in the Harclean Mark — 
ΧΙ, 28 for ἁπαλός. Thus it seems 
nearer to εἰκτικῶς than to ἐκτικῶς. 
The word εἰκτικός occurs Orig. dé 
Prine. iii. 15 (1. p. 124), and occa- 
sionally elsewhere. On these ad- 
jectives in -ἰκός see Lobeck Phryn. 
p. 228. 

I. ov πάντες x.r.d.] Comp. 1 Cor. 
xii. 29, 30. 

2. ἔπαρχοι κιτ.λ.] See Exod. xviii. 
21 καταστήσεις [αὐτοὺς] ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν χιλι- 
άρχους καὶ ἑκατοντάρχους καὶ πεντηκον- 
τάρχους καὶ δεκαδάρχους (comp. ver. 25). 
The reference here however is to — 
Roman military organization as the 
context shows; comp. Clém. Hom. x. 
14 ὅνπερ γὰρ τρόπον εἷς ἐστὶν 6 Kaioap, — 
ἔχει δὲ ὑπ᾽ αὐτὸν τοὺς διοικήτας (ύπατι- 
κούς, ἐπάρχους, χιλιάρχους, ἑκατοντάρ- 
χους, δεκαδάρχους), τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον 
καὶ. The ἔπαρχοι therefore are 
‘prefects’, ἔπαρχος being used especi- — 
ally of the ‘praefectus praetorio’, e.g. — 
Plut. Galb. 13, Otho 7; comp. Dion 





XXXVIII| TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


[15 
' ΄- ΩΣ \ ΄ ΄σ / 
μεν TO σῶμα ἡμῶν' ἡ κεφαλὴ δίχα τῶν ποδῶν οὐδέν 
> « 279i ε / , ΄σ lon \ \ 
ἐστιν, οὕτως οὐδὲ οἱ πόδες δίχα THs κεφαλῆς" Ta δὲ 
7 , ~ 7 ΄ ΄. \ yA 
ἐλάχιστα μέλη TOU σώματος ἡμῶν ἀναγκαῖα Kal εὔ- 
7 ε “~ 7 \ 7 ΄- 
χρηστά εἰσιν ὅλῳ τῷ σώματι: ἀλλὰ πάντα συνπνεῖ 
~ an ~ 7 « 
καὶ ὑποταγῇ μιᾷ χρῆται εἰς τὸ σώζεσθαι ὅλον τὸ 


σώμα. 


ΧΧΧΥΠΙ. 


/ + ς “ «.« \ ~ > 
(ωζέσθω οὖν ἡμῶν ὅλον TO σῶμα ἐν 


A; ὑποτασσόμενα C. The converse error appears in the Ms of Ign. Zphes. 2 ἐπι- 


τασσόμενοι for ὑποτασσόμενοι. 
11 συνπνεῖ] As συμπνει C. 


Cass. Fragm. (v. p. 203 ed. L. Dind.) 
αἰσχρόν ἐστι, Καῖσαρ, ἑκατοντάρχῳ σε 
διαλέγεσθαι τῶν ἐπάρχων ἔξω ἑστώτων. 
The χιλίαρχοι, ἑκατόνταρχοι, again are 
the common equivalents for ‘tribu- 
ni’, ‘centuriones’, respectively. But 
for πεντηκόνταρχος I do not know any 
corresponding term in the Roman 
army. If it represents the ‘optio’ the 
ieutenant or the signifer ‘the ensign’ 
‘see Lohr Zakith u. Kriegswesen p. 
41), the numerical relation of 50 to 
100 has become meaningless. 

3. ἕκαστος κιτιλ.} 1 Cor. xv. 23 
ἕκαστος δὲ ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ τάγματι ; Comp. 
below ὃ 41. 

4. βασιλέως] Comp. 1 Pet. ii. 13 sq 
εἴτε βασιλεῖ... εἴτε ἡγεμόσιν ; Comp. 
Joh. xix. 15, Acts xvii. 7. The offi- 
cial title of the emperor in Greek 
was αὐτοκράτωρ, but βασιλεὺς is found 
in common parlance, though the cor- 
responding ‘rex’ would not be used 
except in gross flattery. 

5. of μεγάλοι κ-τ.λ.] See Soph. “47. 
158 (quoted by Jacobson) καίτοι σμι- 
Kpol μεγάλων χωρὶς σφαλερὸν πύργου 
ὁῦμα πέλονται κιτιλ. (with Lobeck’s 
note), Plato Leg. x. p. 902 Ε οὐδὲ γὰρ 
ἄνευ σμικρῶν τοὺς μεγάλους φασὶν οἱ 
λιθολόγοι λίθους εὖ κεῖσθαι, with the 
remarks of Donaldson, New Crat. 
ὃ 455, on this proverb. I have there- 

ventured to print the words as a 





8 οὐδέν ἐστιν] A and so prob. S; ἐστιν οὐδέν C, 
12 χρῆται] A; χρᾶται C: see the note on ii. § 6. 


quotation, and indeed Clement’s text 
seems to embody some anapeestic 
fragments. 

6. σύγκρασις x.t.A.] This seems to 
be a reference to Eurip. Fragm. Aol. 
2 ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι τις σύγκρασις dor ἔχειν 
καλῶς, for Euripides is there speaking 
of the mutual cooperation of rich and 
poor: see the passage quoted from 
the context of Euripides on ὁ πλού- 
ows κιτιλ. just below ὃ 38. Cotterill 
(Peregrinus Proteus p. 25) points out 
that this extract appears in close 
proximity to the passage from So- 
phocles quoted in the last note in 
Stobzeus FVorii, xliii. 18, 20 (p. 82 sq, 
Meineke). Comp. 1 Cor. xii. 24 ἀλλὰ 
ὁ Θεὸς συνεκέρασεν τὸ σῶμα. 

7. Λάβωμεν τὸ σῶμα κ.τιλ.] Sug- 
gested by 1 Cor. xii. 12 sq (comp. 
Rom. xii. 4); see esp. ver. 22 ra do- 
κοῦντα μέλη τοῦ σώματος ἀσθενέστερα 
ὑπάρχειν ἀναγκαῖά ἐστιν. For λάβωμεν 
see above, ὃ 5. 

XXXVIII. ‘So therefore let the 
health of the whole body be our aim. 
Let weak and strong, rich and poor, 
work together in harmony. Let each 
man exercise his special gift in humi- 
lity of heart and without vainglory, 
remembering that he owes everything 
to God and giving thanks to Him 
for His goodness.’ 


$——2 





116 


“~? - \ ε ~ 
Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ, καὶ ὑποτασσέσθω ἕκαστος τῷ πλησίον 
΄“΄ \ , > ΄σ ΄- 
αὐτοῦ, καθὼς καὶ ἐτέθη ἐν τῷ χαρίσματι αὐτοῦ. ὁ 
> \ \ > ’ \ > “~ ς ‘ > ‘ > 
ἰσχυρὸς μὴ ἀτημελείτω τὸν ἀσθενῆ, ὁ δὲ ἀσθενὴς ἐν- 
ld A > ’ e / > 7 ~ 
τρεπέσθω Tov ἰσχυρόν: ὁ πλούσιος ἐπιχορηγείτω τῷ 
΄ | \ ~ ΄ / 
πτωχῷ, ὁ δὲ πτωχὸς εὐχαριστείτω TH Θεῷ, ὅτι ἔδωκεν 5 
aS - ΄- ΄ \ 
αὐτῷ δι᾽ ov ἀναπληρωθῇ αὐτοῦ τὸ ὑστέρημα. 
, ~ \ » ’ 
ἐνδεικνύσθω τὴν σοφίαν αὐτοῦ μὴ ἐν λόγοις ἀλλ᾽ ἐν 
af > ~ ΄ A ΄-“ 
ἔργοις ἀγαθοῖς: ὁ ταπεινοφρονών μὴ ἑαυτῷ μαρτυρείτω, 
> > δ᾽ eyo “ὦ / c \ ΄':- 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐάτω ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου ἑαντὸν μαρτυρεῖσθαι. 
cd \ 4 
ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ ἤτω καὶ μὴ ἀλαζονευέσθω, γινώσκων ὅτιτ 


1 Ἰησοῦ] A; om. CS. 


see above, I. p. 143. 
but it is a soloecism. 
μόνον Clem 613, 

Clem has omitted it in ἐν λόγοις. 


see I. p. 137. 
see above, § 19. 


I. ὑποτασσέσθω ἕκαστος «.T-d.] 
Ephes. v. 21 ; comp. 1 Pet. v. 5. 

2. καθὼς καὶ ἐτέθη] Sc. ὁ πλησίον, 
‘according as he was appointed with 
his special gift’; comp. 1 Pet. iv. 10 
ἕκαστος καθὼς ἔλαβεν χάρισμα, τ Cor.vii. 
7 ἕκαστος ἴδιον ἔχει χάρισμα ἐκ Θεοῦ, 
Rom. xii. 6 ἔχοντες χαρίσματα κατὰ 
τὴν χάριν τὴν δοθεῖσαν ἡμῖν διάφορα. 

3. μὴ ἀτημελείτω] This reading 
makes better sense than πλημμελείτω 
(for Clement is condemning the depre- 
ciation of others) and accounts more 
easily for the corruption; see the 
omission of a in ἀφιλοξενίαν ὃ 35. 

4. 6 πλούσιος κιτ.λ.] See Eurip. 
Fragm. A‘ol. 2 (of which the context 
is cited above, ὃ 37) ἃ μὴ γάρ ἐστι τῷ 
πένητι, πλούσιος δίδωσ᾽" ἃ δ᾽ οἱ πλου- 
τοῦντες οὐ κεκτήμεθα, τοῖσιν πένησι 
χρώμενοι θηρώμεθα. The resemblance 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


2 καὶ A; om. CS. 
μητμμελειτω A; τημελειτω (omitting μὴ) CS. Obviously the a of drnuedelrw had — 
already disappeared from their prototype as it has from A, and the transcribers are — 
obliged to erase the counterbalancing negative μὴ in order to restore the sense; — 
ἐντρεπέσθω] C; évrperérw A, retained by Gebhardt; 

ἡ ἐνδεικνύσθω] ενδικνυσθω A. 

ἐν pyos] A; ἔργοις C, thus omitting ἐν here, while conversely — 
S has it in both, but no stress can be laid on the 
fact, as the translator repeats the preposition where it does not occur in the Greek; 
8 ταπεινοφρονῶν] A, and so prob. S; ταπεινόφρων C Clem; 
μὴ ἑαυτῷ μαρτυρείτω] AC; paprupelrw μὴ ἑαυτῷ Clem. 
























[XXXVIII 


ὁ σοφὸς 


ε ε \ 
ὁ aryvos 


3 μὴ ἀτημελείτω] i 


ἐν λόγοι5] AC; λόγοις 


here confirms the conjecture that ἴπ΄ 
the earlier passage Clement has the 
words of Euripides in his mind. 
6. ἀναπληρωθῇ κ-.τ.λ.] For the ex-— 
pression see 1 Cor. xvi. 17, Phil. ii. 
30: comp. Col. i. 24. 
ὁ σοφὸς κιτ.λ.] This passage down 
to τὴν ἐγκράτειαν is quoted in Clem, 
Alex. Strom. iv. 16 (p. 613) between 
extracts from §§ 40, 41 (see the notes 
there). ἣν 
10. ἤτω] ‘let him be it’. For this 
emphatic use compare Ign. Ephes, 
15 ἄμεινόν ἐστιν σιωπᾶν καὶ εἶναι ἢ Ae 
λοῦντα μὴ εἶναι, Iren. ii. 30. 2 


δείκνυσθαι ὀφείλει. 1 
Laurent’s happy emendation ἤτω to 
ovyarw which has also been suggested 
both because it better suits the vacar 
space in A, and because it is the 





































XXXVIII] 


= 


ἀμήν. 
9 ἐάτω] ACS; ἐν τῷ Clem. 


τυρείσθω) super ipso. 
Clem; dub S. 

J. Luther. Theol. Xx1v. p. 423). 
Ρ. 142. 


13 καὶ τίνες] C; καιτι... A; om. 8. 


κατὰ πάντα] AC; om. 8. 


form found elsewhere in Clement, 
§ 48. Hort suggests στήτω, com- 
paring 1 Cor. vii. 37. At the end of 
a line it is not safe to speak positively 
about the number of letters to be sup- 
plied, as there the letters are some- 
times much smaller and extend be- 
yond the line; but ovydrw seems 
under any circumstances too long 
to be at all probable. Hilgenfeld’s 
reading, ὁ ἁγνὸς ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ καὶ [αὐτὸς 
μὴ ἀλαζονευέσθω, supplies the lacuna 
in the wrong place. For the senti- 
ment see Ign. Polye. 5 εἴ τις δύναται 
ἐν ἁγνείᾳ μένειν εἰς τιμὴν τῆς σαρκὸς 
τοῦ Κυρίου, ἐν ἀκαυχησίᾳ μενέτω" ἐὰν καυ- 
᾿χήσηται, ἀπώλετο (see above, I. Ῥ. 149), 
Tertull. de Virg. Vel. 13 ‘Et sia Deo 
mfertur continentiae virtus, quid 
gloriaris, quasi non acceperis’, pas- 
Sages quoted by Wotton. Clement’s 
language is not sufficient to explain 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


ef / a ἥν τ Ὡς ΄ 
ἕτερος ἐστιν ὁ ἐπιχορηγῶν αὐτῷ τὴν ἐγκράτειαν. 


εὐεργεσίας αὐτοῦ πρὶν ἡμᾶς γεννηθῆναι. 


117 
᾽λνα- 


λογισώμεθα οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ἐκ ποίας ὕλης ἐγενήθημεν" 
ποῖοι καὶ τίνες εἰσήλθαμεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον: ἐκ ποίου 
τάφου καὶ σκότους ὁ πλάσας ἡμᾶς καὶ δημιουργήσας 
εἰσήγαγεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον αὐτοῦ, προετοιμάσας τὰς 


- κυ 
TAVTA ουν 


/ > > -~ +f > / \ / > 
πάντα ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἔχοντες ὀφείλομεν κατὰ πάντα εὐχα- 

~ , ΄σ τ / \ IF ΄σ δὲ 
ριστεῖν αὐτῷ" ᾧ ἢ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 


ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου ἑαυτὸν] A; αὐτὸν ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου Clem; 
ἑαυτὸν ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου C; S translates the sentence sed αὖ aliis testimonium detur (μαρ- 

ἑαυτὸν] AC; αὐτὸν Clem. 
ἤτω] Laurent (his earlier suggestion had been ἔστω, Zeitschr. 
CS Clem omit the words ἤτω καὶ: see above, I 
In A the margin of the parchment is cut off, so that nothing is visible. 
There seems however to haye been room for yrw, as the size of the letters is often 
diminished at the end of the lines ; see below. 


1o ἐν] AC; om. 


11 ἐγκράτειαν] εγκρατιαν A. 
εἰσήλθαμεν ...σηλθαμεν A; εἰσήλθομεν C. 


15 τὸν κόσμον] AC; 5. has hunc mundum, but it probably does not represent a 
various reading ; see the critical note on ii. § 19. 


17 ὀφείλομεν] οφιλομεν A. 


εὐχαριστεῖν] ευχαριστὶ A. 


the allusions of Epiphanius and Je- 
rome (quoted above, I. pp. 170, 173), 
which doubtless refer to the spurious 
Epistles on Virginity; see above, I. 
p- 408 sq. 

13. ποῖοι καὶ τίνες] 1 Pet. i. 11 εἰς 
τίνα ἢ ποῖον καιρόν. 

εἰσήλθαμεν] For the form see Winer 
§ xiii. p. 86. 

ἐκ ποίου τάφου x«.t.A.] Harnack re- 
fers to Ps. cxxxix (cxl). 15 τὸ ὀστοῦν 
pov...emoinaas ἐν κρυφῇ καὶ ἡ ὑπόστασίς 
μου ἐν τοῖς κατωτάτοις τῆς γῆς. 

15. προετοιμάσας κιτ.λ.} See the 
fragment from ‘the 9th Epistle’ of 
Clement of Rome in Leontius and 
John Sacr. Rer. ii (Mai Script. Vet. 
Nov. Coll. Vil. p. 84) given above, I. 
p. 189. Though it has some points 
of resemblance with this passage in 
our epistle, it cannot have been taken 
from it. 








118 THE EPISTLE OF 5: CLEMENT [XXXIX 


of / 

XXXIX. “Adpoves καὶ ἀσύνετοι καὶ μωροὶ καὶ 
᾽ / / 4 τος ᾿ , ε \ 
ἀπαίδευτοι χλευάζουσιν ἡμᾶς Kal μυκτηρίζουσιν, ἑαυτοὺς 

/ / ~ ΄ 
βουλόμενοι ἐπαίρεσθαι ταῖς διανοίαις αὐτῶν. τί γὰρ 
\ / > \ ~ , , 
δύναται θνητός ; ἢ Tis ἰσχὺς γηγενοῦς ; γέγραπται yap" 
Οὐκ HN μορφὴ πρὸ ὀφθδλμῶν MOY’ ἀλλ᾽ ἢ δύρὰν καὶ 
φωνὴν HKOYON. τί fap; MH KA@apdc ἔοτδι Bpotdc ἔνδντι 
Kypioy; ἢ ἀπὸ TON ἔργων δύτοῦ AmemTTOC ἀνήρ; εἰ KATA 


’ > a > , ‘ ‘ > , > “Ὁ Ul 
TTAIAWN AYTOY OY TIICTEYE!l, KATA AE ἄγγελων AYTOY CKOAION 


1” Adpoves...amaldevra] AS; ἄφρονες καὶ ἀπαίδευτοι καὶ μωροὶ C. 2 μυκτηρί- 
fovew] μυκτιρηζουσιν A. 6 καθαρὸ] AC; xban corruptor S, perhaps connecting 
it with καθαίρειν, as if καθαιρέτης: see above, I. p.140. The translator however may 
have had φθόρος in his text. ἔσται] AC; ἐστιν 8. ἔναντι] A (with Lxx SA); 
ἐναντίον C (with Lxx B). 7 el] AC; καὶ δ. 8 παίδων] AC; operum S, but 
this is due to the false pointing; see above, I. p. 138. αὐτοῦ] A; ἑαυτοῦ C. 


XXXIX. ‘What folly is the arro- 
gance and self-assumption of those 
who would make a mockery of us! 
Have we not been taught in the 
Scriptures the nothingness of man ἢ 
In God’s sight not even the angels 
are pure: how much less we frail 
creatures of earth! A lump of clay, 
a breath of air, the sinner is consumed 
in a moment by God’s wrath: and 
the righteous shall inherit his for- 
feited blessings.’ 

I. “Adpoves x.r.A.] Comp. Hermas 
Sim. ix. 14 ἄφρων εἶ καὶ ἀσύνετος. 

2. χλευάζουσιν κ-τ.λ.1 Ps. xliv. 14 
(v. 1.), Lxxix. 4, μυκτηρισμὸς καὶ χλευ- 
ασμός; comp. Afost. Const. ili. 5 μυκ- 
τηρίσαντες χλευάσουσι. In C ἑαυτοὺς 
is connected with the preceding words 
by punctuation. 

4. γηγενοῦς] As a LXX word, γηγενής 
is a translation of D4N in Jer. xxxii. 
20. In Ps, xlix (xlviii). 2 of τε γηγενεῖς 
καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων is a rendering 
of WN 22 DI DIN 2 Ὧλ where the 
next clause of the verse has πλούσιος 
καὶ πένης. In Wisd. vii. 1 Adam is 
called γηγενὴς mpwromdaoros. The 
word occurs Zest. xii Patr. Jos. 2, 


Clem. Alex. Paed.i. 12 (p. 156), Strom. 
iv. 6 (p. 577). In classical writers 
the ynyeveis are the fabled giants, the 
sons of Uranus and Gza, and rebels 
against the Olympians (e.g. Soph. 
Trach. 1058 ὁ γηγενὴς στρατὸς γι- 
γάντων, Aristoph. Av. 824 οἱ θεοὶ 
τοὺς γηγενεῖς ... καθυπερηκόντισαν, See 
Pape Worterd. d. Griech, Eigennam., 
5. v.). Connected with this idea is 
the translation of Ὡ 5, where it 
means ‘the shades of the dead’, by 
γηγενεῖς in the LXX of Prov. ii, 18, 
ix. 18; while in these and other pas- 
sages the other Greek translators 
(Theodotion, Symmachus) render the 
same word by γίγαντες or θεομάχοι: 
see Gesenius 7hesaur. 5. Vv. D1 on 
the connexion of ‘ Rephaim’ and the 
giants. Altogether we may say that 
the word (1) signifies originally ‘hu- 
mility and meanness of origin’, and 
(2) connotes ‘separation from and 
hostility to God’. 

γέγραπται γάρ] A long passage 
from the Lxx Job iv. 16—v. 5, the — 
words οὐρανὸς δὲ.. «αὐτοῦ being inserted 
from Job xv. 15 (see below). The 
variations from the LXxX are for the 





































XXXIX] 


ov] AC; om. 8. 


τροποσ A; see the last note. 


most part slight. 

5. Οὐκ ἦν μορφὴ x.7.A.] The words 
of Eliphaz reproving Job. He relates 
how a voice spoke to him in the dead 
of night, telling him that no man is 
pure in God’s sight. The Lxx differs 
materially from the Hebrew, but the 
general sense is the same in both. 
The οὐκ is not represented in the 
Hebrew, and it may have been in- 
serted by the Lxx to avoid an anthro- 
pomorphic expression ; but the trans- 
lators must also have read the pre- 
ceding words somewhat differently. 

7. εἰ κατὰ παίδων κ-τ.λ.} ‘seeing 
that against His servants He ἐς dis- 
trustful, and against (to the discredit 
of) His angels He noteth. some de- 
pravity? 

9. οὐρανὸς δὲ κ-τ.λ.] From Job xv. 
15 (likewise in a speech of Eliphaz) 
εἰ κατὰ ἁγίων οὐ πιστεύει, οὐρανὸς δὲ οὐ 
καθαρὸς ἐναντίον avrov. The fact that 
nearly the same words occur as the 
first clause of xv. 15, which are found 


to insert the second clause also of 
this same verse in the other passage 
_ to which it does not belong. 

ἔα δέ, οἱ κατοικοῦντες] ‘how much 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


> ͵ ‘ ‘ ‘ ” > ‘ U 
€TEAEYTHCAN, TAPA TO MH ἔχειν AYTOYC COMIAN. 


πιστεύει] AC; πιστεύσει 8. 
A επεσεν)ὴ; ἔπεσον αὐτοῦ S; see above, I. p. 140. 
(as I read it), by a transposition with the termination of the next word. Tischendorf 
gave σητοσ, but afterwards acquiesced in my reading of the Ms. 
12 ἔτι) AC; om. S. 

σοι] A, and so prob. S (with Lxx BS); σου C (with Lxx A). 


[19 


τι ἐπενόησεν: OYPANOC δὲ OY KABAPOC ἐνώπιον ayTOY Ed 
IO λέ, οἱ KATOIKOYNTEC οἰκίδο THAINAC ἐξ ὧν Kal AYTO! ἐκ τοῦ 
AYTOY πηλοῦ ἐομέν" ἔπδιοεν δυτοὴς CHTOC τρόπον, Kal ἀπὸ 
πρωΐθεν ἕως ἑοπέρδο οὐκ ἔτι εἰοίν" πὰρὰ τὸ MH δύνδοθδι 


> ι ε a rn > , ‘ 2 , 3 a ‘ 
AYTOYC EAYTOIC BOHOACA!I ATI@AONTO* ENEMYCHCEN AYTOIC KAI 


> U 
ETTIKAAECAI 


, 3, , ε , nn ” ¢ U > U >» 
15 λέ, Εἰ TIC CO! YTAKOYCETAI, H El TINA ATION ἀγγελῶν OYH" 


κἀὶ γὰρ A@pona ἀνδιρεῖ ὀργή, TETAANHMENON AE OANATOI 


11 ἔπαισεν αὐτοὺς] AC (but 
σητὸς] σητον stands in A 


τρόπον] CS; 
15 εἴ pri] AC; ἢ 8. 
ὄψῃ] A; ὄψει C, 


more, ye that dwell’. In the LXx BS 
read τοὺς δὲ κατοικοῦντας, but A ἔα δὲ 
τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ‘let alone those that 
dwell’. The latter is a better render- 
ing of the Hebrew and must have 
been the original LXxX text. Sym- 
machus has πόσῳ μᾶλλον, to which 
éa with this construction is an equiva- 
lent, Job xv. 16, xxv. 6. 

10. οἰκίας πηλίνας] The houses of 
clay in the original probably signify 
men’s bodies: comp. 2 Cor. v. I ἡ 
ἐπίγειος ἡμῶν οἰκία τοῦ σκήνους, Called 
before (iv. 7) ὀστράκινα σκεύη. But 
the LXx by the turn which they give 
to the next clause, ἐξ ὧν καὶ αὐτοὶ 
καιτιλ., seem to have understood it 
literally, ‘We are made of the same 
clay as our houses’; ἐξ ὧν being ex- 
plained by ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ πηλοῦ. 

II. καὶ ἀπὸ πρωΐθεν x.t.A.] καὶ is 
found in BS but omitted ἴῃ Α. By 
ἀπὸ πρωΐθεν x.r.A. is Meant ‘in the 
course of a single day’; comp. Is. 
XXXViii. T2, 13. 

14. ἐτελεύτησαν] In the Lxx A so 
reads with all authorities here; but 
BS have ἐξηράνθησαν. 

16. ὀργή, ζῆλος] 1.6. indignation 
against God, such as Job had shown, 


120 


‘ \ 


ζῆλος. ἐγὼ δὲ 


’ > a 


θέως EBPWOH AYT@N ἢ δίδιτὰ. 


AYT@N ἀπὸ οωτηρίδο᾽ 


© > 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XXXIX 


EWPAKA ἀἄφρονδο Pizac BaddNnTac, AAA εὺ- 


πόρρω γένοιντο οἵ. Υἱοὶ 


KOAABPICOEIHCAN ἐπὶ θύήρδιο ἡσοόνων, 


Kal οὐκ ἔοτδι ὁ ἐξδιρούμενοο"' ἃ γὰρ ἐκείνοις ἡτοίμδοτδι, 


2 ‘ > 


δίκδιοι EAONTAI* 


1 δὲ] AC; om. S. 
a present. 


2. δίαιτα] ‘their abode’; as e.g. 
LXX Job viii. 6, 22, xi. 14, xxxix. 6. 

3. κολαβρισθείησαν) ‘mocked, in- 
sulted’, as Athen. viii. p. 364 A καλα- 
βρίζουσι τοὺς οἰκέτας, ἀπειλοῦσι τοῖς 
πολλοῖς. Suidas after others says 
κολαβρισθείη" χλευασθείη, ἐκτιναχθείη, 
ἀτιμασθείη: κόλαβρος γὰρ καὶ κάλαβρος, 
ὁ μικρὸς χοῖρος" ἀντὶ τοῦ οὐδενὸς λόγου 
ἄξιος νομισθείη. And 50 Bochart 
Hieroz. ii. § 57,1. p. 707, " κολαβρίζειν 
Hellenistis contemnere, quia porcello 
apud Judaeos nihil fuit contemptius’. 
But this derivation cannot be correct ; 
for (to say nothing else) the word was 
not confined to Hellenist Jews. The 
same Athenzeus, who furnishes the 
only other instance of the verb κολα- 
βρίζω, has also two substantives, κόλα- 
Bpos or κάλαβρος (iv. p. 164 E, xv. p. 
697 C) ‘a licentious song’, and καλα- 
βρισμός (xiv. p. 629 D) ‘a certain 
Thracian dance’. The latter is de- 
fined by Pollux (iv. 100) Θρᾳκικὸν 
ὄρχημα καὶ Καρικόν. Here therefore 
the derivation must be sought. The 
jeering sallies and mocking gestures 
of these unrestrained songs and dan- 
ces would be expressed by κολαβρί- 
(ev. The reading of A in the Lxx 
σκολαβρισθείησαν, compared with oxo- 
ρακίζειν, might seem to favour the 
other derivation, if there were suffi- 
cient evidence that κόλαβρος ever 
meant χοιρίδιον. 

ἐπὶ θύραις ἡσσόνων) ‘at the doors 
of their inferiors’. There is nothing 
corresponding to ἡσσόνων in the He- 


αὐτοὶ δὲ EK KAK@N οὐκ ἐξαίρετοι EcONTal. 5 


Badévras] A; βάλλοντας C (with Lxx), and S also has 
εὐθέως] A (with Lxx BS); εὐθὺς C (with Lxx A). 
ἡτοίμασται] AC; ἐκεῖνοι ἡτοίμασαν S: for the Lxx see below. 


4 ἐκείνοις 
5 ἐξαίρετοι] 


brew, where ‘at the gate’ means ‘in 
court, in judgment’. 

4. ἃ γὰρ ἐκείνοις κιτ.λ.] In the LXx 
(BS) ἃ yap ἐκεῖνοι συνήγαγον (ἐθέρισαν 
A), δίκαιοι ἔδονται κιτιλ. For ἐξαίρετοι 
ἔσονται A has εξερεθησονται (i.e. ἐξαι- 
ρεθήσονται)δ. The LXxX in this verse 
diverges considerably from the He- 
brew. ἐξαίρετοι here has the some- 
what rare sense ‘ rescued, exempt, as 
e.g. Dion. Hal. A. 2. vi. 50. 

XL. ‘This being plain, we must 
do all things decently and in order, as 
our Heavenly Master wills us. The 
appointed times, the fixed places, the 
proper ministers, must be respected 
in making our offerings. So only 
will they be acceptable to God. In 
the law of Moses the high-priest, the 
priests, the Levites, the laity, all have 
their distinct functions’. 

The offence of the Corinthians — 
was contempt of ecclesiastical order. — 
They had resisted and ejected their 
lawfully appointed presbyters ; and— 
as a necessary consequence—they 
held their agape and celebrated their — 
eucharistic feast when and where — 
they chose, dispensing with the in- 
tervention of these their proper offi- 
cers. There is no ground for sup- 
posing (with Rothe Anjfange p. 404 
sq), that they had taken advantage 
of a vacancy in the episcopate by - 
death to mutiny against the presby- 
ters. Of bishops, properly so called, — 
no mention is made in this epistle (see _ 
the notes on §§ 42, 44); and, if the 





XL] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


ΕΖΙ 


- 7 , \ > 
XL. Προδήλων οὖν ἡμῖν ὄντων τούτων, καὶ ἐγ- 
͵7ὔ ~ 7 / ’ 
κεκυφότες εἰς τὰ βάθη τῆς θείας γνώσεως, πάντα 
΄ ε / ~ / 
τάξει ποιεῖν ὀφείλομεν ὅσα ὁ δεσπότης ἐπιτελεῖν ἐκέ- 


/ Ul \ 
λευσεν κατὰ καιροὺς τεταγμένους" Tas TE προσῴφορας 


εξερετοι A. 
ἀδελφοί 8. 
Α. ὅσα] AC; sicut (ws?) 8. 


government of the Corinthian Church 
was in any sense episcopal at this 
time, the functions of the bishop were 
not yet so distinct from those of the 
presbyters, but that he could still be 
regarded as one of them, and that no 
special designation of his office was 
necessary or natural. On the late 
development of the episcopate in Co- 
rinth, compared with the Churches of 
Syria and Asia Minor, see the disser- 
tation in Philippians p. 213 sq, and 
Ignat. and Polyc. τ. p. 562 sq, ed. I 
(Ρ. 579, ed. 2). 

6. Προδήλων κ-τ.λ.] This passage 
as far as καιροὺς τεταγμένους is quoted 
in Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 16 (p. 613). 

ἐγκεκυφότες) ‘peered into, pored 
over’. See below §§ 45, 53, Polyc. 
Phil. 3, Clem. Hom. iii. y. In all 
these passages it is used of searching 
the Scriptures. Similarly παρακύπ- 
rew, James i. 25, 1 Pet. i. 12. The 
word ἐκκεκυφότες in Clem. Alex. must 
be regarded as an error of transcrip- 
tion. 

7. τὰ βάθη τῆς θείας γνώσεως] The 
large and comprehensive spirit of 
Clement, as exhibited in the use 
of the Apostolic writers, has been 
already pointed out (notes on §§ 12, 
31, 33, 49). Here it is seen from a 
_ somewhat different point of view. 
_ While he draws his arguments from 
the law of Moses and his illustrations 
_ from the Old Testament, thus show- 
ing his sympathy with the Judaic side 
of Christianity, he at the same time 
uses freely those forms of expression 


6 ἡμῖν ὄντων] AC; ὄντων ἡμῖν Clem 613. 
éyxexugores] AC; ἐκκεκυφότες Clem. 


τούτων] AC; add. 
8 ὀφείλομεν] οφίλομεν 


which afterwards became the watch- 
words of the Gnostic sects and were 
doubtless frequently heard on the 
lips of their forerunners his contem- 
poraries. To this class belongs ra 
βάθη τῆς γνώσεως (comp. I Cor. ii. 
10) : see 8. John’s language in Rev. ii. 
24 οἵτινες οὐκ ἔγνωσαν τὰ βαθέα 
τοῦ Σατανᾶ, ὡς λέγουσιν, which is 
illustrated by Iren. Haer. ii. 22. 3 
‘profunda Dei adinvenisse se dicen- 
tes’, ii. 28. 9 ‘aliquis eorum qui alti- 
tudines Dei exquisisse se dicunt’, 
Hippol. Haer. v. 6 ἐπεκάλεσαν ἑαυτοὺς 
γνωστικούς, φάσκοντες μόνοι τὰ βάθη 
γινώσκειν; compare the description 
in Tertullian adv. Valent. 1 ‘Si 
bona fide quaeras, concreto vultu, 
suspenso supercilio, A/tum est aiunt’, 
and see Galatians p. 298. It is sig- 
nificant too that γνῶσις is a favourite 
word with Clement: see §§ 1, 36, 41, 
and especially ὃ 48 ἤτω δυνατὸς γνῶσιν 
ἐξειπεῖν (with the note). Again in 
§ 34 he repeats the favourite Gnostic 
text ‘Eye hath not seen etc.’, which 
they misapplied to support their prin- 
ciple of an esoteric doctrine. See 
the note there. 

9. τάς τε προσφορὰς κ-τ.λ.] Editors 
have failed to explain the reading of 
the MS satisfactorily. Two modes of 
punctuation are offered. The main 
stop is placed (1) after ἐκέλευσεν, so 
that we read κατὰ καιρ. rer. τάς τε 
προσφ. κιτιλ.; but in this case we get 
an unmeaning repetition, κατὰ καιροὺς 
τεταγμένους and ὡρισμένοις καιροῖς κιτ.λ. 
belonging to the same sentence: or 


122 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XL 


\ / > ~ o “ N 
kat λειτουργίας ἐπιμελώς ἐπιτελεῖσθαι καὶ οὐκ εἰκῆ ἢ 


> / ? / / > > € / ~~ ‘ 
ἄτακτως ἐκελευσεν γίνεσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ὡρισμένοις καιροῖς καὶ 


ε ΄“΄ \ \ / / \ 
ὥραις" ποῦ τε καὶ διὰ τίνων ἐπιτελεῖσθαι θέλει, αὐτὸς 


J ~ e¢ 7 ᾽ a / "ee / 
WOLOEV TH UTEPTATW αὐτου βουλήσει" ἐν OOlLWS σαντα 


, 3 ᾽ “ 3 , f ~ / 
γινόμενα ἐν εὐδοκήσει εὐπρόσδεκτα εἴη τῷ θελήματι5᾽ 


αὐτοῦ. 


1 λειτουργίας] λειτουργειασ A. 
for the insertion are given below. 
2 ἀλλ A; ἀλλὰ (Ὁ. 
που. 


3 ~~ / qn ΄ 
Οἱ οὖν τοῖς προστεταγμένοις καιροῖς ποιοῦντες 


ἐπιμελῶς] conj.; om. ACS. The reasons 
ἐπιτελεῖσθαι καὶ] AC; om. S: see below. 
3 wpas ποῦ re] AC. S translates as if it had read ὥραις τέ 
4 ὑπερτάτῳ)] A; ὑπερτάτῃ C; see the lower note, “πᾶ above, I. p. 127. 
πάντα] παντατα A; πάντα τὰ C. For S see below. 


5 ἐν εὐδοκήσει) AC: 5 


translates the sentence, ita ut, guum omnia pie fiant, velit ut acceptabilia sint volun- 
ati suae, thus apparently taking évevdoxjoe (one word) as a verb and reading 


(2) after ἐπιτελεῖσθαι, in which case 
ἐπιτελεῖσθαι must be governed by 
ὀφείλομεν. But, with this construc- 
tion (not to urge other obvious objec- 
tions) there is an awkwardness in 
using the middle ἐπιτελεῖσθαι in the 
same sense in which the active ém- 
τελεῖν has occurred just before; 
though the middle in itself might 
stand. (In James iv. 2, 3 however 
we have αἰτεῖν and αἰτεῖσθαι side by 
side.) I have therefore inserted ém- 
μελῶς, supposing that the omission 
was due to the similar beginnings of 
the two words (as e.g. αὐωνίον for αἰνὸν 
αἰωνιον ii. ὃ 9; see also the note on 
ii. § 10 εὑρεῖν) ; comp. 1 (3) Esdr. viii. 
21 πάντα κατὰ τὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ νόμον 
ἐπιτελεσθήτω ἐπιμελῶς τῷ Θεῴ 
τῷ ὑψίστῳ, Herm. Mand. xii. 3 τὴν 
διακονίαν... τέλει ἐπιμελῶς. Thus the 
passage reads smoothly and intel- 
ligibly. An alternative would be to 
omit ἐπιτελεῖσθαι (and this is done 
by the Syriac translator), as having 
been inserted from below (διὰ τίνων 
ἐπιτελεῖσθαι), and to take rds τε 
προσφορὰς καὶ λειτουργίας in appo- 
sition with ὅσα, but this does not 
seem so good for more than one 
reason. For the growth of the various 


readings in our authorities, see I. 
p. 143. I should have preferred ras 
ὃ ἐ προσφορὰς, as Tischendorf de- 
ciphers A, but (unless I misread it) 
it certainly has re, as also have CS. 
On the Christian sense of προσφοραὶ 
see the note on mpoceveyxovras τὰ 
δῶρα ὃ 44. 

2. καιροῖς καὶ ὥραις] A pleonasm, 
as in Dionys. de 75067. 14 (p. 561) μὴ 
ἐν καιρῷ γίνεσθαι μηδ᾽ ἐν ὥρᾳ, Plut. 
Ages. 36 τοῦ καλοῦ καιρὸν οἰκεῖον 
εἶναι καὶ ὥραν. The words differ only 
so far, that καιρός refers to the fitness, 
apa to the appointedness, of the time. 
Demosth. Olynth. ii. p. 24 μηδένα 
καιρὸν μηδ᾽ ὥραν παραλείπων shows 
that ὥρα does not refer to the ‘hour 
of the day’, as this use of the word 
was only introduced long after the 
age of Demosthenes. 

4. ὑπερτάτῳ] I have not ventured 
to alter the reading to ὑπερτάτῃ, since 
even in classical writers compara- 
tives and superlatives are sometimes 
of two terminations; e.g. Thucyd. iii. 
89, IOI, v- 71, 110. See Buttmann 
Griech. Sprachl. ὃ 60 anm. 5. 

πάντα γινόμενα] I have struck out 
τὰ before γινόμενα as a mere repe- 


tition of the last syllable of πάντα Ε 





᾿ 











xt] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


123 


> ~ > , \ / 
Tas προσφορὰς αὐτῶν εὐπρόσδεκτοί τε καὶ μακάριοι, 


~~ ΄σ ’ Ps 
τοῖς yap νομίμοις τοῦ δεσπότου ἀκολουθοῦντες οὐ 


διαμαρτάνουσιν. 


5 γὰρ ἀ Tt io λε ί 
Tw yap αρχίέερει tolal ἱὑτουργιαι 


΄ AEE \ σ΄ ς ~ ἴδ ε , 
το δεδομέναι εἰσίν, καὶ τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν ἴδιος ὁ τόπος 


᾿ \ a ΤῸΝ ὃ , ae 
προστέτακται, Και λευΐταις ἰὸιαι laKOVLAL ETTLKELY— 


εἶναι for εἴη. 
sentence) ; for S see the last note. 


εἴη] A; add. πάντα C (thus repeating it a second time in the 


6 mpocreraypevas] A; προσταγεῖσι C, 


9 ἀρχιερεῖ] AC; ἀρχιερεῦσιν S. This is probably due to a misapprehension of 
the translator or of a scribe who supposed that the Christian bishops were meant. 


10 ὁ τόπος] A; τόπος (om. ὁ) C. 


S translates as if it had read ἰδίοις τόποις. 


11 λευΐταις... ἐπίκεινται] AC (but emixwra A); levitae in ministeriis propriis po- 


nuntur ὃ. 


and as interfering with the sense. 
The omission of ra is confirmed by 
the Syriac, 

5. ἐν εὐδοκήσει] sc. τοῦ Θεοῦ. See 
the note on ὃ 2. But possibly we 
should here for E€YAOKHCEIEY- 
TIPOCAEKTA read EYAOKHCEIOCY- 
TIPOCAEKTA ; as in Epiphan. Haer. 
Ixx. 10 (p. 822) εὐδοκήσει Θεοῦ. 

9. τῷ yap ἀρχιερεῖ κιτ.λ.}] This is 
evidently an instance from the old 
dispensation adduced to show that 
God will have His ministrations per- 
formed through definite Zersons, just 
as below (ὃ 41) οὐ πανταχοῦ x.7.d. 
Clement draws an illustration from 
the same source that He will have 
them performed in the proper Adaces. 
There is therefore no direct reference 
to the Christian ministry in ἀρχιερεύς, 
ἱερεῖς, Λευῖται, but it is an argument 
by analogy. Does the analogy then 
extend to the ¢aree orders? The an- 
swer to this seems to be that, though 
the episcopate appears to have been 
widely established in Asia Minor at 
this time (see Philippians p. 209 sq 
with the references given above, p. 
121), this epistle throughout only 
recognizes two orders, presbyters 
and deacons, as existing at Corinth 
(see esp. the notes on ἐπισκόπων ὃ 42, 
and on ἐὰν κοιμηθῶσιν, διαδέξωνται 
κιτιλ. ὃ 44). It has been held indeed 


by some (e.g. Lipsius p. 25) that, this 
being so, the analogy notwithstand- 
ing extends to the number three, 
Christ being represented by the high- 
priest (see the note § 36), the presby- 
ters by the priests, and the deacons 
by the Levites. But to this it is a 
sufficient answer that the High- 
priesthood of Christ is wholly differ- 
ent in kind and exempt from those 
very limitations on which the passage 
dwells. And again why should the 
analogy be so pressed? It would be 
considered ingenious trifling to seek 
out the Christian equivalents to évde- 
λεχισμοῦ ἢ εὐχῶν ἢ περὶ ἁμαρτίας καὶ 
πλημμελείας below (§ 41), or to ἔπαρχοι, 
χιλίαρχοι, ἑκατόνταρχοι, πεντηκόνταρχοι, 
κιτιλ. above (§ 37); nor is there any 
reason why a closer correspondence 
should be exacted from this passage 
than from the others. Later writers 
indeed did dwell on the analogy of 
the ¢hreefold ministry ; but we cannot 
argue back from them to Clement, in 
whose epistle the very element of 
threefoldness, which gives force to 
such a comparison, is wanting. 

10. ἴδιος ὁ τόπος κ-τ.λ.] “ The office 
assigned to the priests ts special’. 
On this sense of τύπος comp. below 
§ 44 τοῦ ἱδρυμένου αὐτοῖς τόπου, and 
see the notes on Ign. Polyc. 1 ἐκδίκει 
σου τον τόπον. 


124 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XLI 


ε ἂν Τῷ af ΄- “" - Ul 
ται: ὁ λαΐκος ἄνθρωπος τοῖς λαϊκοῖς προστάγμασιν 


δέδεται. 


ε « ~ > al , 
XLI. “Ἕεκαστος ὑμῶν, ἀδελφοί, ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ Tay- 


2 δέδεται] A; δέδοται CS. 


I. λαϊκός] Comp. Clem. Hom. E- 
pist. Cl. ὃ 5 οὕτως ἑκάστῳ λαϊκῷ apap- 
tia ἐστὶν «.7.A., Clem. Alex. Strom. 
iii. 12 (p. 552) κἂν πρεσβύτερος 7 κἂν 
διάκονος κἂν λαϊκός, 7b. v. 6 (p. 665) 
κώλυμα λαϊκῆς ἀπιστίας. In Tertul- 
lian ‘laicus’ is not uncommon, e.g. 
de Praescr. 41 ‘nam et laicis sa- 
cerdotalia munera injungunt’. In 
the LXX λαὸς is used not only in 
contradistinction to ‘the Gentiles’ 
(see the note on § 29 above), but 
also as opposed to (1) ‘The rulers’, 
e.g. 2 Chron, xxiv. 10, xxx. 24, (2) 
‘The priests’, eg. Exod. xix. 24, 
Neh. vii. 73 (viii. 1), Is. xxiv. 2; 
comp. Jer. xxxiv (xli). 19 τοὺς ἄρχοντας 
*lovda καὶ τοὺς δυνάστας καὶ τοὺς ἱερεῖς 
καὶ τὸν λαόν. From this last contrast 
comes the use of λαϊκὸς here. The 
adjective however is not found in the 
LXX, though in the other Greek ver- 
sions we meet with λαϊκός ‘laic’ or 
‘profane’ and λαϊκοῦν ‘to profane’, 
Deut. xx. 6, xxviii. 30, Ruth i. 12, 
1 Sam. xxi. 4, Ezek. vii. 22, xlviii. 15. 

XLI. ‘Let each man therefore 
take his proper place in the thanks- 
giving of the Church. Then again, 
in the law of Moses the several sacri- 
fices are not offered anywhere, but 
only in the temple at Jerusalem and 
after careful scrutiny. If then trans- 
gression was visited on the Israelites 
of old with death, how much greater 
shall be our punishment, seeing that 
our knowledge also is greater’. 

4. εὐχαριστείτω)] The allusion here 
is plainly to the public services of the 
Church, where order had been violat- 
ed. Thus εὐχαριστία will refer chiefly, 


3 ὑμῶν] A; ἡμῶν CS. 
A; εὐαρεστείτω CS. See the lower note. 


4 εὐχαριστείτω] 
συνειδήσει] συνειδησιν A, 5 μὴ 


though not solely, to the principal act 
of Christian thanksgiving, the celebra- 
tion of the Lord’s Supper, which at a 
later date was almost exclusively term- 
ed εὐχαριστία. The usage of Clement 
is probably midway between that of 
S. Paul where no such appropriation 
of the term appears (e.g. 1 Cor. xiv. 
16, 2 Cor. ix. 11, 12, Phil. iv. 6, 1 Tim. 
ii. 1, etc.), and that of the Ignatian 
Epistles (PAzlad. 4, Smyrn. 7) and of 
Justin (AZol. i. § 66, p. 97 sq, Dial. 
41, p. 260) where it is especially so 
applied. For the ἴδιον τάγμα of the 
people at the eucharistic feast see 
Justin AZo. i. ὃ 65 (p. 97 Ὁ) οὗ (i.e. 
τοῦ προεστῶτος τῶν ἀδελφῶν) συντελέ- 
σαντος τὰς εὐχὰς καὶ τὴν εὐχαριστίαν 
πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἐπευφημεῖ λέγων ᾿Αμήν... 
εὐχαριστήσαντος δὲ τοῦ προεστῶτος καὶ 
ἐπευφημήσαντος παντὸς τοῦ λαοῦ x.T.A., 
and again zd. ὃ 67 (p. 98 E). See 
Harnack Der Christliche Gottesdienst 
etc. (Erlangen, 1854). 

Though the reading εὐαρεστείτω 
is simpler, εὐχαριστείτω is doubtless 
correct; comp. § 38 with Rom. xiv. 
6, 1 Cor. xiv. 17. For another 
instance of confusion between evapeo- 
reiv and εὐχαριστεῖν in our authorities, 
see § 62. 

ἐν ἀγαθῇ συνειδήσει] Acts xxiii. 
1, 1 Tim. i. 5, 19, 1 Pet. iii. 16, 21: 
comp. καλὴ συνείδησις, Heb. xiii. 18, 
For an explanation of the reading 
συνείδησιν in A see above § 15. 

6. κανόνα] Compare the metaphor 
2 Cor. x. 13, 14, κατὰ τὸ μέτρον roo 
κανόνος and ὑπερεκτείνομεν : see also — 
the note on ὃ 7. : 

npoopépovra| The present tense 





XLI] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


125 


? / ease. > “ / ε ͵ 
ματι εὐχαριστείτω Θεῷ ἐν ἀγαθῆ συνειδήσει ὑπάρχων, 
\ / ‘ ε / “ ΄ 
5 μὴ παρεκβαίνων τὸν ὡρισμένον τῆς λειτουργίας αὐτοῦ 
/ > / ~ 3 
κανόνα, ἐν σεμνότητι. Οὐ πανταχοῦ, ἀδελφοί, προσφέ- 
’ 3 ΄“ N > ΄σ ε 
ρονται θυσίαι ἐνδελεχισμοῦ ἢ εὐχῶν ἢ περὲ ἁμαρτίας καὶ 


παρεκβαίνων] AC (but παραικβαινων A); εἰ perficiens 8. 
6 προσφέρονται] AC; om. 8. 


γιασ Α. 


has been thought to imply that the 
sacrifices were still offered and the 
temple yet standing, and therefore to 
fix the date of the epistle before the 
destruction of Jerusalem, i.e. about 
the close of Nero’s reign. To this 
very early date however there are 
insuperable objections (see the intro- 
duction, I. p. 346 sq, and notes on §§ 1, 
5,44, 47). Clement therefore must use 
προσφέρονται as implying rather the 
permanence of the record and of the 
lesson contained therein than ¢he con- 
tinuance of the institution and prac- 
tice itself. Indeed it will be seen 
that his argument gains considerably, 
if we suppose the practice discon- 
tinued; because then and then only 
is the sanction transferred from the 
Jewish sacrifices to the Christian 
ministrations, as the true fulfilment 
of the Divine command. If any one 
doubts whether such usage is natural, 
let him read the account of the Mosaic 
sacrifices in Josephus Az. iii. cc. 9, 
10 (where the parallels to Clement’s 
present tense προσφέρονται are far too 
numerous to be counted), remember- 
ing that the Avtiguities were pub- 
lished A.D. 93, i.e. within two or three 
years of our epistle. Comp. Barnab. 
7 sq, Epist. ad Diogn. 3, where also 
the present is used. This mode of 
speaking is also very common in the 
Talmud; comp. Friedmann and 
Graetz Die angebliche Fortdauer des 
jiidischen Opfercultus etc. in the 
Theolog. F ahrb. ἈΝΤΙ. p. 338sq (1848), 
and the references in Derenbourg 
L Hist. et la Géogr. de la Palestine 


λειτουργίας] λιτουρ- 
7 εὐχῶν] A; προσευχῶν C. 


p- 480sq. Seealso Grimm in Zézésch. 
SJ. Wiss. Theol. x1. p. 28 sq (1870) 
with reference to the bearing of this 
phenomenon on the date of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews. Comp. 
Apost. Const. ii. 25 ἀπὸ τῶν θυσιῶν 
καὶ ἀπὸ πάσης πλημμελείας καὶ περὶ 
ἁμαρτιῶν, where parts of the context 
seem to be suggested by this passage 
of Clement, though the analogies in 
the O. T. are interpreted after the 
fashion of a later age. 

ἐνδελεχισμοῦ] ‘of continuity, 
perpetuity’, the expression used in 
the LxXx for the ordinary daily sacri- 
fices, as a rendering of 7°DN (e.g. 
Exod. xxix. 42, Neh. x. 33); and thus 
opposed to the special offerings, of 
which the two types are the freewill 
offerings (εὐχῶν) and expiatory offer- 
ings (περὶ ἁμαρτίας ἢ πλημμελείας). 
Of the last two words ἁμαρτία denotes 
the sin-offering (MON) and πλημμέ- 
λεια the trespass-offering (DWN). A 
similar threefold division of sacrifices 
is given by Philo de Vict. 4 (II. p. 240) 
τὸ ὁλόκαυτον, τὸ σωτήριον, TO περὶ ἅμαρ- 
τίας, and by Josephus «42. ili. 9.1 54 
ἡ ὁλοκαύτωσις, ἡ χαριστήριος θυσία, 
ἡ ὑπὲρ ἁμαρτάδων (passages referred to 
in Jacobson’s notes); see also Ewald 
Alterth. des Volkes Isr. p. 52 54. 
Here the θυσία ἐνδελεχισμοῦ stands 
for the ὁλοκαυτώματα generally, as 
being the most prominent type; and 
in the same way the θυσία εὐχῶν, as 
a part for the whole, represents the 
peace-offerings (σωτήρια in the LXx 
and Philo) which comprised two spe- 
cies (Lev. vii. 11—17), the vow or 


126 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [x1 


πλημμελείας, ἀλλ᾽ ἢ ἐν ἱΙερουσαλὴμ μόνη" κἀκεῖ δὲ οὐκ 

> \ / / ἰλλ᾽ A 6 ΄ ΄-ς 

ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ προσφέρεται, ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ ναοῦ 
\ 

πρὸς TO θυσιαστήριον, μωμοσκοπηθὲν τὸ προσφερό- 





μενον διὰ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως καὶ τῶν προειρημένων λειτουρ- 


~ ε 3 \ \ ~ - / > ΄- 
Ὑων. οἱ οὖν Tapa TO καθῆκον τῆς βουλήσεως αὐτου 5 


eee , \ , of 
TOLOVVYTES TL θανατον TO προστιμον ἐχουσιν. 


I πλημμελεία:] πλημμελιασ A; πλημμελημάτων C. S has ἃ singular. 
AS; om. C (as a pleonasm after ἀλλ᾽ ἤ). 
4 τῶν] AC; ceterorum 8. 


sacrificia 8. 
5 βουλήσεως] A; βουλῆς C; dub. S. 


free-will offering (which Clement has 
selected) and the thanksgiving-offer- 
ing (which Josephus takes as the 
type). On the other hand, when 
speaking of expiatory offerings, Cle- 
ment gives both types. 

εὐχῶν] The v. 1. προσευχῶν has 
parallels in James v. 15, 16, Ign. 
Ephes. 10, Rom. 9. It is explained 
by the tendency to substitute a 
common word for a less common. 
Here εὐχῶν is unquestionably right ; 
for more especially in the later lan- 
guage, while προσευχή is ‘a prayer’ 
in the more comprehensive sense, 
εὐχή is ‘a vow’ specially. In the 
LXX προσευχή is commonly a render- 
ing of MbDn, but εὐχὴ of 7) or WD. 
For εὐχή ‘a vow’ see Acts xviii. 18, 
xxi. 23. In the only other passage 
in the N.T. in which it occurs, James 
v. 15, the idea of a vow may possibly 
be present, though it is certainly not 
prominent, and in the context (ver. 14, 
and prob. ver. 16) προσεύχεσθαι is 
used of the same act. But, though 
εὐχὴ might undoubtedly be said of a 
‘prayer, supplication’, it is not so evi- 
dent conversely that προσευχή could 
be used of a vow specifically. In 
Numb. vi. 4 sq, where a vow is 
distinctly meant, the word occurs 
many times in the same context and 
the form is εὐχῆς throughout, though 
an ill-supported reading προσευχῆς 


Ὁρᾶτε, 


μόνῃ] 
2 προσφέρεται] AC; offeruntur 

λειτουργῶν] λιτουργων Α. 
7 ὅσῳ] AC; add. γὰρ 8. κατη- 


occurs in one instance. In Ps. lxi 
(Ix). 6, where the word is 173, the LXX 
(with Symmachus) have προσευχῶν, 
but Aquila more correctly εὐχῶν, thus 
preserving the fundamental ‘meaning 
of the Hebrew word, though the con- 
noted idea of ‘ prayer’ is so prominent 
in the context as to explain the LXx 
rendering. 

2. ἔμπροσθεν x.t.r.] The ναὸς is 
here the shrine, the holy-place ; the 
θυσιαστήριον, the court of the altar: 
see the note on Ign. Ephes. 5. The 
iepov comprises both. This distinc- 
tion of ναὸς and ἱερὸν is carefully 
observed in the N.T.: see Trench 
N.T. Synon. ist ser. § iii. 

3. μωμοσκοπηθὲν ‘after inspection’, 
with a view to detecting blemishes. 
A flaw or blemish, which vitiates a 
person or thing for holy purposes, is 
in the LXX μῶμος. Doubtless the 
choice of this rendering was partly 
determined by its similarity in sound 
to the Hebrew 01, for otherwise it 
is not a very obvious or natural equi- 
valent. [A parallel instance is the 
word σκηνή, chosen for the same rea- 


sons, as a rendering of Shechinah, 
and carrying with it all the signifi- 
cance of the latter.] Hence ἄμωμος 


inthe Lxx signifies ‘without blemish’, 


being applied to victims and the like, _ 
and diverges from its classical mean- 
ing. Hencealsoarederivedthewords — 








i 
“a 


XLIT] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


127 


¢ / / 
ἀδελφοί, ὅσῳ πλείονος κατηξιώθημεν γνώσεως, τοσούτῳ 


“- / 
μᾶλλον ὑποκείμεθα κινδύνῳ. 


XLIL Οἱ ἀπόστολοι ἡμῖν εὐηγγελίσθησαν ἀπὸ τοῦ 


> Κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ, ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ Χριστὸς ἀπὸ τοῦ 


Θεοῦ ἐξεπέμφθη. 


ε \ A > ‘ a ΄ \ ε 
ὁ Χριστὸς οὖν ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ, καὶ οἱ 


ξιώθημεν] καταξιωθημεν A, as Tisch. (preef. p. xix) reads it, but I could not see dis- 


tinctly. 
(om. 6) C. 


μωμοσκόπος, μωμοσκοπεῖν, which seem 
to be confined to Jewish and Christian 
writers: Philo de Agric. 29 (I. p. 320) 
οὗς ἔνιοι μωμοσκόπους ὀνομάζουσιν, ἵ ἵνα 
ἄμωμα καὶ ἀσινῆ προσάγηται τῷ βωμῷ 
τὰ ἱερεῖα κιτ.λ., Polyc. Phil. 4 πάντα 
μωμοσκοπεῖται, Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 
18 (p. 617) ἦσαν δὲ κἀν ταῖς τῶν θυσιῶν 
προσαγωγαῖς παρὰ τῷ νόμῳ οἱ ἱερείων 
μωμοσκόποι, Apost. Const. ii. 3. γέ- 
γραπται γάρ, Μωμοσκοπεῖσθε τὸν μέλ- 
λοντα εἰς ἱερωσύνην προχειρίζεσθαι (a 
paraphrase of Lev. xxi. 17). 

4. ἀρχιερέως] Wotton suggests 
iepéws, ‘quum sacerdotum inferioris 
ordinis potius quam summi sacerdotis 
Sit τὰς θυσίας μωμοσκοπεῖν᾽ ; but διὰ 
τοῦ ἀρχιερέως κιτιλ. belongs rather to 
προσφέρεται than to μωμοσκοπηθέν, as 
the order seems to show. The three 
conditions are (1) that it must be 
offered at the proper place, (2) that 
it must be examined and found with- 
out blemish, (3) that it must be 
sacrificed by the proper persons, the 
high priests or other priests. The 
διὰ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως κιτ.λ. is comprehen- 
sive, so as to include all sacrifices. 

5. τὸ καθῆκον k.r.d.] ‘ the seemly or- 
dinance of His will.’ For the geni- 
tive comp. Plut. Mor. p. 617 E ἐκ τῶν 
Ὁμήρου τὸ θεώρημα τοῦτο λαμβάνων 


καθηκόντων. 


6. τὸ πρόστιμον] 2 Macc. vii. 36. 


᾿᾿Ἐπιτίμιον ᾿Αττικῶς, πρόστιμον Ἕλλη- 
᾿γνικῶς Moeris 5. ν. ἐπιτίμιον. This is one 


4 





9 εὐηγγελίσθησαν] AC; evangelizaverunt (active) S. Hilgenfeld 
wrongly gives the reading of C ευαγγελίσθησαν. 


10 ὁ Χριστὸς] A; χριστὸς 


11 ἐξεπέμφθη... ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ] AS; om. C (by homceoteleuton). 


among many instances of the excep- 
tional character of the Attic dialect, 
for πρόστιμον occurs as early as 
Hippocrates ; ‘see for other examples 
Galatians vi. 6 and p. 92 (p. 89, ed. 1), 
Philippians i. 28, ii. 14. In the 
inscriptions it is a very common 
word for a fine. 

‘Opare κιτ.λ.} This sentence is 
quoted by Clem, Alex. Strom. iv. 16 
(p. 613). 

7. γνώσεως] See the note on ra 
βάθη τῆς θείας γνώσεως ὃ 40. 

XLII. ‘The Apostles were sent 
by Christ, as Christ was sent by the 
Father. Having this commission 
they preached thekingdomof Godand 
appointed presbyters and deacons in 
every place. This was no new insti- 
tution, but had been foretold ages 
ago by the prophet.’ 

9. εὐηγγελίσθησαν) ‘ were taught 
the Gospel’, as Matt. xi. 5 (Luke vii. 
22), Heb. iv. 2,6; for the first aorist 
apparently is always passive, being 
used with a nominative either of the 
person instructed or the lesson con- 
veyed; and ἡμῖν will be ‘for our 
sakes’. It might bea question however 
whether we should not read ἡμῶν, as 
in the opening of § 44. 

11. ἐξεπέμφθη) This is attached by 
the editors generally to the following 
sentence. Yet I can hardly doubt 
that it belongs to the preceding 
words; for (1) The position of οὖν 





128 


? / > \ ~ oe Saeed Φ > ᾽ 
ἀπόστολοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ" ἐγένοντο οὖν ἀμφότερα 
, a Φ ’ 
εὐτάκτως ἐκ θελήματος Θεοῦ. παραγγελίας οὖν λαβόν- 
\ ’ \ “ > , - 
τες καὶ πληροφορηθέντες διὰ τῆς ἀναστάσεως τοῦ Κυ- 
ρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ πιστωθέντες ἐν τῷ λόγῳ 
΄ ΄σ΄ \ cal 
τοῦ Θεοῦ μετὰ πληροφορίας πνεύματος ὡγίου ἐξῆλθον, 
/ \ ΄σ ΄ 
εὐαγγελιζόμενοι τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ μέλλειν ἔρ- 


χεσθαι. 


, \ \ ᾽ ΄- » ’ ΄ ,ὔ 

ίστανον τὰς ἀπαρχὰς αὐτῶν, δοκιμάσαντες τῷ πνεύ- 
> / , ~ 

ματι, εἰς ἐπισκόπους καὶ διακόνους τῶν μελλόντων 


2 λαβόντε:] AC; add. οἱ ἀπόστολοι 8. ; 
(Ἴ being the common rendering of ὁ Κύριος as well as οἵ ὁ Κύριος" ἡμῶν). 


seems to require this ; (2) The awk- 
ward expression that ‘Christ was 
taught the Gospel by the Father’ 
thus disappears; (3) We get in its 
place a forcible epigrammatic paral- 
lelism ὁ Χριστὸς οὖν κιτιλ. For the 
omission of the verb to gain terse- 
ness, and for the form of the sentence 
generally, see Rom. x. 17 dpa ἡ 
πίστις ἐξ ἀκοῆς, ἡ δὲ ἀκοὴ διὰ ῥήματος 
Χριστοῦ, 1 Cor. iii. 23 ὑμεῖς δὲ Χριστοῦ, 
Χριστὸς δὲ Θεοῦ ; comp. also Rom. v. 
18, 1 Τόν αν, 13, Gal. ii. 9. My 
punctuation has been accepted by 
Gebhardt and Harnack and by 
Hilgenfeld (ed. 2), and is now con- 
firmed by the Syriac version. For 
the thought see Joh. xvii. 18 καθὼς 
ἐμὲ ἀπέστειλας εἰς τὸν κόσμον, κἀγὼ 
ἀπέστειλα αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν κόσμον, XX. 21 
καθὼς ἀπέσταλκέν με ὁ πατήρ, κἀγὼ 
πέμπω ὑμᾶς. See also the notes on 
Ign. Ephes. 6; and comp. Tertull. de 
Praescr. 37 ‘in ea regula incedimus, 
quam ecclesia ab apostolis, apostoli 
a Christo, Christus a Deo tradidit’ 
(quoted by Harnack). 

2. παραγγελίας] ‘word of com- 
mand’, received as from a superior 
officer that it may be passed on to 
others ; as e.g. Xen. Cyr. ii. 4. 2, iv. 
227. 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


\ Γ Φ \ / / 
κατὰ χώρας οὖν καὶ πόλεις κηρύσσοντες καθ- 












4 ἡμῶν] A; om. C; dub. 5 


4. πιστωθέντες] 2 Tim. iii. 14 μένε 
ἐν ois ἔμαθες καὶ ἐπιστώθης. ; 
5. μετὰ πληροφορίας κ-τ.λ.} ‘with 
jirm conviction inspired dy the — 
Holy Ghost’: comp. 1 Thess. i. 5 ἐν 
πνεύματι ἁγίῳ καὶ [ἐν] πληροφορίᾳ 
πολλῇ. , 
7. καθίστανον] The same word is 
used in Tit. i. 5 καταστήσῃς κατὰ πόλιν 
πρεσβυτέρους. Both forms of the im- 
perfect καθίστανον (from ἱστάνω) and — 
καθίστων (from iordw) are admissible, — 
at least in the later language; see ~ 
Veitch Greek Verbs p. 299. But I~ 
cannot find any place for either of © 
the readings of our MSS, καθεστανον 
and καθιστᾶν. : 
χώρας] ‘country districts’, as Op- — 
posed to towns ; comp. Luke xxi. 21, 
Joh. iv. 35, Acts viii. 1, James v. 4. 
Hence the ancient title χωρεπίσκοπος; — 
see Philippians p. 230. 
8. τὰς ἀπαρχὰς αὐτῶν] ‘the first- 
Sruits of their preaching’ ; or perhaps — 
αὐτῶν refers not to the Apostles but — 
to the χῶραι καὶ πόλεις, and is like the 
genitives in Rom. xvi. 5 ὅς ἐστιν 
ἀπαρχὴ τῆς ᾿Ασίας, 1 Cor. xvi. 15 Ore 
ἐστὶν ἀπαρχὴ τῆς ᾿Αχαΐας, which pas- 
sages Clement may have had in his” 
mind. ὦ 
δοκιμάσαντες] 1 Tim. iii. 10 Soxe-— 


XL] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 129 





οπιστεύειν. καὶ τοῦτο οὐ καινῶς, ἐκ yop δὴ πολλῶν 
χρόνων ἐγέγραπτο περὶ ἐπισκόπων καὶ διακόνων" 
οὕτως γάρ που λέγει ἡ γραφή᾽ KatactHcw τοὺὶς ἐπι- 
οκόπογο AYT@N EN AIKAIOCYNH KAl TOYC AIAKONOYC AYTA@N 
ἐν TricTel. 


XLII. 


/ \ ~ 3s ~ / 
πιστευθέντες παρὰ Θεοῦ ἔργον τοιοῦτο κατέστησαν 


Καὶ τί θαυμαστὸν εἰ οἱ ἐν Χριστῷ 


\ / « \ U ‘ ’ 
τοὺς προειρημένους; ὅπου καὶ ὁ μακάριος πιοτὸς θερά- 
> a » - ~ \ r 

TaN ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ οἴκῳ Μωῦσῆς τὰ διατεταγμένα αὐτῷ 


7 καθίστανον] καθεστανον A; καθιστῶν C. 
sancto (or rather sanctos, for the word has riduz) 8. 


8 τῷ πνεύματι] AC; spiritu 
10 καινώς] AC; κενῶς S. 


12 οὕτως] AC, but Bryennios tacitly writes οὕτω ; see the note on § 56. 


μαζέσθωσαν πρῶτον, εἶτα διακονείτωσαν: 
see below ὃ 44 διαδέξωνται ἕτεροι 
δεδοκιμασμένοι ἄνδρες. 

τῷ πνεύματι] ‘by the Spirit’, which 
is the great searcher, 1 Cor. ii. Io. 

9. ἐπισκόπους] i.e. πρεσβυτέρους ; 
(ογ Clement thrice mentions ἐπίσκοποι 
καὶ διάκονοι in conjunction (as in Phil. 
i. I σὺν ἐπισκόποις καὶ διακόνοις), and 
it is impossible that he could have 
omitted the presbyters, more especi- 
ally as his one object is to defend 
their authority which had been as- 
sailed (§§ 44, 47, 54). The words 
ἐπίσκοπος and πρεσβύτερος therefore 
are synonymes in Clement, as they 
are in the Apostolic writers. In Igna- 
tius they first appear as distinct titles. 
See Philippians p. 93 $q, Pp. 191 54. 

12. Καταστήσω |Loosely quoted from 
LXX Is. lx. 17 δώσω τοὺς ἄρχοντάς σου 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ καὶ τοὺς ἐπισκόπους σου ἐν 
δικαιοσύνῃ. Thus the introduction of 
the διάκονοι is due to misquotation. 
Irenzeus also (Haer. iv. 26. 5) applies 
__ the passage to the Christian ministry, 
_ but quotes the Lxx correctly. The 
_ force of the original is rightly given 
in the A. V., ‘I will also make thy 
_ officers [magistrates] peace and thine 
exactors [task-masters] righteous- 


CLEM, II. 


ness’; i.e. ‘there shall be no tyranny 
or oppression’. For ἐπίσκοπος, ‘a 
task-master’, see Philippians p. 93. 

XLIII. ‘And no marvel, if the 
Apostles of Christ thus ordained mi- 
nisters, seeing that there was the 
precedent of Moses. When the au- 
thority of the priests was assailed, he 
took the rods of the twelve tribes 
and placed them within the taber- 
nacle, saying that God had chosen 
the tribe whose rod should bud. On 
the morrow when the doors were 
opened, Aaron’s rod alone had bud- 
ded, and the office of the priesthood 
was vindicated.’ 

16. πιστευθέντες ‘entrusted with’. 
The construction πιστεύεσθαί τι is 
common in S. Paul: Rom. iii. 2, 
1 Cor. ix. 17, Gal. ii. 7, 1 Thess. ii. 4, 
1 Tim. i. 11, Tit. i. 3. 

17. πιστὸς θεράπων κ-τ.λ.] From 
Heb. iii. § Μωῦσῆς μὲν πιστὸς ἐν ὅλῳ 
τῷ οἴκῳ αὐτοῦ ὡς θεράπων, where there 
is a reference to Num. xii. 7 οὐχ 
οὕτως ὁ θεράπων μου Μωῦσῆς ἐν ὅλῳ 
τῷ οἴκῳ μου πιστός ἐστιν. On θεράπων 
see above § 4. For the combination 
of epithets here comp. Justin Déa/. 56 
(p. 274) Μωῦσῆς οὖν ὁ μακάριος καὶ 
πιστὸς θεράπων Θεοῦ x.T.A. 


9 


130 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [XLII 


, 9 4 > ~ ε ~ / = \ 
σαντα EONMELWOATO εν Tals ιεραις βίβλοις, ῳ και 


3 "4 € \ a os 
ἐπηκολούθησαν ot λοιποὶ προφηται συνεπιμαρτυρουντες 
΄- 4΄ κα ~ / a / / 
τοῖς Um αὐτοῦ νενομοθετημένοις. ἐκεῖνος yap, CndXou 
3᾽ \ ~ / ΄ ~ 
ἐμπεσόντος περὶ τῆς ἱερωσύνης Kal στασιαζουσῶν τῶν 


“~ ε / 3 ~ af rey / “ee 4 ΄ 
φυλὼν ὁποία αὐτῶν εἴη TH ἐνδόξῳ ὀνόματι κεκοσμήημε- 5 


BS oe \ / , ΄ 
vn, ἐκέλευσεν τοὺς δώδεκα φυλάρχους προσενεγκεῖν 
IT@® ῥάβδους ἐπιγεγραμμένας ἑκάσ λῆς κατ᾽ 
αὐτῷ ρα γεγραμμένας ἑκαστης φυλή 
oS \ \ > \ / ‘uo , a 
ὄνομα: καὶ λαβὼν αὐτὰς ἔδησεν καὶ ἐσφραγισεν τοῖς 
/ ~ 4 \ > / > \ > \ 
δακτυλίοις τῶν φυλάρχων, και ἀπέθετο αὐτὰς εἰς THY 


\ ~ / 3 \ \ / ΄. ΄ 
σκηνὴν τοῦ μαρτυρίου ἐπὶ τῆν τράπεζαν τοῦ Θεοῦ" τ΄ 


\ 4 A \ > / \ a ε , 
καὶ κλείσας τὴν σκηνην ἐσφραγισεν τὰς κλεῖδας ὡσαύ- 
A / \ ee > - » ᾿ , 

τως καὶ τὰς θύρας" καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς" Ἄνδρες ἀλελφοί, 
Hc ἂν φγλῆς ἢ ῥάβδος Βλδοτήοῃ, TAYTHN ἐκλέλεκτδι ὁ 


> \ c , ‘ al > a sh 
Θεὸς εἶς TO iepaTeyeIN KAI λειτουργεῖν δύτῷ.  Mpwlas 


1 ἐσημειώσατο] eonuiwoaro A. 


5 φυλῶν] AC; add. πασῶν [rod] Ἰσραήλ S. 


8 αὐτὰς] AS; αὐτὸς C. 
ἐσφράγισεν.. 
See I. p. 140. 


I. ἐσημειώσατο)] ‘recorded as a 
sign’: comp. ὃ 11 εἰς κρίμα καὶ εἰς 
σημείωσιν πάσαις ταῖς γενεαῖς γίνονται. 
So in the narrative to which Clement 
here refers, Num. xvii. 10 ἀπόθες τὴν 
ῥάβδον ᾿Δαρὼν...σημεῖον τοῖς υἱοῖς τῶν 
ἀνηκόων. 

ἱεραῖς] On this epithet see below, 
ὃ 53: 

2. οἱ λοιποὶ προφῆται] Moses ap- 
pears as the leader of the prophetic 
band, who prophesied of the Messiah, 
in Deut. xviii. 15, as emphasized in 
Acts iii. 21 sq, vii. 13. 

3. ἐκεῖνος γὰρ «.7.A.] The lesson 
of this narrative is drawn out also by 
Joseph. Anz. iv. 4. 2, and by Philo 
Vit. Moys. iii. 21 (11. p. 162). 

5. ὀνόματι] i.e. ‘dignity, office’, sc. 
τῆς ἱερωσύνης ; as ὃ 44 ἐπὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος 
ms ἐπισκοπῆς. On this sense of ὄνομα 


2 ἐπηκολούθησαν] A; ἠκολούθησαν C, 
κεκοσμημένη] κεκοσμημενω A. 


τοῖς] A; ἐν τοῖς C, a repetition of the last syllable of 
11 κλείσας] κλισασ A. 
15 τὸν] A; om. C. 


12 Ovpas] S; ῥάβδους AC, 
16 ἐπέδείξατο] ...δείξατο A; 


see above § 36. 

7. ἑκάστης φυλῆς] For the geni- 
tive of the thing inscribed after ém- 
ypapew comp. Plut. Mor. 400 E τὸν 


> “ Ἐν 1 , - 
ἐνταῦθα τουτονὶ θησαυρὸν ἐπιγράψαι τῆς 


πόλεως. Here however φυλῆς mises 
be governed by κατ᾽ ὄνομα. 


8. ἔδησεν «.t.A.] This incident, © 
with the following ἐσφράγισεν τὰς 
κλεῖδας ὡσαύτως, is not given in the - 


biblical narrative (Num. xvii). It 


seems however to be intended by 


Josephus (1. c.) τῶν τότε (re ἢ) ἀνδρῶν 
κατασημηναμένων αὐτάς, οἵπερ ἐκόμιζον, 


καὶ τοῦ πλήθους, though his language 


is obscure. Comp. Xen, Hell. iii. 1. 
27 κατέκλεισεν αὐτὰ kal κατεσημήνατο, 


καὶ φύλακας κατέστησεν. 


II. ὡσαύτως καὶ] So also ὁμοίως. 


καὶ Ign. Ephes. 16, το, 7 γαζί, 13. 


18, προεῖλεν] ‘Zook out’. For this 


4 



































XLIV] 


ἀμήν. 


ἐπέδειξε (. 
προεῖλε Ο; sustulit S. 


EICTO, WcTe. 
read τοῦ μόνου ἀληθινοῦ Θεοῦ. 


sense of the active προαιρεῖν see Judith 
xiii, 15 προελοῦσα τὴν κεφαλὴν ἐκ τῆς 
πήρας. Though it occurs compara- 
tively seldom, it is a strictly classical 
use, ¢ fenu promere; see the com- 
mentators on Thucyd. viii. 90. The 
much commoner form is the middle 
voice with a different sense, προαιρεῖσ- 
θαι pracferre, eligere. 

20. ov προήδει x.r.A.] This passage 
is loosely quoted or rather abridged 
and paraphrased by one Joannes. 
The quotation is given in .522ε11. 
Solesm. 1. Ὁ. 293 (see above, I. p. 187). 

23. τοῦ ἀληθινοῦ κιτ.λ.1 Comp. Joh. 
xvii. 3. 

XLIV. ‘So likewise the Apostles 

_ foresaw these feuds. They therefore 
provided for a succession of tried 
persons, who should fulfil the office 
of the ministry. Thus it is no light 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


17 Tas σφραγῖδας] AC; om. S. 
20 δοκεῖτε] δοκειται A. 
wore C and so apparently S. The variation is to be explained by the uncial letters, 
24 Θεοῦ] S; def. A; KuplouvC. S translates as if it had 
27 Κυρίου] ky CS; yy A. 
ἔσται) AC; but S seems to have read ἐστιν. 


131 


\ / / , \ > / A 
δὲ γενομένης συνεκάλεσεν πάντα Tov ᾿Ισραήλ, τὰς 
ἑξακοσίας χιλιάδας τῶν ἀνδρών, καὶ ἐπεδείξατο τοῖς 

Cr VS \ ~ 

φυλάρχοις Tas σφραγῖδας καὶ ἤνοιξεν τὴν σκηνὴν τοῦ 

/ \ ~ \ a! ὃ Σ A Sif « 

μαρτυρίου καὶ προεῖλεν τὰς ῥάβδους" καὶ εὑρέθη ἡ 

ῥάβδος ᾿λαρὼν οὐ μόνον βεβλαστηκυῖα ἀλλὰ καὶ 

,ὔ a 

καρπὸν ἔχουσα. τί δοκεῖτε, ἀγαπητοί; οὐ προήδει 
ἕ 

- ~ ~~ tf > > 

Mwions τοῦτο μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι; μάλιστα ἤδει" ἀλλ 
ε > / > - t 
ἵνα μὴ ἀκαταστασία γένηται ἐν τῷ ᾿Ισραήλ, οὕτως 
2 7 > \ “- \ of “ > a \ 
ἐποίησεν εἰς TO δοξασθῆναι τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ ἀληθινοῦ καὶ 

, an = / 7A a 
μόνου Θεοῦ: w ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 


XLIV. Καὶ οἱ ἀπόστολοι ἡμῶν ἔγνωσαν διὰ τοῦ 
Κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ, ὅτι ἔρις ἔσται ἐπὶ τοῦ 


18 προεῖλεν] προε.... Az 
23 εἰς τὸ] A; 


ἔρι5] ερεισ A. 
ἐπὶ A; περὶ C, and so app. 8. 


sin of which you are guilty in ejecting 
men so appointed, when they have 
discharged their duties faithfully. 
Happy those presbyters who have 
departed hence, and are in no fear of 
removal from their proper office.’ 

26.. ἡμῶν] Comp. 2 Pet. iii. 2 τῆς 
τῶν ἀποστόλων ὑμῶν ἐντολῆς, where 
ὑμῶν (not ἡμῶν) is the correct reading, 
as quoted by Hilgenfeld; so that it is 
an exact parallel to Clement’s expres- 
sion. See the note on τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς 
ἀποστόλους ὃ 5. 

27. ἔρις ἔσται κιτ.λ.1 See Tert. de 
Bapt. τ7 ‘episcopatus aemulatio scis- 
matum mater est’, quoted by Har- 
nack. 

τοῦ ὀνόματος k.T.A.] On ὄνομα see 
above §§ 36,43. The ἐπισκοπὴ here 
is of course the ‘ office of presbyter’, 
as in 1 Tim. ili. 1. 


9--2 


132 


, ΄- ΄- 
ὀνόματος τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς. 


, 3 / , / \ 
πρόγνωσιν elAnpoTes τελείαν κατέστησαν τοὺς προει- 


1 οὖν] AC; om. S. 


2. Tous προειρημένους] SC. ἐπισκό- 
πους καὶ διακόνους, ὃ 42. 

3. μεταξὺ] ‘afterwards’; comp. 
Acts xiii. 42 εἰς τὸ μεταξὺ σάββατον, 
Barnab. ὃ 13 εἶδεν δὲ Ἰακὼβ τύπον τῷ 
πνεύματι τοῦ λαοῦ τοῦ μεταξύ, Theoph. 
ad Autol. i. 8, iii. 21, 23. See also 
the references in Meyers note to 
Acts l.c. 

ἐπιμονὴν δεδώκασιν] ‘have given 
permanence to the office’: comp. 
Athenag. de Resurr. 18 δεῖται δὲ δια- 
δοχῆς διὰ τὴν τοῦ γένους διαμονήν. 
For ἐπιμονή (which occurs occasion- 
ally also in classical writers of this 
age) see Efist. Gall. ὃ 6 in Euseb. 
v. 1, Tatian ad Graec. 32. This read- 
ing was adopted by Bunsen, but he 
wrongly interpreted it ‘life-tenure’ 
(see Jgnat. von Antioch, etc. p. 96 
sq, Hippolytus 1. p. 45 2nd ed); and 
it has consequently found no favour. 
The original author of this emenda- 
tion ἐπιμονήν is mentioned by Ussher 
(Ignat. Zpzst. proleg. p. cxxxvii) who 
quoting the passage adds this note 
in his margin; “ἐπιμονὴν D. Petrus 
Turnerus [Savilian Professor at Ox- 
ford, t 1651] hic legit, ut continuatio 
episcopatus ab apostolis stabilita 
significetur; quod Athanasiano illi, 
καὶ βέβαια μένει, bene respondet’, 
Other suggestions, ἐπιλογήν, ἐπιτρο- 
πήν, ἐπισκοπήν, ἐπιστολήν, ἀπονομήν, ἔτι 
νόμον, are either inappropriate or di- 
verge too widely from the authorities. 
It seems impossible to assign any fit 
sense to the reading émwopny con- 
formably with usage or derivation. 
The word elsewhere has two mean- 
ings only; (1) ‘encroachment or rav- 
age’, e.g. of the spread of fire (Plut. 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 
Διὰ ταύτην οὖν τὴν αἰτίαν 
3 μεταξὺ] μετοξυ A. 


ἐπιδομὴν C. S translates e¢ in medio (interim) super probatione (ἐπὶ δοκιμὴν or ἐπὶ 
δοκιμῇ) dederunt etiam hoc ita ut si homines ex tis etc. 


















































[XLIV 


ἐπιμονὴν}] επινομην] A; 
See the lower note. 


Alex. 35) or poison (AZlian H. A. xii. 

32), (2) ‘a bandage’ Galen XVIII. I. 
p. 791 (Kuhn)and frequently (see Hase 
in Steph. Thes.). It might also consis- 
tently with its derivation have the 
sense ‘distribution, assignment’, like 
ἐπινέμησις. If it is to be retained, we 
have the choice (1) of assuming ἃ 
secondary meaning ‘injunction’, de- 
rived from the possible (though un-— 
supported) sense ‘assignment’ (so 
Lipsius p. 19 sq); or (2) of giving to 
ἐπινομὴ the known meaning of ἐπι- 
νομίς, ‘an after enactment’, ‘a codicil’ 
(so Rothe Anjfange p. 374 sq; see 
the note on κοιμηθῶσιν). Of these 
alternatives the former is preferable, 
but both are unwarranted. I have 
the less hesitation in making so 
slight a change in the reading of the 
chief Ms, because μετοξυ before and 
εδωκασιν after show that the scribe 
of A wrote carelessly at this point. 
Hilgenfeld (ed. 2), not knowing the 
reading of S, conjectured ἐπὶ δοκιμῇν, 
which he explains καὶ μεταξὺ 
(‘jam conditis ecclesiis’) ἐπὶ δοκιμῇ 
ἔδωκαν (rd ὄνομα τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς) ὅπως 
(‘hac ratione inducta’) κιτιλ., adding 
‘jam ecclesiarum ai ἀπαρχαὶ spiritu 
probati episcoporum et diaconorum 
munera susceperunt, post eos sola 
probationis ratione episcopi con- 
stituti sunt’. But notwithstanding 
the coincidence of this conjecture 
with S, I do not think that a reading 
so harsh can possibly stand. The 
word ἐπινομὴν is retained by Laurent 
who explains it ‘adsignatio muneri 
episcopalis’ (a meaning of ἐπινομῖ 
which though possible is unsup 
ported, and which eyen if allowab 







































XLIv] 


δεδώκασιν] εδωκασιν A; ἔδωκαν C. 
and similarly S inserts homines ex tis. 


in itself would be very awkward 
here); and in their first edition by 
Gebhardt and Harnack, where it is 
interpreted ‘dispositio, praeceptum’ 
(a meaning which would be adequate 
indeed, but which the word could 
not, I think, possibly have). In ed. 
2 however Harnack expresses a be- 
lief that the word is corrupt and 
suggests émPBodnv. Hagemann (Ré- 
mische Kirche p. 684) conjectures 
ἐπινομίν, ‘d. ἢ. wenn diese Form des 
Accusativs von émwopis nachgewiesen 
werden ko6nnte’; and Hort quite 
independently suggested to me ‘ ἐπὶ- 
νομίδα, or conceivably but improbably 
ἐπίνομιν, as we have both χάριτα and 
χάριν, morida and νῆστιν, κλεῖδα and 
κλεῖν", and refers to Philo de Creat. 
Princ. 4 (11. p. 363 M.) where Deu- 
teronomy is so called (comp. Quis 
767. div. 33, 51, 1. Pp. 495, 509). 
Donaldson conjectures ἐπίδομα ‘an 
addition’ (Zheol. Rev. Jan. 1877, p. 
45), and Lipsius ἐπιταγήν (Jen. Lit. 
13 Jan. 1877). 

The Latin quotation of Joannes 
Diaconus (I. p. 187) contains the words 
‘hanc formam tenentes apostoli etc.’, 
}and Card. Pitra (Spzcz2. Solesm. 1. Ὁ. 
293) considers that ‘forma’ here repre- 
Sents ἐπινομή (so too even Ewald 
Gesch. Vil. p. 269), congratulating 
himself that the sense of ἐπινομὴ is 
‘thus decided. A late Latin para- 
phrase would be worthless as an au- 
thority, even if this view of its mean- 
ing were correct. But a comparison of 
the order of the Latin with the original 
of Clement shows that the words mean 
‘the Apostles following this precedent 
set by Moses’, and that ‘forma’ there- 
fore has nothing to do with ἐπινομή. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


133 


PP \ \ > \ , e/ >\ 

pnuevous, Kai μεταξὺ ἐπιμονὴν δεδώκασιν ὅπως, ἐὰν 
~ / / / af 

κοιμηθῶσιν, διαδέξωνται ἕτεροι δεδοκιμασμένοι ἄνδρες 


4 κοιμηθῶσω A; τινες κοιμηθῶσιν C, 
dvdpes] AS; om, C. 


For edoxacw it is a question whe- 
ther we should read δεδώκασιν or 
ἔδωκαν. The former involves a less 
change, and the transition from the 
aorist (κατέστησαν) to the perfect 
(δεδώκασιν) may be explained by the 
fact that the consequences of this 
second act are permanent. 

4. κοιμηθῶσιν] sc. of προειρημένοι, 
i.e. the first generation of presbyters 
appointed bythe Apostles themselves; 
and αὐτῶν too will refer to these 
same persons. Rothe (l.c.) refers 
both to the Apostles themselves. 
He assumes Clement to be here de- 
scribing the establishment of episco- 
pacy properly so called, and supposes 
ἐπινομή, Which he translates ‘after- 
enactment’, to refer to a second 
Apostolic Council convened for this 
purpose. I have discussed this theory 
at length elsewhere (PAz/ippians p. 
199 sq). Of his interpretation of this 
particular passage it is enough to say 
that it interrupts the context with 
irrelevant matter. The Apostles, says 
Clement, first appointed approved 
persons to the ministry (καθίστανον 
δοκιμάσαντες ὃ 42), and afterwards 
(μεταξύ) provided for a succession so 
that vacancies by death should be 
filled by other approved men (ἕτεροι 
δεδοκιμασμένοι ἄνδρες). The presby- 
ters at Corinth, who had been rudely 
ejected from office, belonged to these 
two classes: some were appointed 
directly bythe Apostles (xaracradévras 
im ἐκείνων) ; others belonged to the 
second generation, having been ap- 
pointed by the persons thus immedi- 
ately connected with the Apostles 
(κατασταθέντας ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐλλογίμων 
ἀνδρῶν). 


134 


\ ~ 
τὴν λειτουργίαν αὐτῶν. 


ἐκείνων ἢ μεταξὺ ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐλλογίμων ἀνδρῶν, συνευ- 
δοκησάσης τῆς ἐκκλησίας πάσης, καὶ λειτουργήσαντας 
ἀμέμπτως τῷ ποιμνίῳ τοῦ Χριστοῦ μετὰ ταπεινοφρο- 
σύνης ἡσύχως καὶ ἀβαναύσως, μεμαρτυρημένους τε πολ- 5 
λοῖς χρόνοις ὑπὸ πάντων, τούτους οὐ δικαίως νομίζομεν 


2 μεταξὺ] μετοξυ Α. 
γήσανταΞ]) λιτουργησαντασ A. 
μένους] μεμαρτυρημενοισ A. 


I. τοὺς οὖν κατασταθέντας x.r.d.] 
This notice assists to determine the 
chronology of the epistle. Some of 
those appointed by the Apostles had 
died (οἱ προοδοιπορήσαντες), but others 
were still living (of κατασταθέντες ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνων). See the introduction, I. p. 
349. Here again μεταξὺ means ‘after- 
wards’, as above. 

2. συνευδοκησάσης x.t.r.] Wotton 
quotes Cyprian’s expression ‘plebis 
suffragium’ referring to the appoint- 
ment of Church officers, Zfist. lv 
(p. 243), Ixviii (p. 292). Add also 
the more important passage 2252. 
Ixvii (p. 288), where the part of the 
laity in such appointments is de- 
scribed. See also the account of the 
appointment of Polycarp to the epis- 
copate in the spurious Pionius, Viz. 
Polyc. 23. 

4. τῷ ποιμνίῳ rod Χριστοῦ] The 
phrase occurs again §§ 54, 57 (comp. 
§ 16). See also Acts xx. 28, 29, 1 Pet. 
v: 3°43. 

5. dBavatows |‘unassumingly’. The 
adjective occurs Afost. Const. ii. 3 
ἔστω δὲ εὔσπλαγχνος, ἀβάναυσος, aya- 
πητικός, Where again it refers to 
the qualifications for the ministry. 
See below ὃ 49 οὐδὲν βάναυσον ἐν 
ἀγάπῃ, οὐδὲν ὑπερήφανον, Clem. Alex. 
Paed. iii. 6 (p. 273) μεταδοτέον φιλαν- 
θρώπως, od βαναύσως οὐδὲ ἀλαζονικῶς, 
Job xli. 26 (Theod.) υἱοὶ βαναυσίας 
(Heb. ὑπ ‘pride, arrogance’). In 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


A Ss > 
Tous οὖν κατασταθέντας vr 


ἀνδρῶν] AC; add. ἐκλελεγμένους 8. 
5 ἀβαναύσως] ἀβανάσως C. 
τε] AC; om. 85. 


.- το ὩΣ 


[XLIv 









































3 λειτουρ- 
μεμαρτυρη- 
6 τούτου] AC; add. 


Arist. Eth. Nic. ii. 7, iv. 2, βαναυ- 
gia is the excess of μεγαλοπρέπεια 
‘lavish profusion’, the result of vz/- 
garity. Somewhat similar is the 
sense which the word has here and 
in the passages quoted, ‘ vulgar self- 
assertion’, 

8. ἀμέμπτως καὶ ὁσίως] So 1 Thess. 
li, 10. 

προσενεγκόντας τὰ δῶρα] What 
does Clement mean by sacrifices, by 
gifts (δῶρα) and offerings (προσφοράς)ν 
In what sense are the presbyters said 
to have presented or offered the gifts? 
The answers to these questions must 
be sought in the parallel passages ; — 
§ 18 θυσία τῷ Θεῷ πνεῦμα συντετριμμέ- 
νον, S$ 35, 36 θυσία αἰνέσεως δοξάσει 
με καὶ ἐκεῖ ὁδὸς 7) δείξω αὐτῷ τὸ σωτή- 
ριον τοῦ Θεοῦ: αὕτη ἡ ὁδός, ἀγαπητοί, 
ἐν ἡ εὕρομεν τὸ σωτήριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν 
Χριστὸν τὸν ἀρχιερέα τῶν προσφορῶν 
ἡμῶν, τὸν προστάτην καὶ βοηθὸν τῆς 
ἀσθενείας ἡμῶν, ὃ 41 ἕκαστος ὑμῶν, 
ἀδελφοί, ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ τάγματι εὐχαρισ- 
τείτω τῷ Θεῷ ἐν ἀγαθῇ συνειδήσει 
ὑπάρχων, μὴ παρεκβαίνων τὸν ὡρισμένον 
τῆς λειτουργίας αὐτοῦ κανόνα, ὃ 52 
θῦσον τῷ Θεῷ θυσίαν αἰνέσεως καὶ 
ὑπόδος τῷ ὑψίστῳ τὰς εὐχάς σου K.T.A. 
These passages are illustrated by 
Heb. xiii. 15, 16, δι’ αὐτοῦ οὖν (i.e. 
διὰ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως Ἰησοῦ, vv. 11, 12) 
ἀναφέρωμεν θυσίαν αἰνέσεως διὰ παν-᾿ 
τὸς τῷ Θεῷ, τουτέστιν, καρπὸν χειλέων. 
ὁμολογούντων τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ" τῆς 








XLIV] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


135 


ἀποβάλλεσθαι THs λειτουργίας. GuapTia yap οὐ μικρὰ 


~ / \ / 
ἡμῖν ἔσται, ἐὰν TOUS ἀμέμπτως καὶ ὁσίως προσενεγ- 


/ A ~~ ΄ > na > 7 7 
κόντας Ta Owpa τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἀποβάλωμεν. μακάριοι 


/ / / 
το οἱ προοδοιπορήσαντες πρεσβύτεροι, οἵτινες ἔγκαρπον 


\ > / \ ΄σ 
καὶ τελείαν ἔσχον τὴν ἀνάλυσιν" οὐ γὰρ εὐλαβοῦνται 


οὖν 8. 
in S. See the lower note. 
AS; ἐστίν C. 


δὲ εὐποιΐας καὶ κοινωνίας μὴ ἐπιλανθά- 
νεσθε, τοιαύταις γὰρ θυσίαις εὐαρεστεῖ- 
ται 6 Θεός, to which epistle Clement 
is largely indebted elsewhere. The 
sacrifices, offerings, and gifts there- 
fore are the prayers and thanks- 
givings, the alms, the eucharistic 
elements, the contributions to the 
agape, and so forth. See esp. Cost. 
Apost. ii. 25 ai τότε θυσίαι viv εὐχαὶ 
καὶ δεήσεις καὶ εὐχαριστίαι, ai τότε 
ἀπαρχαὶ καὶ δεκάται καὶ ἀφαιρέματα 
καὶ δῶρα νῦν προσφοραὶ αἱ διὰ τῶν 
ὁσίων ἐπισκόπων προσφερόμε- 
ναι Κυρίῳ x.t.A., § 27 προσήκει οὖν 
καὶ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, θυσίας ὑμῶν ἤτοι 
προσφορὰς τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ προσφέ- 
ρειν ὡς ἀρχιερεῖ κιτιλ., ὃ 34 τοὺς 
καρποὺς ὑμῶν καὶ τὰ ἔργα τῶν χειρῶν 
ὑμῶν εἰς εὐλογίαν ὑμῶν προσφέροντες 
αὐτῷ (SC. τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ)...τὰ δῶρα ὑμῶν 
διδόντες αὐτῷ ὡς ἱερεῖ Θεοῦ, ὃ 35 μη- 
κέτι ἐάσας ὑμᾶς (ὁ Θεός) θύειν ἄλογα 
ζῶα... .οὐ δήπου καὶ τῶν εἰσφορῶν ὑμᾶς 
ἠλευθέρωσεν ὧν ὀφείλετε τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν 
καὶ τῶν εἰς τοὺς δεομένους εὐποιϊῶν 
κιτιλ,, § 53 δῶρον δέ ἐστι Θεῷ ἡ ἑκάστου 
προσευχὴ καὶ εὐχαριστία. These pas- 
sages show in what sense the pres- 
byters might be said to ‘offer the 
gifts’. They led the prayers and 
thanksgivings of the congregation, 
they presented the alms and contri- 
butions to God and asked His bless- 
ing on them in the name of the 
whole body. Hence Clement is 
careful to insist (§ 40) that these of- 
ferings should be made at the right 


7 ἀποβάλλεσθαι] C; ἀποβαλεσθαι A. 
λειτουργίας] λιτουργιασ A. 
9 μακάριοι] AC; add. γὰρ 8. 


It is rendered by an active verb 
8 ἔσται} 


time and in the right place and 
through the right persons. The first 
day of the week had been fixed by 
Apostolic authority not only for com- 
mon prayer and breaking of bread 
(Acts xx. 7) but also for collecting 
alms (1 Cor. xvi. 2); and the pres- 
byters, as the officers appointed by 
the same authority, were the proper 
persons to receive and dispense the 
contributions. On the whole subject 
see Héfling die Lehre der dltesten 
Kirche vom Opfer etc. p. 8 sq (Er- 
langen 1851). 

10. ἔγκαρπον x.t.A.] The same com- 
bination of epithets occurs again ὃ 
56 ἔσται αὐτοῖς ἔγκαρπος καὶ τελεία ἡ 
πρὸς τὸν Θεὸν K.T.A. 

11. τελείαν] i.e. ‘in mature, ripe 
age’, so that it has borne fruit (ἔγκαρ- 
πον). Comp, the compound τελειο- 
καρπεῖν Which occurs several times in 
Theophrastus (e.g. Hist. PZ. i. 13. 4, 
Caus. Pi. iii. 6.9). The work of these 
presbyters had not, like those Corin- 
thian elders whose cause Clement 
pleads, been rudely interfered with 
and prematurely ended. 

τὴν ἀνάλυσιν] ‘their departure’; 
comp. Phil. i. 23,2 Tim. iv. 6. The 
metaphor seems to be taken from the 
breaking up of an encampment (see 
Philippians \,c.), so that it is well 
suited to προοδοιπορήσαντες. 

οὐκ εὐλαβοῦνται μή] ‘they have no 
Sear lest’: comp. 1 Mace. iii. 30, xii. 
40 (v.L). In Acts xxiii, 10 εὐλαβη- 
θεὶς is a false reading. 


136 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XLIV 


, \ / \ -~ ~ 
μή τις αὐτοὺς μεταστήση ἀπὸ τοῦ ἱδρυμένον αὐτοῖς 


, 
τοπου. 


eam \ > ε ΄ μι 
ὁρῶμεν γὰρ ὅτι ἐνίους ὑμεῖς μετηγάγετε καλῶς 


/ “ ΄ 
πολιτευομένους ἐκ τῆς ἀμέμπτως αὐτοῖς Τ᾿ τετιμημένης tT 


λειτουργίας. 


XLV. φιλόνεικοι ἔστε, ἀδελφοί, καὶ ζηλωταὶ περὶ 5 


΄ ’ὔ 
τῶν ἀνηκόντων εἰς σωτηρίαν. 


, / > A 
ἐνκεκυῴατε εἰς τας 


γραφάς, τὰς ἀληθεῖς, τὰς [διὰ] τοῦ πνεύματος τοῦ 


2 μετηγάγετε] μεταγαγετε Α. 


3 πολιτευομένους] AS; πολιτευσαμένους C, 


ἀμέμπτως] AC; om. 8, perhaps from a feeling that it was not appropriate with 


τετιμημένης. 
tore) εσται A. 


S inserts a negative. See the lower note. 
ras γραφάς] A; ras ἱερὰς γραφάς CS. This is probably 


C; el ἐγκεκύφατε S. 


taken from § 53 ἐπίστασθε τὰς ἱερὰς γραφὰς.. καὶ ἔγκεκύφατε κ.τ.λ. 
No better way of filling the lacuna in A 


τοῦ] CS; def. A: see the lower note. 


2. τόπου] On the place of the de- 
parted see the note on ὃ 5. There is 
here also an allusion to the other 
sense, ‘office’; see § 40 (with the 
note). 

3. Ὑ{τετιμημένης 1] ‘respected by 
them’. So all the authorities. But 
I am disposed to read τετηρημένης : 
comp. I Thess. v. 23 ἀμέμπτως. ..τηρη- 
θείη. My emendation was accepted 
by Gebhardt (ed. 1), and indeed it 
seems to be required notwithstand- 
ing the coincidence of our existing 
authorities. In their second edition 
however Gebhardt and Harnack re- 
turn to τετιμημένης, explaining it ‘offi- 
cio quo inculpabiliter ac legitime 
honorati erant’, and supposing that 
τιμᾶν τινί τι Can mean ‘aliquid alicui 
tamquam honorem tribuere’. But 
the passages quoted by them, which 
seem to favour this meaning, Pind. 
Οἱ [l. Pyth.] iv. 270 Παιάν τέ σοι τιμᾷ 
φάος, Soph. Ant. 514 ἐκείνῳ δυσσεβῆ 
τιμᾷς χάριν [comp. also “47. 675], are 
highly poetical. Moreover even in 
these the expression must be referred 
to the original meaning of τιμᾶν, ‘ to 
respect (and so ‘to scrupulously ob- 


4 Aecroupylas] λιτουργειασ A. 
6 τῶν ἀνηκόντων] C (as I had conjectured); ...avyxovrwy A, 


5 Φιλόνεικοι] φιλονικοι A, 
ἐνκεκύφατε] εν....... τε A; ἐγκεκύφατε 


7 τὰς διὰ 


serve’) a thing for a person’ (comp. 
e.g. Eur. Orest. 828 πατρῴαν τιμῶν 
χάριν with Soph. Avz.l.c.); and thus 
they afford no countenance for a pas- 
sive use τιμᾶσθαί τινι ‘to be bestowed 
as an honour on a person’. The in- 
stances of the passive, which are 
quoted in their note, all make against 
this interpretation ; e.g. Euseb. H. £. 
X. 4 yepapa φρονήσει παρὰ Θεοῦ τετι- 
μημένε, Const. Ap. ii. 26 ὁ ἐπίσκοπος 
«Θεοῦ ἀξίᾳ τετιμημένος. If τετιμημέ- 
νης can stand at all here, it must 
mean ‘respected’, i.e. ‘duly dis- 
charged’. Hilgenfeld (ed. 2) speaks 
favourably of τετηρημένης. 

XLV. ‘Your zeal is misplaced, 
my brethren. Search the Scriptures. 
You will indeed find that God’s ser- 
vants have been persecuted, but their 
persecutors are always the impious 
and unholy. Did pious men shut up 


Daniel in the lions’ den? Or cast — 


the three children into the fire? This — 
was the deed of the wicked who knew © 
not that God mightily shields His — 
faithful people. And so He has crown- — 
ed the sufferers with everlasting re- — 
nown and honour.’ 





XLV] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


137 


4 \ »" \ 
ἁγίου" ἐπίστασθε ὅτι οὐδὲν ἄδικον οὐδὲ παραπεποιη- 


/ -~ 
μένον γέγραπται ἐν αὐταῖς. 


> ε / / 
οὐχ εὑρήσετε δικαίους 


5 3 ~ 3 / 
ἀποβεβλημένους ἀπὸ ὁσίων ἀνδρῶν: ἐδιώχθησαν δί- 

> ε 3 \ 
καιοι, GAN ὑπὸ ἀνόμων" ἐφυλακίσθησαν, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ 


> / 2 / ε \ / 3 / 
ἀνοσίων: ἐλιθάσθησαν ὑπὸ παρανόμων: ἀπεκταάνθησαν 


Ἁ ΄ Dd Fg ra 
ὑπὸ τῶν μιαρὸν Kal ἄδικον ζῆλον ἀνειληφότων. ταῦτα 


occurred to me in my first edition than τὰς τοῦ. 


I saw that the ῥήσεις of all previous 


editors could not stand, as the usual expression is either πνεύματος ἁγίου or τοῦ 


πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου. 


ς 


νόμων] C; ὑποπα. .νομων A; ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ παρανόμων S: see I. p. 142. 


© 


τῶν] A; ἀπὸ τῶν C; ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ (or ἀπὸ) τῶν S. 866 the last note. 
(as I had conjectured, ed. 1); μιαρῶν AS. 


143. ταῦτα] AC; καὶ ταῦτα 8. 


5. Φιλόνεικοι ἔστε κιτ.λ.] By read- 
ing τῶν ἀνηκόντων, instead of μὴ ἀνη- 
κόντων (by which previous editors 
supplied the lacuna of A), I changed 
ἔστε from an indicative to an impera- 
tive; ‘Contend zealously, if you will, 
but let your zeal be directed to things 
pertaining to salvation’ ; comp. Gal. 
iv. 17, 18, 1 Pet. iii. 13. There is a 
Θεοῦ ζῆλος, and in some sense also a 
Θεοῦ φιλονεικία. My conjecture was 
approved by Tischendorf and ac- 
cepted by Gebhardt, and is now con- 
firmed by C. S translates ἔστε as an 
indicative, and is obliged in conse- 
quence to insert a negative with ἀνη- 
κόντων, thus falling into the same trap 
as the editors. Compare Barnab. 
§ 17 ἐλπίζει μου ἡ Ψυχὴ τῇ ἐπιθυμίᾳ 
μου μὴ παραλελοιπέναι τι τῶν ἀνηκόντων 
εἰς σωτηρίαν. For ἀνήκειν εἰς see also 
Ign. Philad. 1, Smyrn.8, Polyc. Phil. 
13. For τὰ ἀνήκοντα with a dative 
see §§ 35, 62. 

6. ἐνκεκύφατε] See the note above 
ὃ 40. 

7. τὰς διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος] The emen- 
_ dation τὰς τοῦ πνεύματος, which I pro- 
_ posed somewhat hesitatingly, was 
adopted by Gebhardt in place of 
the ῥήσεις πνεύματος of previous edi- 





8 ἐπίστασθε] επιτασθαι A. 
Ὁ: εὑρήσετε] C; ..«υρησεται A; imvenitis (a present) S. 


9. γέγραπται] A; γέγραπτο 
12 ὑπὸ παρα- 
13 ὑπὸ 
μιαρὸν] C 
ἄδικον] AC; ἀδίκων S: see I. p. 


tors. It is confirmed to a greater 
extent than I could have hoped by 
CS, which have ras διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος. 
It is difficult however to see how 
there was room for so many letters 
in the lacuna of A; for the space 
left for τασδιατου is at most half a 
letter more than is taken up in the 
next line by οτιουδ, i.e. six letters. 
Since the lacunz here are at the 
beginnings, not (as commonly) at the 
ends of the lines, there can be no un- 
certainty about the spaces. I have 
therefore placed διὰ in brackets. 

8. παραπεποιημένον] ‘ counterfeit, 
spurious’. For the metaphor see 
Basil. (Ὁ) zz saz. i. 22 (I. p. 416 E) 
μήπου κίβδηλος 7 δραχμή, τουτέστι, μή- 
που δόγμα παραπεποιημένον, with the 
whole context in which the metaphor 
is developed. So παραποιεῖν Justin 
Dial. 69, 115, παραποίησις Iren. i. 9. 2. 

11. ἐφυλακίσθησαν)] Many editors 
read ἐνεφυλακίσθησαν, but this is open 
to objection, for there seems to be 
no authority for a verb ἐμφυλακίζω ; 
and indeed such a compound is hard- 
ly possible, for φυλακίζω is derived 
not from φυλακὴ but from φύλαξ. 

13. μιαρὸν] The emendation (μιαρὸν 
for μιαρων) which I made in my first 


138 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [xLv 


πάσχοντες εὐκλεώς ἤνεγκαν. Ti γὰρ εἴπωμεν, ἀδελ- 
φοί; Δανιὴλ ὑπὸ τῶν φοβουμένων τὸν Θεὸν ἐβλήθη εἰς 
λάκκον λεόντων; ἢ ’Avavias καὶ ᾿Αζαρίας καὶ Μισαὴλ 
ὑπὸ τῶν θρησκευόντων τὴν μεγαλοπρεπῆ καὶ ἔνδοξον 
θρησκείαν τοῦ ὑψίστου κατείρχθησαν εἰς κάμινον πυρός; 
μηθαμώς τοῦτο γένοιτο. 


οι 


/ 53 ε a / 
τίνες οὖν οἱ ταῦτα δράσαν- 
᾿ ,ὔ ὔ ~ 
τες; οἱ OTUYNTOL Kal πάσης κακίας πλήρεις εἰς τοσοῦτο 
᾿ , ~ ed \ > een 4 \ > , , 
ἐξήρισαν θυμοῦ ὥστε τοὺς ἐν ὁσίᾳ καὶ ἀμώμῳ προθέσει 
΄σ ~ 7 ~ \ 
δουλεύοντας TH Θεῷ εἰς αἰκίαν trepiBareivt, μὴ εἰδότες 


I εὐκλεῶς] ευὐκλαιωσ A. 


εἴπωμεν] εἰπομεν A; εἴποιμεν C; dicam (εἴπω) 8. 


5 τοῦ ὑψίστου) AC. The present text of S has NW rod Κυρίου, but this is 


doubtless a corruption of NOD τοῦ ὑψίστου. 
ἡ στυγητοὶ] CS; στυητοι A. 
the last syllable of the preceding word -ει8). 


σαν C, 


edition is now confirmed by C. For 
the confusion of o and @ in A com- 
pare εἰπομεν just below, and see above, 
I. p. 120. Here the immediate neigh- 
bourhood of τῶν would suggest the 
change to a transcriber. Compare 
§ I puapas καὶ ἀνοσίου στάσεως, ὃ 3 
ὥχλον ἄδικον καὶ ἀσεβῆ ἀνειληφότας. 

5. θρησκείανἍ The word is here 
used in its correct sense (see Trench 
NV. T. Syn. ist ser. ὃ xlviii); for the 
incident turns on an act of external 
worship. 

6. μηθαμῶς x.7-r.] 1.6. ‘Let us not 
entertain the thought, let us not so 
pervert facts’. _ 

8. ἐξήρισαν)] ‘persisted in strife’. 
So Plut. Pomp. ὃ 56 οὐκ ἐξερίσας ἀλλ᾽ 
οἷον ἡττηθείς, Appian. Bell. Civ. ii. 
151 φιλονεικότεροι δὲ τοῖς ἐξερίζουσιν 
ὄντες. So too ἐξεριστής Eur. Suppl. 
894, ἐξεριστικός Diog. Laert. x. 143. 
For the whole expression comp. § 1 
els τόσουτον ἀπονοίας ἐξέκαυσαν. Hilgen- 
feld reads ἐξηρέθισαν, but this, besides 
being unsupported and unnecessary, 
would give a wrong meaning, for épe- 
θίζω, ἐξερεθίζω, are transitive. 

9. περιβαλεῖν] ‘to drive round’, 


κατείρχθησαν] A; καθείρχθη- 
els] AS; om. C (owing to 
9 περιβαλεῖν] AC; jaciant S. 


If the reading be correct, the idea of 
the preposition (as in περιπίπτειν) 
must be ‘sudden and complete 
change’. But I cannot find any 
parallel; for in Eur. He/. 312 φόβος 
γὰρ és τὸ δεῖμα περιβαλών μ᾽ ἄγει the 
meaning of the word is wholly differ- 
ent. Elsewhere (see Schweighauser 
Lex. Polyb. s.v. περιβάλλεσθαι) περι- 
βάλλειν has been substituted for mapa- 
βάλλειν, and this may possibly have 
been the case here. So Heb. xiii. 9 
περιφέρεσθε and παραφέρεσθε are con- 
fused. Comp. ὃ 55 παρέβαλεν. Our 
Greek Mss however are agreed in © 
reading περιβαλεῖν here. 

10. ὑπέρμαχος κιτ.λ.] Ὑπέρμαχος is — 
said of God, 2 Macc. xiv. 34 (comp. — 
Wisd. x. 20): ὑπερασπιστὴς is fre- 
quently so applied (especially in con- — 
nexion with βοηθός), Ps. xviii. 2, xxviii. 
7, 8, xxxiii. 20, cxiv. 17, 18, 19, etc.; 
comp. ὃ 56 πόσος ὑπερασπισμός ἐστιν. 

11. ἐν καθαρᾷ συνειδήσει] The same — 
expression occurs I Tim. iii. 9, 2 Tim. — 
i. 3; comp. Ign. 7ra/Z. 7. 

παναρέτῳ] See the note on § I. 

14. ἔγγραφοι] ‘recorded, notable, 


famous’. The word occurs also in a 





XLvI] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


139 


« « 7 , > a 
ὅτι ὁ ὕψιστος ὑπέρμαχος Kal ὑπερασπιστής ἐστιν τῶν 
΄ ’ , ΄ ’ , 
ἐν καθαρᾷ συνειδήσει λατρευόντων τῷ παναρέτῳ ὀνο- 
~ Ὄ \ I -“ 2. 
ματι αὐτοῦ: w ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 
7 
any. 
\ > / > , / \ 7 > / 
τιμὴν ἐκληρονόμησαν, ἐπήρθησαν τε Kal ἔγγραφοι ἐγε- 
\ ΄ ΄- ~ / ΄ > Ἁ 
νοντὸ ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐν τῷ μνημοσύνῳ αὐτῶν εἰς τοὺς 
/ 
any. 


᾽ὔ / ’ 
οἱ δὲ ὑπομένοντες ἐν πεποιθήσει δόξαν καὶ 


~~ ~~ / 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 





XLVI. 


/ SY ε / “ \ 
Τοιούτοις οὖν ὑποδείγμασιν κολληθῆναι καὶ 


ἡμᾶς δεῖ, ἀδελφοί. γέγραπται γάρ" Κολλᾶοθε τοῖς ἁγίοιο, 


12 τῶν αἰώνων] S; τωναι.... A; om. Ὁ, See above, § 32. 


14 ἔγγραφοι] 


C (as conjectured by Laurent p. 424); ἐπαῴφροι A. For ἔγγραφοι ἐγένοντο S has 


scriptt sunt. 
17 οὖν] AC; om. 8. 


fragment ascribed to our Clement in 
Joann. Damasc. Eclog. i. 49 (11. p. 752 
ed. Lequien) ὅθεν ἔγγραφον περὶ αὐτοῦ 
(i.e. τοῦ ᾿Αβραάμ) ἱστορίαν γενέσθαι 
φκονόμησεν ; but see especially Herm. 
Sim. V. 3 ἔσται ἡ θυσία σου δεκτὴ παρὰ 
τῷ Θεῷ καὶ ἔγγραφος ἔσται ἡ νηστεία 
αὕτη (comp. Vis. i. 3 ἐνγραφήσονται 
εἰς τὰς βίβλους τῆς ζωῆς), Apost. Can. 
§ 19 ὁ γὰρ ἐμπιπλῶν ὦτα μὴ νοοῦντος 
ἔγγραφος λογισθήσεται παρὰ τῷ Θεῷ, 
§ 29 ὁ γὰρ θησαυρίζων ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ 
ἔγγραφος ἐργάτης λογισθήσεται παρὰ 
τῷ Θεῷ (Lagarde’s Rel. Fur. Eccles. 
pp. 78, 79, see Hilgenfeld Mov. Test. 
extr. Can. IV. pp. 102, 104; this 
writing elsewhere bears traces of the 
influence of Clement’s epistle, e.g. in 
§ 23 which reproduces the language 
of Clem. § 40). It is however un- 
necessary to substitute ὑπὸ for ἀπὸ 
with Hilgenfeld; e.g. in this very 
chapter we have ἀποβεβλημένους ἀπὸ 
ὁσίων ἀνδρῶν: see also 1 Cor. i. 30, 
James i. 13, with the examples in 
Winer ὃ xlvii. p. 389. The phrase 
τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτοῦ, Or αὐτῶν, is com- 
mon in the ΧΧ, It might be a 
question here whether we should 
read αὐτοῦ or αὐτῶν, but ὃ 26 τὸ μνη- 


15 αὐτῶν] A; αὐτοῦ CS. 
18 Κολλᾶσθε] κολλασθαι A. 


16 ἀμήν] AC; om. S. 


μόσυνον αὐτῶν (and indeed the general 
use of the genitive with μνημόσυνον in 
the Lxx of the persons whose memo- 
rial is preserved) points distinctly to 
αὐτῶν. 

XLVI. ‘Copy these bright exam- 
ples. Cleave to the righteous, to the 
elect of God. To what end are these 
strifes and divisions? Have you for- 
gotten that, as there is one God, one 
Christ, one Spirit, so also there is one 
body? Would you rend asunder its 
limbs? Remember how the Lord de- 
nounces the man through whom the 
offences shall come. Already have 
your feuds been a scandal to many, 
and yet they continue.’ 

18. Κολλᾶσθε x.7.A.] This quota- 
tion is no where found in the Old 
Testament. The nearest approach is 
Ecclus. vi. 34 τίς σοφός ; αὐτῷ mpoo- 
κολλήθητι. Similar words however 
occur in Hermas Vs. iii. 6 μηδὲ κολ- 
λώμενοι τοῖς ἁγίοις, Szm. vill. 8 of ἐν 
ταῖς πραγματείαις ἐμπεφυρμένοι καὶ μὴ 
κολλώμενοι τοῖς ἁγίοις, Sim. ix. 20 
οὐ κολλῶνται τοῖς δούλοις τοῦ Θεοῦ. 
It is perhaps another of those apocry- 
phal quotations to which Photius 
alludes (see the notes on §§ 8, 13, 17, 


140 


ὅτι οἱ KOAA@MENO! AYTOIC APIACOHCONTAI. 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XLVI 


/ 
Kal πάλιν ἐν 


U4 ‘ ‘ > ' > fal + 
ἑτέρῳ τόπῳ λέγει" Metd ἀνδρὸς ἀθῴου ἀθῷος ἔσῃ καὶ 


μετὰ ἐκλεκτοῦ ἐκλεκτὸς 


οτρέψειο. 


Ἁ - \ ΄- nn 
εἰσὶν δὲ οὗτοι ἐκλεκτοὶ τοῦ Θεοῦ. 


θυμοὶ 


ὑμῖν ; 


Εἰ 
ἔσῃ 


KAl μετὰ cTpeBAOY διὰ- 


~ > ΄ / Ps 
κολληθῶμεν οὖν τοῖς ἀθῴοις καὶ δικαίοις 


“Iva τί Epes καὶ 5 


καὶ διχοστασίαι καὶ σχίσματα πόλεμός τε ἐν 
ΠῚ > Δ Ψ \ a7 \ cd \ " ὦ 
ἢ οὐχὶ ἕνα Θεὸν ἔχομεν καὶ ἕνα Χριστὸν καὶ ἕν 


6 πόλεμός τε] AC; S has the plural (as determined by ribui) πόλεμοί τε and 
adds et contentiones δ ΓΝ], which probably represents καὶ μάχαι, since the same 
word elsewhere stands for μάχαι (e.g. James iv. 1, Pesh., Hel.; 2 Tim. ii. 23, 


23, 29); or possibly Clement is giving 
from memory the sense of some ca- 
nonical text or texts. This passage 
is imitated by Clem. Alex. Strom. 
v. 8 (p. 677) γέγραπται δέ, Mera ἀνδρὸς 
ἀθῴου ἀθῷος ἔσῃ καὶ μετὰ ἐκλεκτοῦ 
ἐκλεκτὸς ἔσῃ καὶ μετὰ στρεβλοῦ δια- 
στρέψεις" κολλᾶσθαι οὖν τοῖς ἁγίοις 
προσήκει ὅτι οἱ κολλώμενοι αὐτοῖς ἁγιασ- 
θήσονται, where the change of form 
suggests that the Alexandrian Cle- 
ment did not recognise the source of 
the quotation in his Roman name- 
sake. Part of this passage is loosely 
quotedalsoby Nicon thus: κολληθῶμεν 
οὖν τοῖς ἀθῴοις καὶ δικαίοις" εἰσὶ δὲ οὗ- 
τοι ἐκλεκτοὶ τοῦ Θεοῦ" γέγραπται yap" 
Κολλᾶσθαι (κολλᾶσθε) τοῖς ἁγίοις, ὅτι 
οἱ κολλώμενοι αὐτοῖς ἁγιασθήσονται (see 
above ὃ 14. .- 

2. Μετὰ ἀνδρὸς x.r.A.] An accurate 
quotation from Ps. xviii. 25, 26: but 
the application of the passage by S. 
Clement to the influence of good or 
bad companionship is wholly wrong. 
The ‘Thou’ of the Psalmist is God 
Himself, and the passage teaches 
that He deals with men according to 
their characters. 

5. ἔρεις x.t.A.] The words are ar- 
ranged in an ascending scale; see 
the notes on Galatians v. 20,21. Θυ- 
pot are ‘outbursts of wrath,’ as in Lc. 
Διχοστασία is weaker than σχίσμα, as 


it is stronger than στάσις ὃ 51: as 
στάσις developes into διχοστασία, so 
διχοστασία widens into σχίσμα. 

6. πόλεμός τε ἐν ὑμῖν] comp. James 
iv. I. 

7. οὐχὶ ἕνα Θεὸν κιτ.λ.] From Ephes. 
iv. 4 sq ἐν σῶμα καὶ ἕν πνεῦμα, 
καθὼς καὶ ἐκλήθητε ἐν μιᾷ ἐλπίδι τῆς 
κλήσεως ὑμῶν εἷς Κύριος, μία πίσ- 
τις, ἐν βάπτισμα, εἷς Θεός...ἑνὶ δὲ 
ἑκάστῳ ἡμῶν ἐδόθη ἡ χάρις KA; 
comp. I Cor. viii. 6, xii. 12 sq. See 
also Hermas Sim. ix. 13 ἔσονται εἰς 
ἐν πνεῦμα, εἰς ἕν σῶμα. «καὶ ἦν αὐτῶν 
ἐν πνεῦμα καὶ ἕν σῶμα, ix. 18 ἔσται ἡ 
ἐκκλησία τοῦ Θεοῦ ἕν “σῶμα, μία φρόνη- 
σις, εἷς νοῦς, μία πίστις, μία ἀγάπη, 
Ign. Magn. 7. 

This mention of Θεός, Χριστός, 
πνεῦμα, has a parallel in the reference 
to the Trinity quoted by S. Basil (de 
Spir. Sanct. xxix, 111. p. 16) as from 
our Clement, but not found in our MS 
and probably belonging to the lacuna 
from ὃ 58, (ἢ yap ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ζῇ ὁ Κύριος 
Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον. 
Owing to this parallel, I have taken ἕν 
πνεῦμα as an accusative and connect- 
ed it with the preceding words, rather 
than as a nominative, in which case 
it would be attached to the following 
clause, καὶ pia κλῆσις ἐν Χριστῷ; but — 
the construction is doubtful. The — 
construction and punctuation has — 





ΧΙ] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


141 


΄ ΄ , \ > θὲ 249 ε ΕΝ \ , 
σνευμὰ τῆς χαριτος TO εκχυ εν ἐφ μας. Kat μιὰ 


~ ΄ ’ \ A 
κλῆσις ἐν Χριστῷ; iva τί διέλκομεν Kal διασπῶμεν τὰ 


’ ΄- ΄σ \ / \ A “ \ 
10 μέλη τοῦ Χριστοῦ, καὶ στασιάζομεν πρὸς TO σῶμα TO 


ἴδ Α 3 / > / > / 6 / 7 
tOLOV, καὶ εἰς TOTAVTHV ATOVOLAV EPXOME a WOTE εἐπι- 


λαθέσθαι ἡμᾶς ὅτι μέλη ἐσμὲν ἀλλήλων; μνήσθητε 
τῶν λόγων ᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν" εἶπεν γάρ" ΟΥδὶ 


Tit. iii. 9, Hel.). 


The connecting particles in the Greek are favourable to such 


an addition; but it is suspicious, as being perhaps borrowed from James iv. 1. 


9 διέλκομεν) AS; διέλκωμεν C. 
ἡμῶν ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ CS. 


been confirmed by the Syriac, since 
I first proposed it. 

12. μέλη ἐσμὲν] Rom. xii. 5 of πολλοὶ 
ἕν σῶμά ἐσμεν ἐν Χριστῷ, τὸ δὲ καθ᾽ 
εἷς ἀλλήλων μέλη. 

13. Ovaix.r.A.] Twodifferent sayings 
of our Lord are here combined. The 
first is recorded in Matt. xxvi. 24, 
Mark xiv. 21, οὐαὶ δὲ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ 
ἐκείνῳ δι᾿ οὗ 6 υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου παρα- 
δίδοται" καλὸν ἦν αὐτῷ εἰ οὐκ ἐγεννήθη 
ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐκεῖνος; and more briefly 
in Luke xxii. 22, πλὴν οὐαὶ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ 
ἐκείνῳ δ οὗ παραδίδοται. The second 
runs in Matt. xviii. 6, 7, ὃς δ᾽ ἂν σκαν- 
δαλίσῃ ἕνα τῶν μικρῶν τούτων τῶν 
πιστευόντων εἰς ἐμέ, συμφέρει αὐτῷ ἵνα 
κρεμασθῇ μύλος ὀνικὸς περὶ τὸν τρά- 
χῆλον αὐτοῦ καὶ καταποντισθῇ ἐν τῷ 
πελάγει τῆς θαλάσσης. ...οὐαὶ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ 
δύ οὗ τὸ σκάνδαλον ἔρχεται: in Mark 
ix. 42, ὃς ἂν ox. & τ. μ. τ. τ. π. εἰς 
ἐμέ, καλόν ἐστιν αὐτῷ μᾶλλον εἰ περί- 
κειται μ. Ov. π. τ. TP. αὐτοῦ καὶ βέβληται 
εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν: in Luke xvii. 1, 2, 
ἀνένδεκτόν ἐστιν τοῦ τὰ σκάνδαλα μὴ 
ἐλθεῖν, πλὴν οὐαὶ 8’ οὗ ἔρχεται" λυσι- 
τελεῖ αὐτῷ εἰ λίθος μυλικὸς περίκειται 
π. τ. τρ. αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔρριπται εἰς τὴν 
θάλασσαν, ἣ ἵνα σκανδαλίσῃ τῶν μικρῶν 
τούτων ἕνα. Hermas Vis. iv. 2 has 
οὐαὶ τοῖς ἀκούσασιν τὰ ῥήματα ταῦτα καὶ 
παρακούσασιν᾽ αἱρετώτερον ἦν αὐτοῖς τὸ 
μὴ γεννηθῆναι : and in Clem. Hom. 
xii. 29 a saying of our Lord is quoted, 


13 Ἰησοῦ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν] A; τοῦ κυρίου 


τὰ ἀγαθὰ ἐλθεῖν δεῖ, μακάριος δὲ δὲ οὗ 
ἔρχεται. ὁμοίως καὶ τὰ κακὰ ἀνάγκη 
ἐλθεῖν, οὐαὶ δὲ δι’ οὗ ἔρχεται. 8. Cle- 
ment here may be quoting from our 
canonical gospels (confusing them 
together), or from oral tradition, or 
possibly (though this seems the least 
probable supposition) from some 
written account no longer extant, e.g. 
the Gospel of the Hebrews. The 
first solution presents no difficulties; 
for the insertion of 7 ἕνα τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν 
μου σκανδαλίσαι is not a more violent 
change than is found in many of his 
Old Testament quotations; e.g. the 
perversion of Is. lx. 17 at the end of 
§ 42. See also the fusion of different 
passages in §§ 18, 26, 29, 32, 35, 39, 
50, 52, 53. The quotation of Clem. 
Alex. Strom. iii. 18 (p. 561) is not an 
independent authority, for it is evi- 
dently taken from the Roman Cle- 
ment. 

I have no doubt that the Syriac 
has preserved the right reading ; and 
this for three reasons. (1) This 
reading is farther from the language 
of the canonical Gospels and there- 
foremore likely to have been changed; 
(2) Clement of Alexandria, Strom. 
iii. 18 (p. 561), so read the passage in 
the Roman Clement ; (3) The word 
διαστρέψαι explains the sequel τὸ 
σχίσμα ὑμῶν πολλοὺς διέστρεψεν (‘per- 
verted not one, but many’), it being 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [XLVI 


142 


“ > , > , re 3 > > > Ἂ 
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐκείνῳ: κἀλὸν HN δὐτῷ εἰ οὐκ ἐγεννήθη, H 


ῃ 
a ἮΝ 


ἕνὰ τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν MOY οκὰνδδλίοδι" κρεῖττον HN δἀὐτῷ 
περιτεθῆνδι μύλον Kal κατὰ ποντιοθῆνδι εἰς τὴν θἄλδοοδν, 
ENA τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν MOY AlacTpéyal τὸ σχίσμα ὑμών 
πολλοὺς διέστρεψεν, πολλοὺς εἰς ἀθυμίαν ἔβαλεν, πολ- 5. 


A > ’ \ / ε ΄ 3 / \ 
λοὺς εἰς δισταγμον, τοὺς TavTas ἡμᾶς εἰς λύπην" καὶ 


~ > / 
ἐπίμονος ὑμῶν ἐστιν ἡ στασις. 


1 otk] A; μὴ Ο. 


μου σκανδαλίσαι AC. See the lower note. 


πάντας 8. ἡμᾶς] AS; ὑμᾶς C. 

after Clement’s manner to take up 
and comment on a leading word in 
his quotations; e.g. $14 ἀνθρώπῳ 
elpHNiIkg followed by § 15 KoAAn- 
θῶμεν τοῖς per εὐσεβείας εἰρηνεύ- 
ουσιν, § 27 ὧν οὐχὶ AKOYONTAI 
followed by ὃ 28 πάντων οὖν βλεπο- 
μένων καὶ ἀκουομένων, ΖοἐΓΕΝΗΘΗ 
μερὶς Kypfoy...aria Ariwn fol- 
lowed by ὃ 30 ‘Ayiov οὖν μερίς, ὃ 
300 edc...AfAwcin χἄριν followed 
by οἷς ἡ χάρις ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ δέδοται, 
§ 34 dca ἡτοίμδοεν τοῖο ὑπο- 
MENOYCIN AYTON followed by § 35 
τίνα οὖν dpa ἐστὶν τὰ ἑτοιμαζόμενα 
τοῖς ὑπομένουσιν; ὃ 35 dAdc A 
λείξω aYT@ τὸ CWTHPION TOY 
Ocoy followed by ὃ 36 αὕτη ἡ ὁδὸς... 
ἐν ἡ εὕρομεν τὸ σωτήριον ἡμῶν, 
§ 36 ewe ἂν θῶ Toye ἐχθρούς 
κιτιλ. followed by τίνες οὖν οἱ ἐχθροί, 
§ 46 (just above) μετὰ ANApOc 
ἀθῴογΥ ἀθῷος ἔσῃ Kal μετὰ 
ἐκλεκτοῦ ἐκλεκτὸς ἔσῃ followed 
by κολληθῶμεν οὖν τοῖς ἀθῴοις... 
εἰσὶν δὲ οὗτοι ἐκλεκτοὶ τοῦ Θεοῦ, ὃ 
48 ἀνοίξατέ μοι πύλδο λικὰιο- 
cYNHC κιτιλι followed by πολλῶν οὖν 
πυλῶν ἀνεῳγυιῶν ἡ ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ 
αὕτη ἐστίν, § 50 ὧν APEOHCAN al 
ἀνολλίδι «TA. followed by ὃ 51 ὅσα 
οὖν παρεπέσαμεν.. ἀξιώσωμεν ἀφ εθῆ- 
ναι ἡμῖν, ὃ 57 KATACKHNOCE! ἐπ᾽ 
ἐλπίλι πεποιθώο followed by ὃ 


4 τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν μου διαστρέψαι] S Clem; τῶν μικρῶν 


6 τοὺς πάντας] AC; τοὺς δὲ 
11 αὐτοῦ τε... Απολλώ] A; ἑαυτοῦ καὶ 


58 ἵνακατασκηνώσωμεν πεποιθότες 
κιτλ. I have collected these ex- 
amples, because this characteristic 
determines the readings in three 
passages of interest (here and §§ 35, 
57; comp. also § 51), where there are 
variations, 

6. δισταγμόν] The word is rare, 
but occurs in Hermas Szm. ix, 28, 
Plut. Mor. 214 F. 

XLVII. ‘Read the epistle which 
Paul the Apostle wrote to you long 
ago. See how he condemns strife and 
party spirit in you. Yet then you 
had this excuse, that you chose as 


‘leaders Apostles and Apostolic men. 


Now even this palliation of your 
offence is wanting. It is sad indeed 
that two or three ringleaders should 
sully the fair fame of the Corinthian 
Church and bring dishonour on the 
name of Christ.’ 

8. τὴν ἐπιστολὴν] It must not be 
inferred from this expression that Cle- 
ment was unacquainted with the 2nd 
Epistle to the Corinthians; for exactly 
in the same way Irenzus (i. 8. 2) 
writes ἐν τῇ πρὸς Κορινθίους (where the — 
present Latin text specifies ‘in prima — 
ad Corinthios epistola’), and again — 
(iv. 27. 3) ‘in epistola quae est δά 
Corinthios’, and (iv. 27. 4) quotes 
2 Thessalonians as ‘ea quae est δᾶ 
Thessalonicenses epistola’. So also 











XLVI] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS, 


143 


XLVII. ’AvadaBere τὴν ἐπιστολὴν τοῦ μακαρίου 


΄σ΄ > / / ΄σ ~ > ΄σ ΄σ 
Παύλου τοῦ ἀποστόλου. τί πρῶτον ὑμῖν ἐν ἀρχή τοῦ 


᾿ Γι “- , 
ο εὐαγγελίου ἔγραψεν; ἐπ᾽ ἀληθείας πνευματικῶς ἐπέ- 


~ > ~ \ ~ / 
στειλεν ὑμῖν περὶ αὐτοῦ τε καὶ Knpa τε καὶ ᾿λπολλώ, 


διὰ τὸ καὶ τότε προσκλίσεις ὑμᾶς πεποιῆσθαι" ἀλλ᾽ ἡ 


ἀπολλὼ καὶ κηφᾶ, C, thus conforming the order to 1 Cor. i. 12 (comp. iv. 6). S has 


the same order as A, but omits τε in both places, 


It also repeats the preposition 


before each word, but no stress can be laid on this (see above, 1. p. 137). 
12 προσκλίσει5] A; divisionesS; προσκλήσεις C. For this itacism see above § 21. 


Orig. c. Cels. i. 63 ἐν τῇ πρὸς Τιμόθεόν 
φησι, iii. 20 τῇ πρὸς Θεσσαλονικεῖς, 
Method. Symp. iii. 14 (p. 22 Jahn) 
λαβέτω δὲ pera χειρὸς ὃ βουλόμενος τὴν 
πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπιστολήν, Macarius 
Magnes “2967. iii. 36 (p. 131 Blondel) 
καὶ ἐν τῇ πρὸς Κορινθίους δὲ ἐπιστολῇ 
λέγει Περὶ δὲ τῶν παρθένων ἐπιταγὴν 
Κυρίου οὐκ ἔχω κ-τιλ., Hieron. 2222. 
111, 9 (I. p. 264) ‘lege Pauli epistolam 
ad Corinthios, quomodo diversa mem- 
bra unum corpus efficiunt’, Anast. 
Sin. Hodeg. 12 (p. 97) ἐκ τῆς πρὸς 
Κορινθίους, and Chrysostom in his 
preface to the Colossians (XI. p. 322 
B, ed. Bened.) refers to 2 Timothy as 
ἡ πρὸς Τιμόθεον (ἐπιστολή). Where 
the context clearly shows which 
epistle is meant, no specification is 
needed. On the other hand I have 
not observed any distinct traces of 
the influence of 2 Corinthians on 
Clement’s language or thoughts. 
μακαρίου] Polyc. Phil. ὃ 3 τοῦ paxa- 
piov καὶ ἐνδόξου Παύλου, 2. ὃ 11 
‘beatus Paulus.’ This passage of 
Clement is perhaps the earliest in- 
stance of the specially Christian sense 
of μακάριος : comp. Rev. xiv. 13 
μακάριοι οἱ νεκροὶ of ἐν Κυρίῳ ἀποθνή- 
σκοντες ἀπάρτι. In ὃ 43 he applies 
the epithet to Moses; in § 55 to 
Judith. The word continues to be 
used occasionally of the living, e.g. 
Alex. Hieros. in Euseb. H. 2. vi. 11 
διὰ Κλήμεντος τοῦ μακαρίου πρεσβυ- 


τέρου, and even in later writers. 

9. πρῶτον] ‘first and foremost’, re- 
ferring to the position and promi- 
nence assigned to this topic in the 
First Epistle to the Corinthians. It 
does not seem to be quite correct to 
explain the word with different com- 
mentators either (1) Of time purely, 
in which case it adds nothing to ἐν 
ἀρχῇ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου ; or (2) of guality 
purely, as if it signified the primary 
value and excellence of the injunc- 
tion. 

ἐν ἀρχῇ x.rA.] i.e. ‘in the first days 
of the Gospel, soon after your con- 
version.’ The expression occurs in 
S. Paul himself, Phil. iv. 15. See 
also the note on Polyc. PAZ. 11 ‘in 
principio’. It is quite impossible that 
ἀρχὴ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου can mean (as 
Young, Cotelier, and others suppose), 
‘the beginning of his epistle’ as 
containing his evangelical teaching 
(Iren. iv. 34. 1 ‘legite diligentius id 
quod ab apostolis est evangelium 
nobis datum’). 

11. περὶ αὐτοῦ re κιτ.λ.} 1 Cor. i. 
Io 54. The party whose watchword 
was ἐγὼ Χριστοῦ is passed over in 
silence by Clement, because the men- 
tion of them would only have com- 
plicated his argument. Moreover it 
is not probable that their exact theo- 
logical position was known to him or 
his contemporaries. 

12. προσκλίσεις] See above on § 21. 


144 


πρόσκλισις ἐκείνη ἧττον ἁμαρτίαν ὑμῖν προσήνεγκεν" 
προσεκλίθητε γὰρ ἀποστόλοις μεμαρτυρημένοις καὶ 
ἀνδρὶ δεδοκιμασμένῳ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς. 
τίνες ὑμᾶς διέστρεψαν καὶ τὸ σεμνὸν τῆς περιβοήτου 
φιλαδελφίας ὑμῶν ἐμείωσαν. 
καὶ ἀνάξια τῆς ἐν Χριστῷ ἀγωγῆς, 


/ > / 
Alay αἰσχρα; 
> , \ 
ἀκούεσθαι τὴν 

«Ὁ 
κλησίαν Ov ἕν 
πρεσβυτέρους. 


1 πρόσκλισις:] πρόσκλησις C; προσκλήσεις A. 
προσήνεγκεν] A; ἐπήνεγκε C, and so apparently 5. 


so apparently S. 
2 προσεκλίθητε] A; προσεκλήθητε C. 


C, which reads conversely μεμαρτυρημένῳ for δεδοκιμασμένῳ in the next line. 


3 παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς] AS; παρ᾽ αὐτῶν C. 
βεβαιοτάτην, as if βεβαιότητα. 
AC; om. 9. 


2. μεμαρτυρημένοις] ‘attested, fa- 
mous’: see the note on §17. So Ign. 
Eph. 12 Παύλου...τοῦ μεμαρτυρημένου. 

3. ἀνδρὶ δεδοκιμασμένῳ] Apollos 
therefore is not regarded as an Apo- 
stle; see Galatians pp. 96, 98. 

4. τὸ σεμνὸν κιτ.λ.] Comp. § I ὥστε 
τὸ σεμνὸν καὶ περιβόητον καὶ πᾶσιν ἀν- 
θρώποις ἀξιαγάπητον ὄνομα ὑμῶν μεγά- 
λως βλασφημηθῆναι. 

5. αἰσχρὰ καὶ λίαν αἰσχρά] Comp. 
§ 53 ἐπίστασθε καὶ καλῶς ἐπίστασθε. 
See also Theoph. ad «ΑΙ πέοϊ. i. 17 καλὰ 
καὶ καλὰ λίαν, Hippol. p. 36 (Lagarde) 
πάντα μὲν καλὰ Kal καλὰ λίαν τὰ τοῦ 
Θεοῦ, Clem. Recogn. iii. 25 ‘ Ignoras, 
O Simon, et valde ignoras’, and per- 
haps Hermas Mand. viii. ov δοκεῖ σοι 
ταῦτα πονηρὰ εἶναι καὶ λίαν πονηρὰ τοῖς 
δούλοις τοῦ Θεοῦ ; (if this be the right 
punctuation). The very words αἰσχρὰ 
καὶ λίαν αἰσχρὰ occur in Maximus (?) 
on Jude 7 in Cramer's Catena p. 
157- 

μὴ ἀγωγῆς] ‘education’, ‘training’, 
as below § 48. The word is used 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


, re , , > ‘ 
βεβαιοτάτην καὶ ἀρχαίαν Κορινθίων ἐκ- 
J \ \ 
ἢ δύο πρόσωπα στασιάζειν πρὸς τοὺς 

\ « ε 3 \ ᾽ / > ε ~ ᾽ 1 

καὶ αὕτη ἡ ἀκοὴ οἱ μόνον εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐχώ- 


5 ἐμείωσαν] ἐμιωσαν A. 
6 Χριστῷ] AC; add. ἰησοῦ 8. 
































[xuvir 


\ / 
νυνὶ δὲ κατανοήσατε 


’ \ 
αἰσχρά, ἀγαπητοί, Kal 5 


ἧττον] A; ἥττονα C, and 
μεμαρτυρημένοι:] AS; δεδοκιμασμένοις 


4 περιβοήτου] AC; om. S translating — 
αἰσχρά, ἀγαπητοί] 
dywyis] AS; ἀγάπης C. 


commonly of any systematic disci- 
plinary or scholastic training. Ε 
7. ἀκούεσθαι] i.e. ‘It is a disgrace- — 
ful state of things, that z¢ should be 
reported, the word ἀκούεσθαι being 
dependent on αἰσχρὰ... καὶ ἀνάξια. I 
mention this, because the construc- 
tion is generally mistaken; some 
editors wanting to understand de 
and others substituting ἀκούεται for — 
ἀκούεσθαι. For the plural αἰσχρὰ 
κιτιλ. see Jelf’s Gramm. § 383. 
ἀρχαίαν] This epithet seems not to — 
be consistent with the very early date 
which some critics would assign to — 
Clement’s epistle: see I. p. 364 sq, 
and the notes on §§ 5, 44. 
8. πρόσωπα] ‘persons’, or rather 
‘ringleaders’; as in ὃ 1. See the 
note on Ign. Magu. 6. 
9. ἀκοὴ] Thus it was a rumour or 
report which had reached the ears of 
Clement and the Roman Church 
specting the feuds at Corinth; 
those earlier accounts of irregularities 
in the same Church which reached 


xivi1] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 145 


pnoev ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰς τοὺς ἑτεροκλινεῖς ὑπάρχοντας ἀφ᾽ 


ἡμῶν, ὥστε καὶ βχασφημῥας ἐπιφέρεσθαι τᾷ ὀνόματι 
Κυρίου διὰ τὴν ὑμετέραν ἀφροσύνην, ἑαυτοῖς δὲ κίνδυνον 
ἐπεξεργάζεσθαι. 

ΧΙ ΤΠ. 


4 - / A Ud / 
TET WUEV TW δεσπότη καὶ κλαύσωμεν ἱκετεύοντες αὐτόν, 


"E / Φ al > / \ 
Eapwpev OUV TOUTO εν τάχει Kal σροσ- 


ὅπως ἵλεως. γενόμενος ἐπικαταλλαγῆ ἡμῖν καὶ ἐπὶ τὴ 
γενόμ γῆ ἡμ πὶ τὴν 


σεμνὴν τῆς φιλαδελφίας ἡμῶν ἁγνὴν ἀγωγὴν ἀποκατα-᾿ 


στήση ἡμᾶς. πύλη γὰρ δικαιοσύνης ἀνεῳγυῖα εἰς ζωὴν 
ἐ ‘ 

ἡ καὶ] AC; om. S. 11 ἡμῶν] AS; ὑμῶν C. 12. ἑαυτοῖς δὲ] A; ἑαυτοῖς 
τε C; et vobis ipsis S. 16 ἵλεως yevduevos] A; γενόμενος ἵλεως C. ἡμῖν] 
AS; ὑμῖν C. ἐπὶ τὴν κιτ.λ.1 S translates loosely restituat nos ad priorem illam 
modestiam nostram amoris fraternitatis et ad puram illam conversationem, but this 
probably does not represent a various reading. 17 ἡμῶν] AS; ὑμῶν (Ὁ. 
18 ἡμᾶς] AS; ὑμᾶς C. dvewyvia els ξωὴν] A; εἰς ξωὴν ἀνεῳγυῖα CS. 


the ears οἵ 5. Paul (1 Cor. v. 1 ὅλως 
ἀκούεται κιτιλ., xi. 18 ἀκούω σχίσματα 
κιτιλ., comp. i. 11). It is quite a mis- 
take to suppose that the Church of 
Corinth had formally and by letter 
asked advice; see the note on § 1 
νομίζομεν κιτιλ. 

10. ἑτεροκλινεῖς] See the note on 
§ 11. 

11. ὥστε... βλασφημίας ἐπιφέρεσθαι] 
‘so that you heap blasphemies’; ἐπι- 
φέρεσθαι being middle as frequently 
elsewhere, and the subject being ὑμᾶς 
or possibly τοὺς ἑτεροκλινεῖς ὑπάρχον- 
τας. Comp. Rom. ii. 24 τὸ γὰρ ὄνομα 
τοῦ Θεοῦ δι’ ὑμᾶς βλασφημεῖται ἐν τοῖς 
ἔθνεσιν, καθὼς γέγραπται. 

12. κίνδυνον] i.e. the danger of in- 
curring God’s wrath, as ὃ 14 κίνδυνον 
ὑποίσομεν μέγαν, ὃ 41 τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον 
ὑποκείμεθα κινδύνῳ. 

13. ἐπεξεργάζεσθαι] ‘withal to cre- 
ate’; for this is the force of ἐπί, as in 
Demosth. de Cor. p. 274 ἕν δ᾽ ἐπεξειρ- 
γάσατο τοιοῦτον ὃ πᾶσι τοῖς προτέροις 
ἐπέθηκε τέλος. Here ἑαυτοῖς will be 
equivalent to ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς : see the note 


CLEM. II. 


on § 32 and Winer § xxii. p. 163. 

XLVIII. ‘Let us put our sin away. 
Let us fall on our knees and implore 
God’s pardon. Righteousness in 
Christ is the only gate which leads 
to life. Is any one faithful, wise, 
learned, energetic, pure? He should 
be the more humble in proportion as 
he is greater. He should work for 
the common good.’ 

16. ἐπικαταλλαγῇ] While no other 
instance of the verb ἐπικαταλλάσσειν 
is given in the lexicons, the sub- 
stantive appears in Theophrast. Cha- 
ract. 26 τοῦ χαλκοῦ τὴν ἐπικαταλλαγήν, 
where it seems to signify ‘the dis- 
count’. 

τὴν σεμνὴν κιτ.λ] The expression 
is copied by Clem. Alex. Stvom. iv. 
17 (p. 613) ἡ σεμνὴ οὖν τῆς φιλανθρω- 
πίας καὶ ἁγνὴ ἀγωγὴ κατὰ τὸν Κλήμεντα 


τὸ κοινωφελὲς ζητεῖ, where the insertion ° 


of καὶ relieves the sentence. Comp. 
the words at the close of this chapter. 
᾿Αγωγὴ is ‘conduct’, as in ὃ 47: see 
also 2 Tim. iii. 10, Esth. ii. 20, x. 3, 
2 Mace. iv. 16, vi. 8, xi. 24. 


IO 





146 


. \ ' ' , ; x 
αὕτη, καθὼς γέγραπται" "ANOIZATE μοι TIYAAC διΚΔΙΟΟΥΝΗΟ, 
ἵνὰ εἰσελθὼν ἐν aYTAic ἐξομολογήσοωμδι τῷ Κγρίῳ᾽ δὕτη. 
ἡ πύλη τοῦ Kypioy, δλίκδιοι εἰσελεύήοοντὰι ἐν aYTH. 
lo > “ > - eeu / / > ὌΠ 
λών οὖν πυλὼν ἀνεῳγνιων, ἡ ἐν δικαιοσύνη αὕτη ἐστιν 
Δ. 32 “ > ec / / € > /, \ 
ἡ ἐν Χριστῷ, ἐν ἣ μακάριοι πάντες οἱ εἰσελθόντες καὶ 


1 αὕτη] A; ἐστὶν αὕτη C, and so apparently 5. 
2 ἵνα] S Clem; om. AC. See the next note. 
γήσομαι C with Clem. See above, I. p. 143. 
9 διακρίσει] C; διακριακρισει A, as read by Tischendorf; see prol. p. xix. 
as the c he appears to me to have deciphered the Ms correctly. Jacobson, instead 
This seemed to me more like the traces in the Ms, but I 
could not see it distinctly. See below. 
Clem (see below); ἤτω ἁγνός AC. S has sit homo (quispiam) fidelis, sit validus, 


of cel, reads it CIN. 


I. ᾿Ανοίξατε x.r.A.] From the LXx 
Ps. cxviii. 19, 20, word for word. This 
passage, as far as ἤτω γοργὸς ἐν ἔργοις, 
is loosely quoted with interpolations 
of his own by Clem. Alex. Strom. i, 
7 (p- 338 sq), who gives his authority 
as ὁ Κλήμης ἐν τῇ πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπι- 
στολῇ. Elsewhere Strom. vi. ὃ (p. 
772), after quoting Ps. cxviii. 19, 20, 
he adds (by a lapse of memory) ἐξη- 
youpevos δὲ τὸ ῥητὸν τοῦ προφήτου 
Βαρνάβας ἐπιφέρει, Πολλῶν πυλῶν 
ἀνεῳγυιῶν...οἱ εἰσελθόντες, though a 
few sentences below he cites the words 
ἔστω τοίνυν πιστός... μᾶλλον μείζων 
εἶναι, as from ‘Clement in the letter 
to the Corinthians’. His two quota- 
tions do not agree exactly either with 
the original text of Clement or with 
one another. These facts make it 
clear that he cites chiefly from me- 
mory, and this must be borne in 
mind in using his quotations to cor- 
rect the text of the Roman Clement. 

2. ἐξομολογήσωμαι] The best MSS 
of the Lxx have ἐξομολογήσομαι, 

_ which is substituted for the conjunc- 
tive by most editors here, but ἐξο- 
μολογήσωμαι will stand; see Winer 
§ xli. p. 300. Hilgenfeld inserts iva 
before εἰσελθών, following Clem. Alex. 
Strom. i.7 (p. 338); but the quotation 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


























[xuvm ; 


a 


TOA= 


ἀνοίξατε] AC; aperi S. 
ἐξομολογήσωμαι AS; ἐξομολο- 
5 ἡ] AC; om. S apparently. — 
As far 


ἤτω γοργὸς ἐν ἔργοις, ἤτω ἁγνός} 


of the later Clement is much too 
loose to be a guide here, and he pro- ~ 
bably inserted the ἵνα to improve the - 
grammar of the sentence. ; 

3. πολλῶν οὖν πυλῶν x.7.A.] Ῥεῖ- 
haps a reference to our Lord’s saying, — 
Matt. vii. 13, 14. ᾿ 

5. ἡ ἐν Χριστῷ] John x. 9 ἐγώ εἶμι, 
ἡ θύρα, Hermas Simm, ix. 12 ἡ πύλη ὃ 
υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐστί (and the whole 566 - 
tion), Ign. Phzlad. 9 αὐτὸς ὧν θύρα τοῦ 
πατρός, Clem. Hom. iii. 52 διὰ τοῦτο 
αὐτὸς ἀληθὴς dv προφήτης ἔλεγεν, Ἐγώ, 
εἶμι ἡ πύλη τῆς ζωῆς κιτιλ., Hegesipp. © 
in Euseb. H. £. ii. 23 incr ven 
ἡμῖν τίς ἡ θύρα τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ. [ 

6. ὁσιότητι κιτιλ.] The usual com- 
bination of ὅσιος and δίκαιος. See 
the note on ii. § 5. 

7. ἤτω τις πιστός K.T.A.] 1.6. Ifa. 
man has any special gift, let him 
employ it for the common good, and 
not as a means of self-assertion.’ 
The same gifts of the Spirit are enu- 
merated, though in the reverse order, 
in 1 Cor. xii. 8,9 ᾧ μὲν yap διὰ τοῦ 
πνεύματος δίδοται λόγος σοφίας, a) 
δὲ λόγος γνώσεως κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ πνεῦμα, 
ἑτέρῳ πίστις ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ πνεύματι. 
Unless Clement is using this 
guage without warrant, the temper 
of the factious Corinthians of 


Va 


XLV1I1] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


147 


/ A / ΄ 
κατευθύνοντες τὴν πορείαν αὐτῶν ἐν ὁσιότητι καὶ 


/ / / σ΄ 
δικαιοσύνη, ἀταράχως πάντα ἐπιτελοῦντες. 


» 
NTW τις 


; , a \ ΄σ > ΄ af \ > 

πιστός, ἤτω δυνατὸς yvwow ἐξειπεῖν, ἤτω σοῴφος ἐν 
, / 7 \ 7 

διακρίσει λόγων, ἤτω γοργὸς ἐν ἔργοις, ἤτω dyvos: 
/ A ΄- ἂ ΄ ᾿ ε 

τοσούτῳ γὰρ μάλλον ταπεινοφρονεῖν ὀφείλει, ὅσῳ 


scientiam possideat (possidebit), laboret (laborabit) sapiens in interpretatione verb- 


orum, sit purus in operibus. 


This represents substantially the same Greek with 


AC, except that ἤτω δύνατος γνῶσιν ἐξειπεῖν, ἤτω σοφὸς x.7.X. must have been 
corrupted into ἤτω δύνατος, γνῶσιν ἕξει, wovelrw σοφός, as Bensly points out. 
Io τοσούτῳ γὰρ] AS; Clem τοσούτῳ (om. yap) C; τοσοῦτόν τις Anton Max. 


yap] AS; om. (. 
Anton Max.; dub. S. 


time must have closely resembled 
that of their predecessors in S. Paul’s 
age. 

ὃ. γνῶσιν ἐξειπεῖν] ‘to utter, ex- 
pound a γνῶσις᾽, i.e. ‘to bring out the 
hidden meaning of ascripture’. For 

this sense of γνῶσις see the note on 
Barnabas ὃ 6. The possession of 
γνῶσις was an old boast of the fac- 
tious Corinthians, 1 Cor. viii. 1, 10, 
II, xiii. 2, 8; and the vaunt has not 
without reason been attributed espe- 
cially to the party among them which 
claimed as its leader Apollos, the 
learned Alexandrian, ‘mighty in the 
scriptures’ (Acts xviii. 24). 

9. διακρίσει)] The reading of A 
(if it be correctly given διακριακρισιν) 
is a corruption of διακρισιν (= δια- 
xpiot) which itself arose out of δια- 
κρισι and this out of διακρίσει: see 
for other instances of a like error the 
note on ἀναστήσομαι ὃ 15. Otherwise 
διακρίσεσιν might be read (see above, 
I. p. 120, for similar corruptions), as 
the plural διακρίσεις occurs Rom, xiv. 
I διακρίσεις διαλογισμῶν, 1 Cor. xii. 10 
διακρίσεις πνευμάτων. 

ἤτω γοργός] ‘let him be energetic’. 
In later writers γοργὸς is ‘active, 
quick, strenuous’; e.g. Dion. Hal. 
de Comp. Verb. Ὁ. 133 (Reiske) τὸ 


μὲν αὐτῶν [τῶν κώλων] γοργότερον τὸ 


i 


ταπεινοφρονεῖν ὀφείλει] AC Clem; ὀφείλει ταπεινοφρονεῖν 
ὀφείλει} οφιλει A. 


ὅσῳ] AC Clem; ὅσον Anton Max. 


δὲ βραδύτερον, Epict. Diss. ii. 16. 20 
ἐν μὲν τῇ σχολῇ yopyot καὶ κατά- 
γλωσσοι, iii. 12. ΤΟ ἄσκησον, εἰ γορ- 
γὸς εἶ, λοιδορούμενος ἀνέχεσθαι x.7.X., 
M. Antonin. xii. 6 εἰ οὖν γοργὸς εἶ, 
ταύτην θεράπευσον. The departure 
in the later usage of the word from 
its Attic sense ‘terrible’ is noted by 
the old lexicographers. The pas- 
sage is twice quoted by Clem. Alex., 
Strom. i. 7 (p. 339) αὐτίκα ὁ Κλήμης ἐν 
τῇ πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπιστολῇ κατὰ λέξιν 
φησί, τὰς διαφορὰς ἐκτιθέμενος τῶν 
κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν δοκίμων, ἼἬτω τις 
πιστός, ἤτω δυνατός τις γνῶσιν ἐξειπεῖν, 
ἤτω σοφὸς ἐν διακρίσει λόγων, ἤτω 
γοργὸς ἐν ἔργοις, and Strom. vi. 8 (p. 
722 Sq) ἔστω τοίνυν πιστὸς ὁ τοιοῦτος, 
ἔστω δυνατὸς γνῶσιν ἐξειπεῖν, ἤτω σο- 
φὸς ἐν διακρίσει λόγων, ἤτω γοργὸς ἐν 
ἔργοις, ἤτω ἁγνός" τοσούτῳ γὰρ μᾶλλον 
ταπεινοφρονεῖν ὀφείλει, ὅσῳ δοκεῖ μᾶλ- 
λον μείζων εἶναι: ὁ Κλήμης ἐν τῇ πρὸς 
Κορινθίους φησί. The correction 
adopted in the text (after Hilgenfeld) 
seems to be justified by these two 
quotations. It does not however 
find any support in our existing au- 
thorities. The reading of the MS 
may be explained as arising out of a 
confusion, the transcriber’s eye pass- 
ing from one similar ending to an- 
other. 


10—2 








148 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


[XLVIII 


~~ ΄σ > \ ΄. AN 
δοκεῖ μᾶλλον μείζων εἶναι, καὶ ζητεῖν TO κοινωφελὲς 


~~ \ A A ro 
πάσιν καὶ μή TO ἑαυτοῦ. 


XLIX. ὋὉ ἔχων ἀγάπην ἐν Χριστῷ ποιησάτω τὰ 


τοῦ Χριστοῦ παραγγέλματα. 


\ \ ΄σ΄ > / 
τὸν δεσμὸν τῆς ἀγάπης 


΄σ ΄ / \ ΄σ 
τοῦ Θεοῦ τίς δύναται ἐξηγήσασθαι; τὸ μεγαλεῖον τῆς 5 


“- 3 “- ΄ 3 \ 2 aS \ 3 A 
καλλονῆς αὐτοῦ Tis ἀρκετὸς ἐξειπεῖν; τὸ ὕψος εἰς ὃ 


A ε 3 / 3 4 / > 
ἀνάγει 4 ἀγάπη dvekoinyntov ἐστιν. 


ἡμᾶς τῷ Θεῷ" 


ἀγάπη κολλᾷ 


3 “4 / ΄σ ς ΄ ἶ 
ἀγάπη καλύπτει πλῆθος ἁμαρτιῶν" 


3 / ως Seay 4 , - 93 Ne! iy 
ἀγάπη πάντα ἀνέχεται, πάντα μακροθυμεῖ" οὐδὲν Ba- 


t μείζων] AC Clem; om. Anton Max. 
Tischendorf reads A, but other collators give it τηρησατω. 


3 ποιησάτω] CS. So also 
I could not satisfy 


myself. On the first two inspections I inclined to τηρήσατω, but on the last to 


ποιησατω. 
i Joh. v. 2. 
but this is a lapse of the pen. 


I. μᾶλλον μείζων] See Matt. xxiii. 
11. For the double comparative see 
the note on Philippians i. 23. An- 
tonius Melissa Loc. Comm. ii. 73 (34) 
and Maximus Serm. 49 both quote 
this sentence as from Clement in a 
somewhat different form, τοσοῦτόν τις 
μᾶλλον ὀφείλει ταπεινοφρονεῖν, ὅσον 
δοκεῖ μᾶλλον εἶναι: but they cannot 
be regarded as zxdependent authori- 
ties for omitting μείζων, since in such 
collections of excerpts the later com- 
piler generally borrows directly from 
his predecessor: see Philippians p. 
251, note 2. The Syriac connects 
μᾶλλον with δοκεῖ. 

(nreiv κιτιλ] I Cor. x. 24 μηδεὶς 
τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ζητείτω ἀλλὰ τὸ τοῦ ἑτέρου, 
and 73. ver. 33 μὴ ζητῶν τὸ ἐμαυτοῦ 
σύμφορον ἀλλὰ τὸ τῶν πολλῶν. For 
(nreiv τὸ ἑαυτοῦ see also I Cor. xiii. 5, 
Phil. ii. 21. 

τὸ κοινωφελές] ‘the common ad- 
vantage’; comp. Philo de Foseph. 
1. p. 47 M. διὰ τὸ κοινωφελὲς φθάνοντα 
τοὺς ἄλλους, M. Anton. iii. 4 χωρὶς 
μεγάλης καὶ κοινωφελοῦς dvaykns, A post. 
Const. vi. 12 συζητοῦντες πρὸς τὸ 


There are various readings ποιῶμεν, τηρῶμεν (both well supported) in 
6 ἀρκετὸ] ACS. Bryennios represents C as omitting ἀρκετὸς, 


ἡ ἐστίν. ἀγάπη] A; ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγάπη C. 


κοινωφελές. 

XLIX. ‘Who shall tell the power 
and the beauty of love? Love unites 
us to God: love is all enduring: love 
is free from pride and vulgarity: 
love brooks no strife or discord. In 
love all the saints were perfected. 
In love God took us to Himself. 
In love Christ gave His body for 
our bodies and His life for our lives,’ 

3. Ὁ ἔχων x.r.A.] This resembles 
our Lord’s saying in John xiv. 15 ἐὰν 
ἀγαπᾶτέ με, Tas ἐντολὰς Tas ἐμὰς τηρή- 
σετε (ν.]. τηρήσατε) : comp. I Joh. v. 
1---3. 

4. τὸν δεσμόν] i.e. ‘the binding 
power’: comp. Col. iii. 14 τὴν ἀγάπην 
ὅ ἐστιν σύνδεσμος τῆς τελειότητος. 
This clause is quoted by Jerome ad 
Ephes. iv. τ (VII. p. 606) ‘Cujus rei et 
Clemens ad Corinthios testis est, 
scribens Vinculum charitatis Det qui 
(quis) poterit enarrare 2’ 4 

6. ἀρκετὸς ἐξειπεῖν] Previous edit- 
ors had misread the ms A, and writ- 
ten ἀρκεῖ, ὡς ἔδει, εἰπεῖν. For the 
construction of ἀρκετὸς see I Pet. iv. 3. 
The word occurs also Matt. vi. 34, 





XLIx | TO THE CORINTHIANS. 149 


> > ’ 3 ε ’ὔ > ’ 7 
οναυσον ἐν ἀγάπη, οὐδὲν ὑπερηφαναν ἀγάπη σχίσμα 
/ / / ~ 
οὐκ ἔχει, ἀγάπη οὐ στασιάζει, ἀγάπη πάντα ποιεῖ ἐν 
΄. > 7 / \ 
ὁμονοίᾳ" ἐν TH ἀγάπη ἐτελειώθησαν πάντες οἱ ἐκλεκτοὶ 
~ ΄σ ͵ ; > / x Δ 9 7 7 > ~ ΄ 
τοῦ Θεοῦ: δίχα ἀγάπης οὐδὲν εὐάρεστόν ἐστιν τῷ Θεῷ" 
3 > / / ε lad ε / \ A 
ἐν ἀγάπη προσελάβετο ἡμᾶς ὁ δεσπότης" διὰ τὴν 
εἰ ᾽ \ ~ \ κ᾿ > oe 
5 ἀγάπην, ἣν ἔσχεν πρὸς ἡμᾶς, TO αἷμα αὐτοῦ ἔδωκεν 
ε \ ε ~ 3 fal \ € , ε “ > , 
ὑπερ ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστὸς ὁ Κύριος ἡμῶν ἐν θελήματι 
a \ ΄σ A ΄σ \ 
Θεοῦ, καὶ τὴν σάρκα ὑπὲρ τῆς σαρκὸς ἡμῶν Kal τὴν 
A \ ΄- a a 
ψυχὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν ψυχῶν ἡμῶν. 
The whole of the preceding passage is disturbed in CS by false punctuation. 
8 πλῆθος] AC; but S translates NNW ‘ murum.’ 13 οὐδὲν. «τῷ Beg] AC, 


and so Clem (except that he omits ἐστι); Deo placere nemo potest (as if οὐδενὶ 
εὐαρεστεῖν ἐστιν τῷ Θεῷ) 8. 14 quads] AS; ὑμᾶς C. 15 ἔδωκεν] A; 








δέδωκεν C. 16 ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς} AS ; ἰησοῦς χριστὸς ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν C. 


18 τῶν ψυχῶν] AS; τῆς ψυχῆς Ο. 


x. 25, Hermas Κ725. iii. 8. 

τὸ ὕψος κιτ.λ.} See the elabo- 
rate metaphor in Ign. Ephes. 9 ἀνα- 
φερόμενοι εἰς τὰ ὕψη διὰ τῆς μηχανῆς 
Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ κιτιλ. The passage of 
Clement from this point, as far as 
τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ Χριστοῦ (§ 50), is 
loosely quoted and abridged by Clem. 
Alex. Strom. iv. 17 (p. 613 sq). 

8. ἀγάπη καλύπτει κ-.τ.λ.} ‘throws 
a veil over, omits to notice, forgets, 
JSorgives’, The expression is taken 
from 1 Pet. iv. 8 (comp. James v. 20), 
which again seems to be a loose quo- 
tation from Prov. x. 12, where the 
original has p'ywand> ‘all sins’ for 
‘a multitude of sins’, and the Lxx 
rendering is still wider, πάντας δὲ 
τοὺς μὴ φιλονεικοῦντας καλύπτει φιλία. 
For this Hebrew metaphor of ‘cover- 
ing’ see Ps. xxxii. 1, Ιχχχν. 3, Neh. 
ili. 37 (iv. 6). 

9. ἀγάπη πάντα ἀνέχεται] An imi- 
tation of 1 Cor. xiii. 4, 7, ἡ ἀγάπη 
pakpoOupel...mavra στέγει.. πάντα ὑπο- 
μένει: and indeed the whole passage 
is evidently inspired by S. Paul’s 
_ praise of love. The juxtaposition of 


the language of S. Paul and the lan- 
guage of S. Peter is a token of the 
large and comprehensive sympathies 
of one who paid equal honour to 
both these great Apostles (§ 5), though 
rival sectarians claimed them for their 
respective schools. See Galatians p. 
323, with notes above §§ 12, 33. 

βάναυσον] ‘ coarse, vulgar, self-as- 
serting, arrogant’, See the note on 
ἀβαναύσως ὃ 44. 

10. σχίσμα οὐκ ἔχει κιτ.λ.] The ex- 
pressions are in an ascending scale 
(1) ‘knows nothing of outward 
schisms’; (2) ‘does not even foster 
a factious spirit’; (3) ‘nay, preserves 
entire and universal harmony’. 

12. ἐτελειώθησαν) 1 John iv. 18 ὁ δὲ 
φοβούμενος οὐ τετελείωται ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ. 

14. διὰ τὴν ἀγάπην κιτ.λ.] Comp. 
John xv. 12, Gal. ii. 20, Ephes. v. 2. 

17. καὶ τὴν σάρκα] Wotton quotes 
Iren. v. 1. I τῷ ἰδίῳ αἵματι λυτρωσαμέ- 
vou ἡμᾶς τοῦ Κυρίου καὶ δόντος τὴν 
ψυχὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἡμετέρων ψυχῶν καὶ 
τὴν σάρκα τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ἀντὶ τῶν ἡμετέρων 
σαρκῶν, which seems to have been 
taken from this passage of Clement. 


150 


Ὁ ΄“ 3 ’ὔ ~ / \ 6 , 
᾿ pare, ἀγαπητοί, πώς μέγα καὶ θαυμαστόν 
, a , “- y 
ἐστιν ἡ ἀγάπη, Kal τῆς τελειότητος αὐτῆς οὐκ ἔστιν 
.. / - I A: A ᾽ 3. σ ε a ? \ ἃ \ 
ἐξήγησις" Tis ἱκανὸς ἐν αὐτῇ εὑρεθῆναι, εἰ μὴ ous ἂν 
/ ε / ’ 7 {fy \ > , > \ 
καταξιώση ὁ Θεός; δεώμεθα οὖν καὶ αἰτώμεθα ἀπὸ 
a ΄ / > 3 / ~ 
τοῦ ἐλέους αὐτοῦ, iva ἐν ἀγάπη εὑρεθῶμεν δίχα προσ- 5 
/ ’ 
κλίσεως ἀνθρωπίνης ἄμωμοι. 
\ e/ ΄' , ΄ / 
᾿λδὰμ ἕως τῆσδε ἡμέρας παρῆλθον, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ ἐν ἀγάπῃ 


2 ἡ ἀγάπη] A; ἀγάπη C. 
perfectionis. 


the translation of the whole context. 


have rightly deciphered A as reading OyYCAKATAzZIWCH, though the superscribed 
4 καταξιώσῃ] S; καταδιώξη C. For the reading of A see 
δεώμεθα] supplicemus S; 


Ν is not distinct. 
the last note. 


L. ‘In this marvellous love let us 
pray God that we may live. We can 
only do so by His grace. Past 
generations, thus perfected in love, 
now dwell in the abodes of bliss, 
awaiting His kingdom: for He has 
promised to raise them again. Happy 
are we, if we pass our time here in 
harmony andlove. For then our sins 
will be forgiven us: we shall inherit 
the blessing promised to the elect of 
God through Christ.’ 

2. τῆς τελειότητος κιτ.λ.} See 1 John 
iv. 18 οὐ τετελείωται ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ, above 
§ 49 ἐτελειώθησαν, and below οἱ ἐν 
ἀγάπῃ τελειωθέντες ; comp. 1 John ii. 
5, iv. 12. 

3. ἐν αὐτῇ evp.] Comp. Phil. iii. 9. 

6. αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι] Comp. ὃ 7 εἰς 
τὰς γενεὰς πάσας. 

8. χῶρον εὐσεβῶν] ‘the place as- 
signed to the pious’, like τὸν ὀφειλόμε- 
νον τόπον τῆς δόξης ὃ 5, or τοῦ ἱδρυ- 
μένου αὐτοῖς τόπου ὃ 44. See the note 
ΟἹ ὃ 5, ἀπ comp. Iren. v. 31. 2(quoted 
by Wotton here) αἱ ψυχαὶ ἀπέρχονται 
εἰς τὸν [ἀόρατον] τόπον τὸν ὡρισμένον 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT [τ 


αὐτῆς A; αὐτοῦ C. S translates ejusdem (ipsius) 
It seems to have had αὐτῆς and made it agree with τελειότητος. 
οὐκ ἔστιν x.T.d.] AC; S translates non est sermo ullus sufficiens ut inveniatur, thus 
reading ἐξήγησίς τις and making ἱκανὸς feminine. 
εἰ μὴ AC; S apparently adds ἐν ἀγάπῃ καὶ, but a false punctuation has confused 

































e \ ψῃ \ 
al γενεαὶ πᾶσαι amo 


3 ἐξήγησις] εξηγησεισ A. 


οὗς ἂν καταξιώσῃ] Tischendorf seems to 
Ν 


...0a A; δεόμεθα C; I had conjec- 


αὐταῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ, κἀκεῖ μέχρι τῆς 
ἀναστάσεως φοιτῶσι, περιμένουσαι τὴν 
ἀνάστασιν κιτιλ. See also Afost. 
Const. viii. 41 χῶρος εὐσεβῶν ἀνει- 
μένος x.t.A., Lebas- Waddington Asie 
Mineure χάρι 168 εὐσεβέων χῶρον 
δέξατο πᾶσι φίλον. For χῶρον εὐσεβῶν 
the existing text of Clem. Alex. has © 
χώραν εὐσεβῶν, ‘the country, the ~ 
realms of the pious’, which suggests 
a more sensuous image, conveying a 
notion similar to the ‘Elysian fields’. 
The one might be translated ‘locus ~ 
piorum’, the other ‘campus piorum’, — 
But χῶρος, rather than χώρα, accords 
with the language of the Roman 
Clement elsewhere. A place in Si-— 
cily, named after two brothers famous — 
for their piety, was called indiffer- 
ently Εὐσεβῶν χώρα and EvocBov 
xGpos; see Bentley’s Dissert. on Pha- 
lar. ν (1. Ρ. 238, ed. Dyce). 

9. ἐν τῇ ἐπισκοπῇ κιτιλ.] Luke xix. 
44 Tov καιρὸν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς vou, I Pet. 
ii. 12 δοξάσωσιν τὸν Θεὸν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἐπι- 
σκοπῆς, Wisd. iii. 7 καὶ ἐν καιρῷ ἐπι- 
σκοπῆς αὐτῶν ἀναλάμψουσιν, Polycra- 


L] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


151 


΄ = , 7 ~ 
τελειωθέντες κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Θεοῦ χάριν ἔχουσιν χῶρον 
> x A / > ς΄ > πὶ ΄. 
εὐσεβών" οἱ φανερωθήσονται ἐν τῇ ἐπισκοπῇ τῆς βα- 


ο σιλείας τοῦ Θεοῦ. 


τἀμεῖὰ μικρὸν OCON ὅσον, ἕως οὕ πὰρέλθηῃ ἡ 
θγμός MOY, KAl μνηοθήοομδι ἡμέρδο ἀγαθῆς KA 


γέγραπται γάρ" Εἰςέλθετε εἰς τὰ 


3 


OprH kal 


‘ > 


| ANACTHCO@ 


ε n a a c a ’ Ψ΄ 
ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῶν θηκῶν ὑμῶν. μακάριοι ἦμεν, ἀγαπητοί, 


3 / ~ ~ > ~ 
εἰ τὰ προστάγματα τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐποιοῦμεν ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ 


> / 3 \ > ~ ton o Ne 7 \ ς 7 
5 ayamns, Εἰς TO ἀφεθῆναι ημιν δι αγαπήῆς τας αμαρτῖίας. 


tured δεώμεθα (ed. 1). 
αἰτούμεθα C. 


terminable. 


οὖν] AC; add. ἀγαπητοί 8. 
5 αὐτοῦ] AC; τοῦ Θεοῦ 8. 
C; adhaerentia S. On this itacism see above, § 47. 
τῆς ἡμέρας τῆσδε C; while Clem has τῆσδε τῆς ἡμέρας. 
9 οἵ] AS; οἱ δὲ Ὁ. 


αἰτώμεθα] AS; 
προσκλίσεω:] A; προσκλήσεως 

7 τῆσδε ἡμέραΞ] A; 
The reading οὗ S is inde- 
10 Θεοῦ] CS; .Y A; Tischendorf 


reads XY; but I could only see Ὑ, the first letter being hopelessly blurred. 


εἰσέλθετε] CS; enced... A. 


Lxx, but the other authorities point to εἰσέλθετε. 
12 θυμός] Ov... ΑΙ; ὁ θυμός C. 


ταμιεῖα C. 
15 ἡμῖν] AS; ὑμῖν C. 


tes in Euseb. H. £. ν. 24 περιμένων 
τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν οὐρανῶν ἐπισκοπὴν ἐν ἡ ἐκ 
νεκρῶν ἀναστήσεται. 

10. Εἰσέλθετε κιτ.λ.] A combination 
of passages. The opening is taken 
from the LXX Is. xxvi. 20 εἴσελθε eis 
τὰ ταμεῖά σου, ἀποκλεῖσον τὴν θύραν cov, 
ἀποκρύβηθι μικρὸν ὅσον ὅσον, ἕως ἂν 
παρέλθῃ ἡ ὀργὴ Κυρίου : the close pro- 
bably from Ezek. xxxvii. 12 ἀνάξω 
ὑμᾶς ἐκ τῶν μνημάτων ὑμῶν. The in- 
termediate words καὶ μνησθήσομαι 
ἡμέρας ἀγαθῆς are not found any- 
where. They may possibly be in- 
tended to give the general purport 
of the promise which they introduce : 
see a parallel instance in § 52. The 
combination of the two passages 
_ from different prophets was probably 
| suggested by the verse in Isaiah 
which immediately precedes the 
words quoted, ἀναστήσονται οἱ νεκροὶ 
᾿ καὶ ἐγερθήσονται οἱ ἐν τοῖς μνημείοις (Is. 
ΟΧΧνΐ. 19). Comp. 5 Esdr. ii. 16 ‘et 
_ resuscitabo mortuos de locis suis et 
_ de monumentis educam illos ete.’ 


It is quite possible that A read εἴσελθε with the 


II ταμεῖα] ταμια A; 
13 ἦμεν] CS; ἐσμεν A. 


11. ταμεῖα] ‘the inner chamber’, 
tn. On the form see Lobeck Phryn. 
p. 493, Paral. p. 28. The same ten- 
dency to elide the « before εἰ appears 
in ὑγεία ὃ 20. In § 21 however our 
chief MS writes ταμιεια. 

ὅσον ὅσον] Comp. Heb. x. 37 (with 
Bleek’s note). 

ὀργὴ καὶ θυμός] ὀργὴ is the settled 
temper, ‘auger’; θυμὸς the sudden 
outburst, ‘wrath’. See the distinc- 
tion in Trench’s MV. 7. Syn. ist 
ser. § xxxvii, and to the passages 
there collected add Joseph. BZ. 7. ii. 
8. 6 ὀργῆς ταμίαι δίκαιοι θυμοῦ Kabex- 
τικοί, Hermas Mand. v. 2 ἐκ δὲ τῆς 
πικρίας θυμός, ἐκ δὲ τοῦ θυμοῦ ὀργή, 
K.T.A. 

14. ἐποιοῦμεν] If the reading be 
correct, the point of time denoted in 
ἐσμὲν must be the second advent, so 
that the deeds of this present life are 
regarded as past. 

ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ ἀγάπης] ὃ 49 ἀγάπη πάντα 
ποιεῖ ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ. 


15. δι’ ἀγάπης] through God’s love’, 


152 


, , ἢ ca > ἢ eo αὶ ͵ 
γέγραπται γαρ' Makdpio: ὧν ἀφέθησαδν ai ἂνομίδι 
ὧν €EMEKAAYPOHCAN δὶ ἁμδρτίδι" 


λογίσηται Κύριος AmMapTiaAN οὐδέ EcTIN ἐν τῷ οτόμδτι ἀὙτ[οὔ] 


δόλοου. 


/ \ ~~ ΄ ius wn ra ΄' Φ J 
μένους ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ Κυρίου 5 
ε cod = , \ ΄σ ΄σ / / 
ἡμῶν, ᾧ ἡ δόξα Els τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 


I μακάριοι] μακακαριοι A. 
the LxXx. 
CS ; παρε.. 
bably A. See the lower note. 


probably does not represent a different Greek text. 


of which we become partakers by 
ourselves living in love. There is 
the same transition from the be- 
liever’s love to God’s love in § 49 
δίχα ἀγάπης k.T.d. 

I. Μακάριοι κ-τ.λ.] From the LXx 
of Ps. xxxii. 1, 2, word for word, as 
read in A (S writes αφειθησαν). For 
οὗ B has ᾧ. In Rom. iv. 8 it is a 
question whether οὗ or ᾧ is the cor- 
rect reading. 

4. οὗτος ὁ μακαρισμός] Suggested 
by Rom. iv. 9, where after quoting 
the same passage from the Psalms 
5. Paul continues, ὁ μακαρισμὸς οὖν 
οὗτος ἐπὶ τὴν περιτομὴν κιτιλ. For 
μακαρισμὸς see also Rom. iv. 6, Gal. 
iv. 15 (note). 

7. παρεπέσαμεν καὶ ἐποιήσαμεν 
There can be no doubt about the 
reading of our two new authorities; 
for though the last word indeed, as 


now read in the Syriac Ms, is pias 
transgressi sumus, the diacritic point 
has been altered and it was originally 
aya Jecimus. But what was the 


reading of A? The editors have 
hitherto given παρέβημεν; but the 
older collators Young and Wotton 
professed only to see παρε..-μεν, and 
after C was discovered, Gebhardt 
(ed. 2), observing that nothing was 
said either by Tischendorf or by my- 


THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT εἶ 


- ς \ 5 Ψ en! \ > Ι 
OUTOS O Makapla Mos EVEVETO €7rl τους ἐκλελεγ- 


2 οὗ] A; ᾧ CS. There is the same v. 1. in 
5 τοῦ Θεοῦ] A; Θεοῦ C. 

μεν A. See the lower note. 

10 τῆς ἐλπίδος] AC ; sfez nostrae S, but it 
















































MaKaploc ἀνὴρ OY OY MH- 


7 παρεπέσαμεν καὶ ἐποιήσαμεν 
8 ἀφεθῆναι ἡμῖν] CS, and so pro- 


11 φόβου] AC ; add, 


self ‘de litera B adhuc conspicua’, 
suggested that the reading of A was 
not παρέβημεν but παρεπέσαμεν and 
that the following words καὶ ἐποιήσα- 
μεν were omitted owing to homceote- — 
leuton, for there certainly is πο 
room for them. I believe he is right. 
Having my attention thus directed to — 
the matter, I looked at the Ms again. 
I could not discern a B but saw — 
traces of a square letter which looked ~ 
like tr followed by a curved letter 
which might be ε. Not satisfied 
with my own inspection, I wrote 
afterwards to Dr E. M. Thompson, ~ 
now chief librarian of the British — 
Museum, to obtain his opinion. He — 
read the letters independently exactly 
as I had done, and says confidently — 
that the reading was mapemécapev. — 
This reading is favoured by the words 
which follow καλὸν yap ἀνθρώπῳ ἐξο- — 
μολογεῖσθαι περὶ τῶν παραπτωμάτων 
(see the note on § 46), as also by 
the loose paraphrase of the younger 
Clement Strom. iv. 18 (p. 614) ἢν δὲ 
kal περιπέσῃ ἄκων τοιαύτῃ τινὶ περι- 
στάσει διὰ τὰς παρεμπτώσεις τοῦ ἀντι- 
κειμένου, Where περιπέσῃ seems to 
have been suggested by the associa- | 
tion of sounds. * 
LI. ‘We must therefore ask par- 
don for our sins. Above all ought 
the leaders of these factions to deny 





































1.1] 


LL. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


153 


4 = , \ ? , , 
Oca οὖν παρεπέσαμεν καὶ ἐποιήσαμεν διά 


΄σ fal / “- ΄ 
τινος τῶν τοῦ ἀντικειμένου, ἀξιώσωμεν ἀφεθῆναι ἡμῖν" 


3 ΄ / rf 
καὶ ἐκεῖνοι δέ, οἵτινες ἀρχηγοὶ στάσεως Kal διχοστασίας 
3 , > 7 \ \ ~ > / ~ 
ἐγενήθησαν, ὀφειλουσιν τὸ κοινὸν τῆς ἐλπίδος σκοπεῖν. 

\ \ 3 / \ 
οἱ yap μετὰ φόβου καὶ ἀγάπης πολιτευόμενοι ἑαυτοὺς 


/ ΄ > - \ \ , 
θέλουσιν μᾶλλον αἰκίαις περιπίπτειν ἢ τοὺς πλησίον, 


det 8. 


12 θέλουσιν] AC; cogunt (coarctant) 8. 


αἰκίας] οἰκιαισ A, 


Tischendorf (prol. p. xix) considers that it is altered into αἰκιαὶσ prima manu, but 


I could not distinctly see this correction. 


τοὺς πλησίον] AC ; τοῖς πλησίον S, 


which also omits δὲ ἑαυτῶν, thus throwing the syntax into confusion. 


themselves for the common good. 
It is well always to confess our 
wrong-doings, and not to harden 
our hearts. Let us take warning by 
the fate of the factious opponents of 
Moses who were swallowed up alive 
in the pit, and by the fate of Pharaoh 
and his host who were overwhelmed 
in the Red Sea, because they har- 
dened their hearts.’ 

7. διά twos κιτ.λ.] ‘by any of the 
wiles (or of the ministers) of the ad- 
versary’. 

8. τοῦ ἀντικειμένου] So ὁ ἀντίδικος 
I Pet. v. 8, and perhaps ὁ ἀντενεργῶν 
Barnab. ὃ 2. Ὁ ἀντικείμενος itself is 
not so used in the New Testament 
(except possibly in 1 Tim. v. 14), but 
occurs Mart. Polyc. 17, and in later 
writers. 

ἀφεθῆναι ἡμῖν] So the lacuna in 
A is now supplied in our new 
authorities in place of συγγνώμην. 
Among other suggestions I had pro- 
posed ἀφεθῆναι in my notes ; comp. 
§ 50 εἰς τὸ ἀφεθῆναι ἡμῖν...γέγραπται 
γάρ: Μακάριοι ὧν ἀφέθησαν «rd. Τὶ 
is entirely after Clement’s manner to 
take up the key word of a quotation 
and dwell upon it ; see the instances 
collected above, § 46. There can be 
no doubt therefore that Tischendorf 
misread A. Nevertheless he re- 
iterated the statement to which I 


took exception and said ‘Emen- 
datione veteris scripturae vix opus 
est [ovy}yvop[ny]; literarum yvop 
pars superior in codice superest, 
quapropter de vera lectione vix du- 
bito: dubitat vero Lightf. et dicit 
etc” He took no notice of my 
grammatical objection to this con- 
struction of ἀξιοῦν. 1 had urged that 
the instances where ἀξιοῦν appears 
to govern an accusative of the thing 
claimed (e.g. Dan, ii. 23, Esth. v. 6, 
ix. 12, Xen. Mem. iii. 11. 12) are not 
decisive. I might have added a 
further lexical objection ; for neither 
in the LXX nor in the N.T. nor in the 
Apostolic Fathers are συγγινώσκειν, 
συγγνώμη; ever saidof God. The fact 
is that the Ms is eaten into holes here 
and nothing can be vead. The letters 
can only be conjectured from the in- 
dentations left. Dr E. M. Thomp- 
son of the British Museum whom I 
consulted and whose practised eye I 
should trust much more than my 
own, gives it as his opinion that 
ovyyvepny would not fit into these 
indentations but that αφεθηναιημί εν] 
might. 

9. διχοστασίας] See the note on 
§ 46. 

10. τὸ κοινὸν τῆς ἐλπίδος] Comp. 
Ign. Ephes. 1 ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ ὀνόματος 
καὶ ἐλπίδος with the note. 


154 


μᾶλλον δὲ ἑαυτῶν κατάγνωσιν φέρουσιν ἢ τῆς Tapa- 
δεδομένης ἡμῖν καλῶς καὶ δικαίως ὁμοφωνίας. 
γὰρ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι περὶ τῶν παραπτωμά- 
των ἢ σκληρῦναι τὴν καρδίαν αὐτοῦ, καθὼς ἐσκληρύνθη 
ἡ καρδία τῶν στασιαζόντων πρὸς τὸν θεράποντα TOU 5 
Θεοῦ Μωὺῦσῆν: ὧν τὸ κρίμα πρόδηλον ἐγενήθη. : 
Bnoav yap εἰς ἅδου ζῶντες, Kal θάνλτος ποιμδνεῖ 


AYTOYC. 


ε / 3 / ’ a \ c ͵ 
οἱ ἡγούμενοι Atyumrov, τὰ τε ἅρμὰτὰ kal οἱ ἀνάβάτδι 
“ > of \ 
αὐτών, ov Ot ἄλλην τινὰ αἰτίαν ἐβυθίσθησαν eis θά- 
\ \ > / 
λασσαν ἐρυθρὰν καὶ ἀπώλοντο, ἀλλὰ Sia TO σκλη- 


5 στασιαζοντων)] A; στασιάντων CS, but there is a tendency in S in these cases 
to translate by a past where the principal verb is a past, as here. 
movra] AS; ἄνθρωπον C. See the lower note. 
αὐτοῦ C. Perhaps the archetype of C was partially erased here and ran a..v.Tov. 

10 οὐ] οἱ A. 
A; Αἰγύπτῳ CS. 


ἀναβάται] ἀναβάταις C. 
13 γῇ Αἰγύπτου] γηαιγυ... 


2. ᾿ καλὸν... ἢ] Matt. xviii. 8, Mark 
ix. 43,45; see Winer Gramm. ὃ xxxv. 
Ρ. 255. 

4. σκληρῦναι x.t.A.] Ps. χον. 8; 
comp. Heb. iii. 8, 15, iv. 7. 

5. τὸν θεράποντα] See the various 
reading in C. Moses is called ἄν- 
θρωπος τοῦ Θεοῦ, Deut. xxxiii. 1, Josh. 
xiv. 6, 1 Chron. xxiii. 14, 2 Chron. 
xxx. 16, Ezra iii. 2. Familiarity with 
the phrase (which is especially 
prominent in Deut. xxxiii. 1, where 
it prefaces the Song of Moses) would 
lead to its introduction here. Else- 
where (§ 53) C alters the designation 
θεράπων τοῦ Θεοῦ in another way. 
On the other hand θεράπων τοῦ Θεοῦ 
is itself a common designation of 
Moses (see the note on § 4), and 
might well have been substituted for 
the other expression here. But the 
preponderance of authority must be 
considered decisive as to the reading. 

6. κατέβησαν yap κ.τ.λ.] Num. xvi. 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


\ \ A ΄ 
Φαραὼ καὶ ἡ στρατιὰ αὐτοῦ καὶ πάντες 






































[τ 


A 
καλον 


, 
κατε- 


θερά- 
9 Αἰγύπτου] 5; ...urrov A; 
12 αὐτῶν] here A; after καρδίας C. 

14 Mwiicéws] μωυσεω As 


32, 33 ἠνοίχθη ἡ γῆ Kal κατέπιεν αὐτούς 
kal κατέβησαν αὐτοὶ καὶ ὅσα ἐστὶν 
αὐτῶν ζῶντα εἰς δου. Comp. AZost. 
Const. ii. 27 Δαθὰν καὶ ᾿Αβειρὼν ζῶντες 
κατέβησαν εἰς ἅδου καὶ ῥάβδος βλασ- 
τήσασα κιτιλ. (comp. § 43); see also 
20. Vi. 3. 

7. ποιμανεῖ] Clement is quoting 
from Ps. xlviii (xlix). 14 ὡς πρόβατα 
ἐν ἅδῃ ἔθεντο, θάνατος ποιμανεῖ αὐτούς. 
The reading could not have been © 
foreseen, and the lacuna in A was — 
supplied with κατέπιεν, before our new 
authorities revealed the true reading. — 

9. τά τε ἅρματα. καὶ οἱ ἀναβάται] 
The expression is borrowed from the — 
Mosaic narrative, where it occurs — 
several times, Exod. xiv. 23, 26, 28, 
comp. Xv. 19, Jer. li (xxviii). 22, Hagg. 
ii, 22. | 

12. Tas ἀσυνέτους καρδίας] Α5 Rom. , 
i. 21 ἐσκοτίσθη ἡ ἀσύνετος av 
καρδία. 


LII. ‘The Lord of the unive δ᾽ 











Li] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


rao 


΄σ ΄σ \ / , \ \ Τὸ 
ρυνθῆναι αὐτῶν τὰς ἀσυνέτους καρδίας μετὰ τὸ γενέσ- 


\ od \ \ U2 3 “- > Ἧ \ 
θαι τὰ σημεῖα καὶ τὰ τέρατα ἐν γῆ Αἰγύπτου διὰ 


τοῦ θεράποντος τοῦ Θεοῦ Mwicéws. 


LIL 


᾿λπροσδεής, ἀδελφοί, ὁ δεσπότης ὑπάρχει 


΄σ ε tA Δ > \ 7 > \ \ > 
τῶν ἁπαντων, οὐδὲν οὐδενὸς χρήζει εἰ μὴ TO ἐξο- 


~~ 3 ΄ 
μολογεῖσθαι αὐτῷ. 


ησὶν γὰρ ὁ 
φ yep 


ες 


ἐκλεκτὸς Aaveid* 


᾿Εξομολογήοομδι τῷ Κγρίῳ, kal ἀρέσει ἀὐτῷ ὑπὲρ μύοχον 


, if > , \ ς , 
νέον KEPATA ἐκφέροντὰ KAI ὁπλᾶδσ᾽ 


2 , 


iAET@CAN πτωχοὶ Kal 


, \ / a a a ͵ 
ο EYPPANOHTOCAN. Καὶ πάλιν λέγει" Ofcon τῷ Θεῷ θγοίὰν 


δἰνέοσεως KAI ἀπόδος τῷ YYICT@ τὰς εὐχάς coy’ καὶ ἐπι- 


μωσέως C. 


16 οὐδὲν] .. δεν A; om. CS. 


τὸ] A; τοῦ C. The οὐδὲν 


has obviously been omitted by carelessness before οὐδενὸς, and thus has necessitated 


the further change of τὸ into τοῦ. 
645 AC. See above, § 4. 
twoav] AS; om. C. 

21 ἐπικάλεσαι] επικαλεσε A. 


wants nothing. He demands of us 
only confession. He asks no sacri- 
fice, but the sacrifice of praise and 
thanksgiving; for so the Psalmist 
teaches us.’ 

15. ᾿Απροσδεής] ‘wants nothing be- 
sides’, Comp. Joseph. Azz. viii. 4. 3 
ἀπροσδεὲς yap τὸ θεῖον ἁπάντων (with 
the context), Act. Paul. et Thecl. 
§ 17 (p. 47 Tisch.) Θεὸς ἀπροσδεής, 
Clem. fTom. xi. 9 6 Θεὸς yap dvevdens 
ὧν αὐτὸς οὐδενὸς δεῖται, Epist. ad 
Diogn. 3 ὁ ποιήσας τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν 
γῆν καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτοῖς... οὐδενὸς ἂν 
αὐτὸς προσδέοιτο τούτων κιιλ., Α- 
thenag. Suppl. § 13 ὁ τοῦδε τοῦ παν- 
τὸς δημιουργὸς καὶ πατὴρ... ἀνενδεὴς καὶ 
ἀπροσδεής, ὃ 29 ἀνενδεὲς...τὸ θεῖον, 
Resurr. § 12 παντὸς γάρ ἐστιν ἀπροσ- 
δεής, Tatian ad Graec. 4 ὃ yap πάν- 
tov ἀνενδεὴς οὐ διαβλητέος ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
ὡς ἐνδεής, Theophil. ad Aut. ii. 10 
dvevdens ὦν. See also Acts xvii. 25 
with the passages from heathen wri- 
ters collected there by Wetstein. 
This was a favourite mode of speak- 


17 αὐτῷ] AC; add. μόνον S. 
19 νέον] ναιον A. 
21—2 καὶ ἐπικάλεσαι... δοξάσεις με] AS; om. Ὁ. 


Δαυείδ] 
19, 20 κέρατα... εὐφρανθή- 


ing with the Stoics. The parallel 
passages quoted above would sup- 
port the connexion of τῶν ἁπάντων 
either with ἀπροσδεὴς or with ὁ dec- 
πότης. The latter seems more forcible 
and more natural here, besides that 
ὁ δεσπότης τῶν ἁπάντων is a common 
phrase in Clement, §§ 8, 20, 33. It 
is however connected with ὁ δεσπότης 
in the Syriac. 

18. ᾿Εξομολογήσομαι x.7.A.] Comp. 
Ps. Ixix. 31, 32, καὶ ἀρέσει τῷ Θεῷ ὑπὲρ 
μόσχον νέον κέρατα ἐκφέροντα καὶ ὁπ- 
Ads’ ἰδέτωσαν κιτιλ. The introductory 
words ἐξομολογήσομαι τῷ Κυρίῳ are 
not found in the context, though they 
express the sewse of the preceding 
verse αἰνέσω τὸ ὄνομα κ-.τ.λ., and occur 
frequently elsewhere. 

20. Θῦσον κ-ιτ.λ.] The first part 
θῦσον... δοξάσεις με occurs in Ps, xlix 
(1). 14, 15 word for word, except that 
the second gov is omitted in some 
MSS: the last clause is taken from 
Ps, li. 17 θυσία τῷ Θεῷ πνεῦμα συν- 
τετριμμένον. 


156 THE EPISTLE OF 8. CLEMENT [un 
κἄλεοδί ME EN ἡμέρὰ θλίψεώς οου, Kal @ZeAOFMAi ce, Kal 
AozZAceic me’ θγοίὰ γὰρ TH Θεῷ TNEYMA CYNTETPIMMENON. 


LIT. ἘΕπίστασθε γὰρ καὶ καλῶς ἐπίστασθε τὰς 
























€ \ 6 3 ’ δν / > \ / 

ἱερᾶς γραφας, ἀγαπητοὶ, καὶ ἐγκεκυφατε εἰς Ta λογια 

Μωὺῦ- 5 
, \ ? ΄ > \ af \ ΄ 

σέως γὰρ ἀναβαίνοντος εἰς τὸ ὄρος καὶ ποιήσαντος 


a ΄ > > / 3 ΄ ’ 
τοῦ Θεοῦ" εἰς ἀνάμνησιν οὖν ταῦτα γράφομεν. 


τεσσεράκοντα ἡμέρας καὶ τεσσεράκοντα νύκτας ἐν 
“νηστείᾳ καὶ ταπεινώσει, εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Θεός" 
Maycf, ΛΛωγοῆ, κατάβηθι τὸ τἄχος ἐντεῦθεν, ὅτι HNGMHCEN 
ὁ Aadc coy ofc ἐξήγαγες ἐκ γῆς Αἰγύπτογ᾽ πὰρέβησδν τὰχΥ 


1 gov] A; om. 8. 3 ἐπίστασθε] επιστασθαι A. yap] AC; add. 
ἀδελφοὶ S, omitting ἀγαπητοὶ 1. 20; see above, § 1. 4 καὶ ἐγκεκύφατε] 
CS; ...exugare A. 5 γράφομεν] CS. In A only the final stroke 1, being 
part of the N, is visible (though Tischendorf says ‘ante Mwvoews praecedit punc- 
tum, non 1 quod Jacobsonus videre sibi visus est’). 6 ἀναβαίνοντος] A, not 
ἀναβάντος as Jacobson would read; for the ! is distinct and cannot have formed 
the first stroke of N as he supposes; ἀναβάντος C. S has a past tense, but on such 
a point its authority cannot be urged. As usual C alters the tenses where they 
do not seem appropriate ; see above, I. p. 126. eis] C; ...0 A; ὡς πρὸς (or ὡς 
els) 5. ἡ τεσσεράκοντα] τεσσαράκοντα C in both places. In either case the 
word is mutilated in A, so that we cannot determine the form, but the preference 
of this Ms for the forms in € can leave little doubt. 


τὰς ἱερὰς γραφάς] Comp. Polyc. 
Phil. 12 ‘Confido enim vos bene 
exercitatos esse in sacris literis et 
nihil vos latet’. So 2 Tim. iii. 15 
[τὰ] ἱερὰ γράμματα, the only passage — 
in the New Testament where this 


1, ἐξελοῦμαι] For this future see 
Buttmann G7. Sprachl. Ul. p. 100, 
Winer Gramm. § xciv. Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 18 (p. 614), after διὰ ras 
παρεμπτώσεις τοῦ ἀντικειμένου (already 
quoted p. 152), goes Ο μιμησάμενος 


τὸν Δαυὶδ ψαλεῖ ᾿Εξομολογήσομαι κ.τ.λ. 
γὴν συντετριμμένον, stringing together 
the same quotations as in this chap- 
ter of the Roman Clement. 

LIII. ‘You are well versed in the 
Scriptures. I therefore quote them 
only to remind you. Remember how 
Moses entreated God for the people, 
how he would accept no honour for 
himself, but asked to be blotted out 
with them, if they might not be for- 
given.’ 

3. ἐπίστασθε κ-τ.λ.] For the form 
of the sentence see the note on § 47 
αἰσχρά, ἀγαπητοί, καὶ λίαν αἰσχρά. 


epithet is applied to the Scriptures. — 
It occurs above § 43, and in 2 Macc. 
viii. 23, and is so used both by Philo 
and by Josephus. 
4. ἐγκεκύφατε] See the note on §4o, © 
6. ποιήσαντος) ‘spent, as several 
times inthe N.T. See the references — 
in Grimm’s Clav. Nov. Test. 5.ν. ποιεῖν 
π. ἃ, p. 527 (ed. Thayer). ; 
8. εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὸν κιτ.λ.] The first 
part, as far as μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦτο, is taken © 
from Deut. ix. 12—14, which ho 
ever commences somewhat differentl 
καὶ εἶπε Κύριος πρός pe’ ᾿Ανάστηθι, κατά- 
βηθι τὸ τάχος, the remainder following 


















TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


Lut] 


157 
ἐκ τῆς ὁλοῦ ὧς ἐνετείλω ayToic, émoiHcan éayToic yw- 
᾿ ee, Pies / ‘ > ’ ᾿Ἶ ’ ‘ 
NeYmata. καὶ εἶπεν Κύριος πρὸς αὐτόν" Neddauxa πρὸς 
cé ἅπδξ Kal δὶς, λέγων, Ἑώὠρδκὰ τὸν λδὸν τοῦτον, Kal ἰδού 
ἐστιν οκληροτρᾶἄχηλοο᾽ ἔδοόν με ἐξολεθρεῦζοδι δύτούο, Kal 
ἐξαλείψω τὸ ὄνομὰ AYTAN ὑποκάτωθεν TOT OYPANOY καὶ 
TOIFC@ ce εἷς ἔθνος μέγὰ κἂὶ BAYMACTON KAI TTOAY μᾶλλον 
ἢ τοῦτο. Kai εἶπεν Λλωγοῆς: ΛΛηθὰμῶςο, Κύριε. Adec TEN 
AMAPTIAN τῷ AAM τούτῳ F κἀμὲ EZAAECIVON EK BIBAOY ZON- 

Nv , > / x / 9 ͵ 
των. ὦ μεγάλης ἀγάπης, ὦ τελειότητος ἀνυπερβλήτου" 
9 Μωὺῦσῆ, Μωῦσῆ] ...σημωυση A; μωσῆ, μωσῆ C (this Ms is most capricious, and 
both before and after this uses the other form μωυσῆς) ; om. S. To ἐκ γῆς 
Αἰγύπτου] C ; εκγησ........ vA; ἐξ Αἰγύπτου S, with the Hebrew. 11 ἐποίησαν 
AC (Lxx A with the Hebr); καὶ ἐποίησαν S. The καὶ appears in B of the 
LXx. χωνεύματα] AC; χώνευμα (owing to the absence of ribui) 5. In the 
Lxx A has χωνευτά, B χώνευμα with the Hebr. 14 ἐστιν] def. A; ἐστι CS with 
Clem. The editors (myself included) following Young had supplied the lacuna in 


A with λαός from the 1ΧΧ (ἰδοὺ λαὸς σκληροτράχηλός ἐστιν), though Potter (Clem. 
Alex. Strom. iv. 19, p. 617) had warned them that Clement of Alexandria supplied 





the right word (ἐστιν). 
ἔασον. 
S apparently. 
hoc 8. 


the Lxx very closely (compare also 
Exod. xxxii. 7, 8). After μᾶλλον ἢ 
τοῦτο the parallel narrative in Exod. 
xxxli is taken up, and the substance 
of vv. 10, 31, 32 is given in a com- 
pressed form. See Barnab. ὃ 4 λέγει 
yap οὕτως Κύριος, Μωῦσῆ, Μωῦσῆ, xa- 
τάβηθι τὸ τάχος, ὅτι ἠνόμησεν ὃ λαός 
σου οὗς ἐξήγαγες ἐκ γῆς Αἰγύπτου, and 
again § 14 εἶπεν Κύριος πρὸς Μωῦσῆν, 
Μωῦσῆ, Μωῦσῆ, κατάβηθι τὸ τάχος ὅτι 
ὁ λαός σου ὃν ἐξήγαγες ἐκ γῆς Αἰγύπτου 
ἠνόμησεν. The coincidence in the 
repetition of the name Maia}, Maton, 
is not sufficient to show that the one 
writer was indebted to the other (as 
Hilgenfeld seems to think, here and 
p- xx); for, though the name is not 
repeated at this place in either of the 
Mosaic narratives, it may very easily 
have been inserted independently by 


ἔασον] AC; καὶ ἔασον S. 
ἐξολεθρεῦσαι] ....εθρευσαι A; ἐξολοθρεῦσαι C ; ἐξολεθρεύσω (or -λοθρεύσω) 

17 εἶπεν] def. A; εἶπε. 
19 ὦ μεγάλη] A; μεγάλης (om. ὦ) C. 


In the Lxx B has καὶ νῦν 


τὴν ἁμαρτίαν] AC; peccatum 


both writers from Exod. iii. 4. 

16. θαυμαστὸν] So quoted also by 
Clem. Alex., but it is ἰσχυρὸν in the 
Lxx. The combination μέγα καὶ 
θαυμαστὸν occurs also §§ 26, 50. 

πολὺ μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦτο] 1.6. πλεῖον 
τούτου, an attempt to render the 
Hebrew idiom 336 2, ‘greater 
than it’. See ii. § 2 from Is. liv. 1. 

Clem. Alex., Strom. iv. 19 (p. 617) 
αὐτίκα οὐχ ὁ Μωῦσῆς κιτιλ., para- 
phrases the remainder of this chapter 
from καὶ εἶπεν κιτιλ., giving the same 
quotations as the Roman Clement. 

19. ὦ ὦ] According to the rule of 
the grammarians the interjections 
should be so accentuated, not ὦ, ὦ ; 
see Chandler Greek Accentuation 
§ 904, p. 246 sq. The editors here 
vary 


158 


παρρησιάζεται θεράπων πρὸς κύριον, αἰτεῖται ἄφεσιν ' 
τῷ πλήθει ἢ καὶ ἑαυτὸν ἐξαλειφθῆναι μετ᾽ αὐτών ἀξιοῖ. 

LIV. Τίς οὖν ἐν ὑμῖν γενναῖος ; τίς εὔσπλαγχνος: 
τίς πεπληροφορημένος ἀγάπης; 
στάσις καὶ ἔρις καὶ σχίσματα, ἐκχωρῶ, ἄπειμι οὗ ἐὰν 5 


βούλησθε, καὶ 


/ , \ , ΄ ΄ > , 
πλήθους: μόνον τὸ ποίμνιον τοῦ Χριστοῦ εἰρηνευνέτω 

A ΄σ / ΄ / 
μετὰ τῶν καθεσταμένων πρεσβυτέρων. τοῦτο ὁ ποιή- — 


1 θεράπων] AS; δεσπότης C. 


ἐγὼ éxxwp® (apparently) S. 
κλαιοσ A. 10 τόπος] τοπωσ A. 


1. θεράπων] Bryennios adopts the 
reading of C δεσπότης, i.e. ‘as a 
master’; but this does not represent 
the fact and cannot be right. 

LIV. ‘Is any one noble, tender- 
hearted, loving? Let him declare 
his willingness to withdraw, that the 
flock of Christ may be at peace. He 
will not want a place of retirement. 
The whole earth will be ready to 
receive him, for Zhe earth is the 
Lora’s and the fulness thereof. This 
has been the conduct of the true 
citizens of God’s kingdom in all 
ages.’ 

3. Tis οὖν κιτιλ.] This passage, as 
far as καθεσταμένων πρεσβυτέρων, is 
quoted in a collection of extracts 
preserved by an anonymous writer in 
Syriac ; see above, I. p. 183. 

Epiphanius also (Haer. xxvii. 6, p. 
107) quotes a few words, but incor- 
rectly and at second hand (see above, 
I. p. 408 sq). He had read them in 
certain ὑπομνηματισμοί, which I have 
elsewhere (I. p. 327 54) given reasons 
for ‘supposing to have been the ‘Me- 
moirs’ (ὑπομνήματα) of Hegesippus. 
The passage suggests to Epiphanius 
a solution of the difficulty attending 
the lists of the early Roman bishops. 
He conjectures that Clement, after 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


΄σ A / \ - 
ποιῶ τὰ προστασσόμενα ὑπο τοῦ 


3 duiv] AS; ἡμῖν C. 
pnuévos] AC; plenus (impletus)S. See the lower note. 
6 βούλησθε] βουλησθαι A. 





























εἰπάτω: Ei ov ἐμὲ 


4 πεπληροῴο- — 
5 ἐκχωρῶ] AC; — 
9 κλέος]. 


12 πολιτείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ] A; τοῦ Θεοῦ — 


being consecrated by S. Peter, may 
have acted as he here advises others ~ 
to act, and have refrained from active ~ 
ministrations (παραιτησάμενος ἤργει) — 
till the deaths of Linus and Cletus. — 
Compare Cic. Aro Miz. § 93 (to which ~ 
Fell refers) ‘Tranquilla republica — 
cives mei (quoniam mihi cum illis 
non licet) sine me ipsi, sed per me — 
tamen, perfruantur ; ego cedam δἵ- 
que abibo.’ It would seem (from 
the reference to patriotic kings and 
rulers in the next chapter) as though ~ 
Clement had read this passage. : 

There are several echoes of this 
passage in John of Ephesus (iv. 13, _ 
48, 60), as pointed out by Bensly. — 
If these be not accidental he probably — 
got them from the ὑπομνηματισμοὶ 
which supplied Epiphanius with his 
quotation, or from the collection which 
the Syriac writer had before him. 

4. πεπληροφορημένος] In the New 
Testament this verb has only the 
following senses: (1) ‘to fulfil’, 2 
Tim. iv. 5, 17; (2) in the passiv : 
‘to be fully believed’ (e.g. Luke i. 1), 
or ‘to be fully persuaded’ (e.g. Rom 
iv. 21). Here, if the reading be cor 
rect, it must be equivalent to 1 
ρωμένος, ‘ filled full’; but of this sense. 
though natural in itself, the lexico 








Ly] 


΄“ / / lo ͵ 
σας ἑαυτῷ μέγα κλέος ἐν Χριστῷ περιποιήσεται, Kat 


ΓΟ ’ὔ ’ > / 
πᾶς τόπος δέξεται αὐτόν: 


, 2 a 
TAF PQ@MA AYTHC. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


159 


\ 


τοῦ γὰρ Kypioy ᾧ' γῆ καὶ τὸ 


~ /, ‘\ , 
ταῦτα οἱ πολιτευόμενοι THY ἀμεταμέ- 


Ἃ ~ ~ > , \ , 
λητον πολιτείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐποίησαν καὶ ποιήσουσιν. 


ΠΥ. 


af δὲ \ « ὃ 7 2 “ ΓΊΦΕΙ > 
va € καὶ ὑπο εἰγματα εὔνων ενεγκωμεν 


\ ~ ΄' > , 
πολλοὶ βασιλεῖς καὶ ἡγούμενοι, Χοιμικοῦ τινος ἐνστάν- 
~~ \ 
TOS καιροῦ, χρησμοδοτηθέντες παρέδωκαν ἑαυτοὺς εἰς 


πολιτείαν (. 


para C. ἐνέγκωμεν] AC ; 


13 ὑποδείγματα) AS (ribui however being omitted); ὑπομνή- 
add. vobis S. 


14 πολλοὶ...καιροῦ] C; multi 


reges et magnates ὁ principibus populorum, qui guum tempus afflictionis vel famis 
alicujus instaret populo S. This is unusually paraphrastic, but perhaps does not 
represent a various reading. There is however a confusion of λοιμός and λιμός. 


do not furnish any example nor have 
I succeeded in finding a distinct 
instance. In the only passage how- 
ever where it occurs in the Lxx, 
Eccles. viii. 11 ἐπληροφορήθη καρδία 
υἱῶν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῦ ποιῆσαι 
τὸ πονηρόν, the corresponding Hebrew 
is 35 xdp, ‘the heart was full to do 
etc.’ The word seems to be confined 
almost exclusively to biblical and 
ecclesiastical writings. 

ὃ. καθεσταμένων ‘duly appointed,’ 
as described in the earlier chapters, 
§ 43,44 (τοὺς κατασταθέντας ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνων). 

10. τοῦ γὰρ Κυρίου x.r.A.] A noble 
application of Ps. xxiv. 1. He retires 
in God’s cause, and there is room 
for him everywhere on God’s earth. 

11. πολιτευόμενοι... πολιτείαν] The 
idea of a spiritual polity to which the 
several members owe a duty is pro- 
minent in the context (e.g. ὑπὸ τοῦ 
πλήθους), and is still further developed 
by the comparison with secular states 
andstatesmen inthe following chapter. 

12. πολιτείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ] Comp. Mart. 
Polyc. 17 τὴν ἀνεπίληπτον αὐτοῦ πο- 
λιτείαν. 

LV. ‘Even heathen nations have 
set bright examples of this self-denial. 
Kings and rulers have died for the 
common weal ; statesmen have of their 


free will withdrawn into exile to lull 
factions. Among ourselves many 
have become slaves to ransom or to 
feed others. Even women, strength- 
ened by God’s grace, have been brave 
as men. Judith and Esther by 
their patriotic courage delivered the 
people from slavery and destruction.’ 

14. πολλοὶ βασιλεῖς x.7.A.] Such 
feats of patriotism as were exhibited 
by Codrus, by Bulis and Sperthias, by 
M. Curtius ; ‘Quantus amor patriae 
Deciorum in pectore, quantum dilexit 
Thebas, si Graecia vera, Menoeceus.’ 
The λοιμικός τις καιρὸς is a type of 
the sort of crisis which called forth 
these deeds of heroic self-sacrifice. 
Origen (tu Foann. vi. § 36, Iv. P. 1 53) 
refers to this passage, μεμαρτύρηται 
δὲ καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ὅτι πολλοί 


4 -“" » Ul > - 
τινες, λοιμικῶν ἐνσκηψάντων ἐν ταῖς 


ἑαυτῶν πατρίσι νοσημάτων, ἑαυτοὺς 
σφάγια ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ παραδεδώκασι" 
καὶ παραδέχεται ταῦθ᾽ οὕτως γεγονέναι 
οὐκ ἀλόγως πιστεύσας ταῖς ἱστορίαις ὁ 
πιστὸς Κλήμης ὑπὸ Παύλου μαρτυρού- 
μενος. ἴῃ several other passages also 
(c. Cels. i. 31, I. p. 349; 2 Foann. 
xxviii. 8.14, IV. p. 393; ad Rom. iv. 
§ 11, IV. p. 541) he uses similar lan- 
guage, but without mentioning Cle- 
ment’s name, 


—— ππῇῆᾷΦφψΦΔΦΗΥ 


160 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT [Lv 


θάνατον, ἵνα ῥύσωνται διὰ τοῦ ἑαυτῶν αἵματος τοὺς 
πολίτας. πολλοὶ ἐξεχώρησαν ἰδίων πόλεων, ἵνα μὴ 
στασιάζωσιν ἐπὶ πλεῖον. ἐπιστάμεθα πολλοὺς ἐν ἡμῖν 
παραδεδωκότας ἑαυτοὺς εἰς δεσμά, ὅπως ἑτέρους λυτρώ- 
σονται. πολλοὶ ἑαυτοὺς παρέδωκαν εἰς δουλείαν, καὶ 5 
λαβόντες Tas τιμὰς αὐτῶν ἑτέρους ἐψώμισαν. πολλαὲ 
γυναῖκες ἐνδυναμωθεῖσαι διὰ τῆς χάριτος τοῦ Θεοῦ 

5 παρέδωκαν] A and so S (apparently) ; ἐξέδωκαν C. 


C (see Bryennios Didache p. py’). S has a singular. 
12 δι᾽ dydarnv...daod] AC; propter amorem 


9 τῆς πόλεως] AC ; urbe sua 8. 


2. πολλοὶ ἐξεχώρησαν «.t.r.] Like 
Lycurgus at Sparta, or Scipio Afri- 
canus at Rome. Of the latter it is 
remarked by Fell that ‘Clementis 
nostri fere verbis urbi valedixit, di- 
cens Exeo, si plus quam tibi [tibi 
guam] expedit crevi? (Seneca Efpist. 
86). 

3. ἐν ἡμῖν] Gundert (Zettschr. Καὶ 
Luther. Theol. 1853, p. 649 sq) ex- 
plains this ‘among us Romans,’ sup- 
posing that Clement is still referring 
to examples of heathen self-devotion. 
This view is adopted by Lipsius (p. 
155), Hilgenfeld, and others. But, 
whatever may have been the miseries 
inflicted on the Roman citizens by the 
civil wars and by imperial despotism, 
the mention of slavery and ransom 
seems to be decisive against this in- 
terpretation. Here, as in the parallel 
passage § 6, ἐν ἡμῖν may refer indeed 
to Romans but to Christian Romans, 
of whom a considerable number be- 
longed to the slave class and the 
lower orders. The ransom of slaves 
and the support of captives were re- 
garded as a sacred duty by the early 
Christians generally, and the brethren 
of Rome especially were. in early 
times honourably distinguished in 
this respect: see the notes on Ign. 
Smyrn. 6 and on Rom. 1. 

4. λυτρώσονται] This construction 


































δουλείαν] A; δουλείας 
8 Ἰουδὶθ] ιουδειθ A. 


of ὅπως with a future is possible (βθθ ὦ 


Winer § xii. p. 304), though it does 
not occur in the New~ Testament, 
where ἵνα is several times so used. 
But we ought perhaps to read λυτρώ- 
σωνται, though both our Greek MSS 
have λυτρώσονται. 

6. τὰς τιμὰς αὐτῶν] ‘the value of 
themselves’ The form αὑτῶν (adopt- 
ed by Hilgenfeld) must certainly be 
rejected from the New Testament, 
and probably from Clement also: 566. 
above 9, 12, 14, 30, 32. ͵ 

ἐψώμισαν] The word is used se- — 
veral times in the LXx and gener- — 
ally as a translation of yon ‘to give — 
to eat’: comp. also 1 Cor. xiii. 3. 
Like so many other words (e.g. yop- — 
τάζεσθαι, see the note Philippians — 
iv. 12), it has in the later language — 
lost the sense of ridicule or meanness, 
which belonged to it in its origin; — 
and Coleridge’s note on its ‘half sa- 
tirical’ force in 1 Cor. xiii. 3 (quoted 
in Stanley’s Corinthians |.c.) seems to — 
be overstrained. On the other hand, — 
it is especially appropriate of feeding — 
the poor and helpless, the sick man — 
or the child. \‘g 

πολλαὶ γυναῖκες κιτιλ] The whole 
of this passage about Judith and 
Esther is paraphrased by Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 19 (p. 617), immediately 
after the paragraph relating to Moses 


































Lv] 


14 θηλείας] θηλιασ A. 


(already quoted p. 156); and some- 

times he gives the very words of the 

elder Clement, e.g. ἡ τελεία κατὰ πίστιν 

Ἔσθήρ. But he does not acknow- 

ledge his obligation in this passage, 

though in the preceding chapter he 
has directly quoted the Roman Cle- 
_ ment. 

8. Ἰουδὶ0}] This passage has a 
critical value as containing the ear- 
liest reference to the Book of Judith, 
which was apparently unknown to, 
as it is unmentioned by, Josephus. 
Volkmar (7heol. Fahrb. 1856 p. 362 

sq, and 1857 p. 441 sq, Einl. in die 
Apokr. τ. 1. p. 28, and elsewhere), 
followed by Baur (Lehrd. der Christi. 
Dogmeng. ed. 2, p. 82, and in other 
places), Hitzig (Zeitschr. fiir Wis- 
sensch. Theol. 1860, 111. p. 240 sq), 
and Graetz (Gesch. der Fuden vom 
_ Untergang etc. p. 132 sq, ed. 2, 1866), 
_ places the writing of that book after 
‘the Jewish war of Trajan, and as 
“ἃ consequence denies the authenti- 
city of the Epistle of Clement. More 
_ Sober critics however date the Book of 
Judith about the second century be- 
fore the Christian era, e.g. Fritzsche 
ἜΤΗ. Ὁ. 127 sq, in the Kurzgef. 
_Handb. zu den Apokr., Ewald Gesch. 
_ des Volkes Isr. wv. pp. 396, 541 sq, 
Westcott in Smmith’s Dictionary of 
_ the Bible τ. p. 1174, besides R. A. 
Se. CLEM. Il. 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


᾿ἐπετελέσαντο πολλὰ ἀνδρεῖα. 


civitatis patrum suorum et propter populum S. 


161 


᾿Ιουδὶθ ἡ μακαρία, ἐν 


“ἢ ΄-- ΄ ’ > ’ A ~ 
 συγκλεισμῷ οὔσης τῆς πόλεως, ἠτήσατο Tapa τῶν 
f 7 ‘ ᾿ “ «..Δ.Κ 3 ΄ 3 \ 
πρεσβυτέρων ἐαθῆναι αὐτὴν ἐξελθεῖν ets τὴν παρεμβο- 
ς΄ ΄΄ A ~ 
Anv τῶν ἀλλοφύλων" παραδοῦσα οὖν ἑαυτὴν τῷ κιν- 
7, πὸ - ΄ ~ 
δύνῳ ἐξῆλθεν Ot ἀγάπην τῆς πατρίδος καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ 
- - / 
τοῦ ὄντος ἐν συγκλεισμῷ, καὶ παρέδωκεν Κύριος ᾽Ολο- 
, > \ / ᾽ « Ἂν. Ὁ , A 
φέρνην ἐν χειρὶ θηλείας. οὐχ ἥττονι καὶ ἡ τελεία κατα 


13 συγκλεισμᾷ] συγκλισμω A. 


ἥττονι] ἡττονει A; ἧττον CS. 


Lipsius (Zettschr. f. Wissensch. Theol. 
1859, II. p. 39 sq) and Hilgenfeld (zd. 
1858, I. p. 247 sq, 1861, IV. p. 335 sq), 
who both have directly refuted Volk- 
mar’s theory; and indeed the date 
and authenticity of Clement’s Epistle 
are established on much more sub- 
stantial grounds than the shadowy 
and fanciful argument by which it is 
attempted to postdate the Book of Ju- 
dith. On this book see also an arti- 
cle of Lipsius Fiidische Quellen zur 
Fudithsage (Zeitschr. f. Wissensch. 
Theol. 1867, X. p. 337 348). Formore 
on this subject see the introduction, 
I. p. 353 56. 

12. τοῦ λαοῦ] ‘the chosen people’ 
(see the note on § 29), and thus op- 
posed to ἀλλόφυλοι. 

14. ἐν χειρὶ θηλείας] Taken from 
Judith xiii. 15 ἐπάταξεν αὐτὸν ὁ Κύριος 
ἐν χειρὶ θηλείας, xvi. 5 Κύριος παντο- 
κράτωρ ἠθέτησεν αὐτοὺς ἐν χειρὶ θηλείας. 
The expression ἐν χειρὶ therefore 
would seem to be the common Ara- 
maism, equivalent to διά: see the 
note on Galatians iii. 19. On the 
other hand the construction παρα- 
δοῦναι ἐν χειρί (or ἐν χερσίν) is com- 
mon in the LXX as an equivalent to 
παραδοῦναι eis χεῖρας: 6.5. the same 
expression 7° jn") is translated first 
καὶ παρέδωκεν ἐν χειρί (A) and then καὶ 
παρέδωκεν εἰς χεῖρας in Josh. x. 30, 32. 


II 


162 


πίστιν ἘΕσθὴρ κινδύνῳ ἑαυτὴν παρέβαλεν, ἵνα τὸ δωδε- 4 
κάφυλον τοῦ ᾿Ισραὴλ μέλλον ἀπολέσθαι ῥύσηται" διὰ ’ 
γὰρ τῆς νηστείας καὶ τῆς ταπεινώσεως αὐτῆς ἠξίωσα { 
τὸν παντεπόπτην δεσπότην, Θεὸν τῶν αἰώνων" Os ἰδὼν. / 
τὸ ταπεινὸν τῆς ψυχῆς αὐτῆς ἐρύσατο τὸν λαόν, ὧν 5 


χάριν ἐκινδύνευσεν. 


LVI. 


, / « - 3 ΄ 
παραπτώματι ὑπαρχόντων, ὅπως δοθῆ αὐτοῖς ἐπιείκεια 
\ , > Rik Oy RA ΚΙ μα 1a 
καὶ ταπεινοφροσύνη εἰς TO εἶξαι αὐτοὺς μὴ ἡμῖν ἀλλα. 


1 τὸ δωδεκάφυλον] A; δωδεκάφυλλον C ; tridbum 8. 
4 δεσπότην] A; om. C obviously by homeeoteleuton. 5 — 
has sfectatorem universi et dominum saeculorum deum, as if the order had been Ἵ 
5 ἐρύσατο] A; ἐρρύσατο C. 
ἐκινδύνευσεν] AC (but ἐκινδύνευσε C); ex its propter quae erat [ populus] in peri- ~ 


A3 ταπεινώσεως C. 
δεσπότην τῶν αἰώνων θεόν. 


culo S, probably only a mistranslation. 


I. τὸ δωδεκάφυλον] So Acts xxvi. 
7, Protev. Facob. § 1; see above τὸ 
δωδεκάσκηπτρον ὃ 31 with the note. 

3. ἠξίωσεν) ‘desired, entreated’, 
with an accusative of the person and 
without any dependent case or clause 
expressing the thing asked: as e.g. 
1 Mact. xi. 62 καὶ ἠξίωσαν of ἀπὸ Γάζης 
τὸν Ἰωνάθαν καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς δεξιάς, 
Clem. Hom. iii. 55 πρὶν αὐτὸν ἀξιώ- 
onre. With an infinitive or a final 
clause added this use of ἀξιοῦν τινὰ is 
more common. On another more 
questionable construction of ἀξιοῦν 
see above § 51. 

4. παντεπόπτην] So below § 64, 
Polyc. Phil. 7, Clem. Hom. iv. 14, 23, 
v. 27, viii. 19. The word is not found 
in the Lxx or New Testament. In the 
Orac. Sibyll. procem. 4 πανεπόπτης 


occurs ; and in heathen writers παν- 


ὅπτης is a common epithet of Ζεύς. 
Θεὸν τῶν αἰώνων] ‘the God ψ' all 
the ages’: comp. πατὴρ τῶν αἰώνων 
§ 35, ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν αἰώνων 1 Tim. i. 
17; comp. Ps. cxlv. 13 ἡ βασιλεία 
σου βασιλεία πάντων τῶν αἰώνων. The 


devil on the other hand is the god 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


΄ > / ~ / ’ 
Kai ἡμεῖς οὖν ἐντύχωμεν περὶ τῶν ἔν τινι 

























[Lv 


3 τῆς ταπεινώσεω!} — 


ὧν χάριν 


ἡ τῶν.. 


ὑπαρχόντων] AC; gui appre — 


(2 Cor. iv. 4) or the ruler (Ign. 
Ephes. 19) of this age or zon (τοῦ. 
αἰῶνος τούτου. See also the passage ~ 
in Clem. Hom. xx. 2 sq. ᾿ 
LVI. ‘Let us intercede for οἴδβη- 
ders, that they may submit in meek-— 
ness and humility, Let us be ever 
ready to give and to take admonition. — 
The Scriptures teach us that chas-— 
tisement is an instrument of mercy 
in the hands of God, that He inflicts. 
it as a fatherly correction, that it isa 
blessing to be so chastised, that the ~ 
man who endures patiently shall be 
restored again, shall be delivered 
from all perils, shall end his days in 
peace, and be gathered into the gar 
ner like the ripe sheaf, in due season.” 
7. ἔν τινι παραπτώματι κιτ.λ.] See 
Gal. vi. 1, of which this passage is 
perhaps a reminiscence. The ἡμεῖς 
and ἡμῖν seem to refer especially te 
the rulers of the Church and to con- 
trast with the ὑμεῖς, the leaders of tl 
feuds, at the beginning of § 57. 
8. ἐπιείκεια] ‘a spirit of concession 
See the notes on ὃ 1 ἐπιεικῆ and § 1 
ἐπιείκεια. The context here points to 













TO THE CORINTHIANS. 163 


Lv1] 


΄ , “-“ ~ « Ἁ ᾽ 3 ΄ ᾽ 
τὸ τῷ θελήματι τοῦ Θεοῦ. οὕτως γὰρ ἔσται αὐτοῖς ἔγ- 


\ ὔ ε \ \ Α \ A ee > 
καρπος Kai τελεία ἡ πρὸς TOV Θεὸν Kai τοὺς ὡγίους μετ 


΄σ , > 7 - 
οἰκτιρμῶν μνεία. ἀναλάβωμεν παιδείαν, ἐφ᾽ ἣ οὐδεὶς 


> ’ὔ > ~ ᾽ , ε , «' , 

ὀφείλει ἀγανακτεῖν, ἀγαπητοί. ἡ νουθέτησις, ἣν ποιού- 
/ / 

μεθα εἰς ἀλλήλους, καλή ἐστιν Kal ὑπεράγαν ὠφέλιμος" 


5 κολλᾷ γὰρ ἡμᾶς τῷ θελήματι τοῦ Θεοῦ. οὕτως γάρ 


φησιν ὁ ἅγιος λόγος" Πειλεήων ἐπδίδεγοέν me 6 Κύριος, 


Kal τῷ θἀνάτῳ OY πὰρέλωκέν με. Ὃν γὰρ drama Κύριος 


hensi sunt S (comp. Gal. vi. 1). 8 ἐπιείκεια] επιεικια A. 10 οὕτως] AC. 
Bryennios here, and again six lines below, tacitly reads οὕτω, and is followed by 
Hilgenfeld. C however has its usual contraction for -ws, not for -w, and therefore 
agrees with A in both places. II ἡ πρὸς... ἁγίους] AC; sive in deum sive in 
sanctos ὃ, as if it had read #...7 for καὶ... καὶ. τὸν] A; om, C. 12 olk- 
τιρμῶν μνεία] οικτειρμωνμνια A. παιδείαν] παιδιαν A. 13 ὀφείλει] οφιλει 


A. νουθέτησις5] νουθετησεισ A. 


its derivation and primary meaning, 
eis τὸ εἶξαι αὐτοὺς κιτιλ. 

10. ἔγκαρπος καὶ τελεία] See the 
note on ὃ 44, where there is the same 
combination of epithets. 

11. ἡ πρὸς τὸν Θεὸν κ-τ.λ.7 1.6, The 
record of them before God and the 
Church will redound to their benefit, 

and they will receive pity. The ex- 
pression ἡ πρὸς τὸν Θεὸν μνεία is al- 
most equivalent to the Old Testa- 
ment phrase μνημόσυνον ἔναντι Κυρίου, 
| Exod. xxviii. 23, xxx. 16, Is. xxiii. 18, 
Ecclus. 1. 16, comp. Acts x. 4. See 
also ὃ 45 ἔγγραφοι ἐγένοντο ἀπὸ τοῦ 
Θεοῦ ἐν τῷ μνημοσύνῳ αὐτῶν. 

᾿ τοὺς ἁγίους] ‘the Christian brother- 
‘hood’, as in the Apostolic writers: 
comp. Ign. Smyrn. 1, Mart. Polyc. 
Two other 


20. See 2 Cor. viii. 21. 


interpretations have been proposed : , 


(1) ‘the saints’, i.e. the beatified dead, 
in which case ἡ πρὸς τοὺς ἁγίους μνεία 
is supposed to refer to invocation of 
Saints. It is needless to say that this 
idea would be an anachronism in Cle- 
‘ment and for some generations after. 
‘the holy angels’, a sense which 






of ἅγιοι frequently has, e.g. Job 
xv. 15, Zech. xiv. 5, Ecclus. xlv. 2, 
Tobit viii. 15, 1 Thess. iii. 13 (pas- 
sages quoted by Hilgenfeld). This 
is a possible interpretation (comp. 
I Tim. v. 21 διαμαρτύρομαι ἐνώπιον 
τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ Χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ καὶ τῶν 
ἐκλεκτῶν ἀγγέλων), but the com- 
mon usage of οἱ ἅγιοι in the Apostolic 
writings is a safer guide. 

12. ἀναλάβωμεν παιδείαν] ‘let us 
receive correction’; comp. Heb, xii. 7 
eis παιδείαν ὑπομένετε κ-τ.λ. 

13. ἡ νουθέτησις] On the difference 
between νουθεσία (vovOérnois) and 
παιδεία, see Trench JV.7. Sym. 151 ser. 
§ xxxii; comp. Ephes. vi. 4. On the 
forms νουθεσία, νουθέτησις, see Lobeck 
Phryn. p. 512. 

16. Παιδεύων κ-τ.λ.] From the Lxx 
Ps. cxviii. 18 word for word. 

17. “Ov yap ἀγαπᾷ κιτ.λ.] From LXx 
Prov. iii, 12 word for word, as SA; 
but for παιδεύει B has ἐλέγχει. The 
Syro-Hexaplar text wavers, giving the 
equivalent to παιδεύει in the text and 
to ἐλέγχει in the margin. In Heb. 
xii. 6 it is quoted with παιδεύει as 


Γ1- 2 


164 


παιδεύει, MACTIFO] AE πᾶντὰ YION ON TApadé€yeTal’ 
me rap, φησιν, Aikaloc ἐν ἐλέει Kal ἐλέγξει Me, +ércoct δὲ 
ἁμδρτωλῶν MH AITANAT@ THN KEAAHN MOY. | 
λέγει" Maképioc ἄνθρωπος ὃν ἤλεγξεν ὁ Κύριος, νογθέ- 


THMA δὲ πὰντοκράτοροο μὴ ἀἁπὰνδίνου" 


ποιεῖ, Kal 


αὐτοῦ ἰάσδντο. 


ἑβδόμῳ OYY ἅψετδί COY KAKON* ἐν λιμῷ PyceTai ce ἐκ BANS= 
> Ll ‘ > ‘ ’ , 
TOY, EN πολεμῷ AE EK YEIPOC ΟἸδΔΗρου λύσει ce’ 


μάστιγος FAMCCHC οὲ κρύψει, 


ἐπερχομένων" ἀλίκων καὶ 

2 dlkaos] AS; κύριος C. 
See the lower note. 
depends on the absence of ridzi. 
sent ἂν in S. 


are found in the mss of the Lxx. 


here: in Rev. iii. 19 both words are 
combined, ἐγὼ ὅσους ἐὰν φιλῶ, ἐλέγχω 
καὶ παιδεύω. Clem. Alex. Paed. I. 9 
(p. 145) has παιδεύει, but his quotation 
is perhaps not independent of the 
Roman Clement. On the other hand 
Philo de Conj. Erud. grat. § 31 (1. 
Ρ. 544) quotes it with ἐλέγχει. This, 
which corresponds with the Hebrew, 
was probably the original reading of 
the LXxX, and all the texts with παι- 
Sever may perhaps have been derived 
directly or indirectly from the quota- 
tion in the Epistle to the Hebrews. 
I. Παιδεύσει κιτ.λ.] From Ps. cxli. 
5, word for word, if we read ἔλαιον. 
Our chief MS however has ελαιοσ, 1.6, 
ἔλεος (for so thescribe generally writes 
the word; see I. p. 121). On the 
other hand, the original reading of 
the LXX was unquestionably ἔλαιον 
(ἔλαιον is the oz, ἔλαιος the olive- 
tree and therefore out of place here) 
as it is in SBA, and apparently in 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


, > ’ 
TTAAIN ATTOKABICTHCIN’ 


ἑξάκις εξ ἀναγκῶν ἐξελεῖτδί ce, ἐν δὲ τῷ 


KAl οὐ μὴ φοβηθήσῃ κἀκῶν 
ἀνόμων 


ἔλεος] ἐλαιοσ A; ἔλεον (i.e. ἔλαιον) C and so 8. ; 
3 ἁμαρτωλῶν] A; ἁμαρτωλοῦ C, and so S, but the singular 

4 6v]) A; ὃν aC. There is nothing to repre- — 
5 ἀπαναίνου] AC; rejictat (or rejiciamus) S, and so the Pesh, 
8 οὐχ ἅψεται] oveoperar A; οὐ μὴ ἅψηται C3; non attrectabit S. Both readings” 
ἐν λιμῷ] AC; 
φοβηθῇς] A; οὐ φοβηθήση C. Both readings are found in the mss of the LXx, | 





























[on 


Tlaideycel 


/ Υ 
καὶ πάλιν 


αὐτὸς γὰρ ἀλγεῖν 5 


ETAICEN, KAl δὶ χεῖρες 


Kal ἀπὸ 


KATATEAACH, ἀπὸ δὲ. 


add. δὲ 5. 12 οὐ μὴ 


all existing MSS of the Lxx, the He- 
brew being yw ; but ἔλαιος (i.e. ἔλεος), 
might not unnaturally be substituted 
by some early transcriber on acco ey 
of the preceding ἐν ἐλέει. It is there- 
fore not impossible that Clement 
found this reading in his text of the 
LXX; see another instance of the 
same error above, § 18 (note). For 
the curious confusion of ἔλεος (€Aauos) 
and ἔλαιον (ἔλεον) in the liturgies 
see Swainson’s Greek Liturgies pp. 
xliii, 90, 127, 265, 331; where the 
answer of the people, ἔλεος, εἰρήνη 
becomes by expansion ἔλεον (ἔλαιον 
εἰρήνης, θυσίαν αἰνεσέως. The sym- 
bolism of the οὐέσε as denoting peace, 
and the manifold ritual uses Ὁ 0 
(see Smith-Cheetham Dict. of Ch: 
Antig. p. 1453 54) would assist in thi: 
confusion, Ἢ 
. 4. Μακάριος κτλ. ] From LXx J 
ν. 17—26 as read in BS, with s 
and unimportant differences, T 






1.11] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


165 


θηρίων ἀγρίων οὐ MF φοβηθῆς. θῆρες rap ἄγριοι eipHNey- 


; , ΠῚ ͵ < 3 ε 
COYCIN col’ εἶτὰ γνώσῃ, ὅτι εἰρηνεὐσει coy 0 οἰκοςσ’ F δὲ 


, “- - > " ς U ΄ ‘ a ‘ 
AlAITA THC CKHNHC COY OY ΜΕ AMAPTH, FN@CH AE OTI πολ 


5 τὸ ciépmMa coy, TA δὲ TEKNA COY ὥσπερ TO TAMBOTANON 



































ΤΟΥ͂ ἀγροῦ" 


CYNKOMICOEICA. 


ς 7 / 3 “ 
ὁσίας παιδείας αὐτοῦ. 


ΠΥΠ. 


γὰρ] AC; δὲ 8. 
AC; om. 8. 
παμβήτανον C. 


18 συνκομισθεῖσα] ov.... 


text of A presents considerable varia- 

tions, chiefly in adding clauses which 

are found in the Hebrew but wanting 
- inBS. The points in which Clement’s 
quotation agrees with A, as against 
BS (ἐξ. οὐχ ἅψεται for οὐ μὴ ἅψηται), 
_ are insignificant. 

7. ἑξάκις x.r.d.] For this Hebraism 

| where two successive numbers are 
| given to denote magnitude and in- 
| crease, see Prov. vi. 16 Hebr. (six, 
_ Seven, as here); Micah v. 5, Eccles. 
᾿ ΧΙ. 2 (seven, eight); Exod. xx. 5, etc. 
(three, four); Job xxxiii. 29 Hebr. 

Kwo, three). 

10. κακῶν] The LXxx text prefixes 
ἀπό (SBA). In the Syriac version 
: vy is made dependent on κακῶν 
‘the evils of the unrighteous’. 
12. θῆρες yap x.r.d.] As in the vision 
of Hermas V7zs. iv. 1, 2, where the 
wild beast is thus pacified. 

br 43. ἡ δὲ δίαιτα] ‘the abode’ ; see 

ove § 39. The Hebrew is quite 


13 εἰρηνεύσει] AC; εἰρηνεύει 8. 

14 gov] AS; om. C. 
16 ἐλεύσῃ! AC; but Bryennios tacitly prints ἐλεύσει. 
,σθεισα As συγκομισθεῖσα C. 
..9qva. A, Tischendorf justly remarked on the common restoration νουθετηθῆ- 
vat; ‘id vix recte, quum syllabae non ita dirimi solent [i.e. νουθετ[ηθηναι]. 
quiritur potius simile verbum ac mro|n@nvau.’ 


ἐλεήοῃ δὲ ἐν τάφῳ ὥςπερ citoc ὥριμος Kata 

KAIPON θεριζόμενοο, F ὥσπερ θημωνιὰ ἅλωνος καθ᾽ Span 
, 3 / / 

βλέπετε, ἀγαπητοί, πόσος ὑπερασπισ- 
/ > ~ / \ ΄σ ’ A 

Mos ἐστιν τοῖς παιδενομένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ δεσπότου" πατὴρ 
\ > \ 3Ὰ / ? ¥. ἫΝ “ ε “ \ “ 

oyap ἀγαθὸς ὧν παιδεύει εἰς τὸ ἐλεηθῆναι ἡμᾶς διὰ τῆς 


ε a Φ ε \ 8 ΄σ / 
Ὑμεῖς οὖν, of τὴν καταβολὴν τῆς στάσεως 


ἡ δὲ δίαιτα.. ἁμάρτῃ] 
15 παμβότανον͵ LXX; ...... τανον A; 


20 ἐλεηθῆναι] CS; 


Re- 
21 madelas] C3; π..διασ A. 


different. 

15. τὸ παμβότανον] ‘the manifold 
herbage’. It seems to be a ἅπαξ 
λεγόμενον till quite a late period. 
There is nothing in the Hebrew 
(awy) to explain the adoption of so 
unusual a word. 

16. ἐν τάφῳ] A Hebraism for εἰς 
τάφον ; see another instance on ὃ 55 
παρέδωκεν ἐν χειρί. 

17. θημωνιὰ] A word, it would ap- 
pear, almost confined to the Lxx, 
though θημὼν is as old as Homer, 
Od. v. 368. 

18. vmepaomopos] ‘protection’, 2 
Sam. xxii. 36, Ps. xviii. 35, Lam. iii. 64, 
Eccles. xxxi (xxxiv). 19. It does not 
occur in the New Testament. See 
the note on ὑπερασπιστὴς above, § 45. 

20. ἀγαθὸς ὧν] ‘of His kindness’ 
(as e.g. Ps. Ixxiii. 1), corresponding 
to ὃν γὰρ ἀγαπᾷ x... above. 

LVII. ‘And do you leaders of the 
schism submit to the elders, and ask 


166 


ποιήσαντες, ὑποτάγητε τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις Kal παι- 
δεύθητε εἰς μετάνοιαν, κάμψαντες τὰ γόνατα τῆν!" ἡ 
καρδίας aid μάθετε ὑποτάσσεσθαι, ἀποθέμενοι THY — 
ἀλαάζονα καὶ ὑπερήφανον τῆς γλώσσης ὑμῶν αὐθά- — 


δειαν" 


rol \ ~~ \ a 
Χριστοῦ μικροὺς καὶ ἐλλογίμους εὑρεθῆναι, ἢ Kal 
ε \ ~ > ΄σ > lanl > , > ΄ 
ὑπεροχὴν δοκοῦντας ἐκριφῆναι ἐκ τῆς ἐλπίδος αὐτοῦ. 
οὕτως γὰρ λέγει ἡ πανάρετος σοφία" Ἰλοὺ mporcomal | 


4 ἀλάζονα] AC; ἀλαζονείαν 8. 


yluous] A; add. ὑμᾶς C. S is doubtful. 
10 ὑπηκούσατε] AC; ὑπηκούετε S. 
14 ὑμῖν pri.] AC; 


δάξω] AS; διδάξαι C. 
Oo. A; si (ἢν) 5. 
A; om. S. ὅταν] orap A. 


pardon of God on your knees. It is 
far better that you should be of no 
account, so that the flock of Christ 
may have peace. Remember how 
sternly Wisdom rebukes the dis- 
obedient in the Book of Proverbs. 
She will laugh them to scorn when 
destruction cometh as a tempest. 
They mocked at her counsels before, 
and she will not hear them then.’ 

I. ὕποτ. τοῖς πρεσβ.] The same ex- 
pression occurs, I Pet. v. 5. 

2. κάμψαντες x.t.A.] Compare the 
expression in the prayer of Manasses 
(Apost. Const. ii. 22) viv κλίνω γόνυ 
καρδίας. So too Greg. Naz. Carm. ii. 
50, ver. 58 ovmoré σοι κάμψω γούνατ᾽ 
ἐμῆς κραδίης (11. p. 946, Caillau), and 
similarly Sir C. Hatton to Q. Eliza- 
beth (Froude’s History ΧΙ. p. 166) ‘1 
can use no other means of thankful- 
ness than by bowing the knees of my 
own heart with all humility’ etc. A 
strong oriental metaphor like ‘ gird- 
ing the loins of the mind’ (1 Pet. i. 
13), or ‘rendering the calves of the 
lips’ (Hosea xiv. 2). 

4. ἀλάζονα καὶ ὑπερήφανον) See 
Trench WV. 7. Sym. 151 ser. § xxix. 

7. δοκοῦντας] ‘held in repute’; 
see the note on Galatians ii. 2. 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


ἄμεινον γάρ ἐστιν ὑμῖν ἐν τῷ ποιμνίῳ τοῦ 5 































[ὑσπὶ ᾿ 


6 ἔλλο. 

9 ot 

13 ἡνίκα ἂν}. 
ὑμῶν S. 15 παρῇ!Ο; «θη 
16 θλίψις] A; add. καὶ στενοχωρία C, a — 


γλώσσης] A; γλώττης C. 
8 Ἰδοὺ] AC; add. yap S. 


τῆς ἐλπίδος αὐτοῦ] i.e. τοῦ Χρι- — 
στοῦ, either a subjective or an Οὔ- — 
jective genitive, ‘the hope which He — 
holds out’ or ‘the hope which reposes — 
in Him’. ἢ 

8. ἡ πανάρετος σοφία] The Book 
of Proverbs, besides the title com- 
monly prefixed to the LXx Version, 
Παροιμίαι or Παροιμίαι Σαλομῶντος, iS 
frequently quoted by early Christian 
writers as ἡ mavaperos σοφία ‘the Wis- — 
dom which comprises all virtues’ 
(for mavdperos comp. ὃ 1); see esp. 
Euseb. H.£. iv. 22, where speaking” 
of Hegesippus he says, οὐ μόνος δὲ 
οὗτος ἀλλὰ καὶ Εἰρηναῖος καὶ ὁ πᾶς 
τῶν ἀρχαίων χορὸς πανάρετον σοφίαν, 
τὰς Σολομῶνος παροιμίας ἐκάλουν. Some= 
times it bears the name σοφία sim- 
ply ; e.g. in Just. Mart. Dial. ὃ 129 
(p. 359 A), Melito in Euseb. 4, 
iv. 26, Clem. Alex. Protr. ὃ 8 (pp. 
67,68), Paed. ii. 2 (p. 182 ἡ θεία copia), 
Strom. ii. 18 (p. 472), Orig. He 72. 
xiv in Gen. § 2 (II. p. 97), bes 
others quoted in Cotelier. It is” 
probable inference from Eusebius 
(ll. cc.) that both Melito and Heges 
ippus derived the name from Jew vis 


1.011] 

































1 


n 
͵ 
n~ 


I5 @dpyBoc, F 


wanting also in the Lxx. 


‘Wisdom’, by rabbinical writers (see 
Fiirst Kanon des Alten Testaments, 
1868, p. 73 sq). The personification 
of Wisdom in the opening would lead 
naturally to this designation; e.g. 
Iren. iv. 20. 3, v. 20, 1, Philo de Edr. 
8 (1. p. 362), though Philo himself 
quotes the book as παροιμίαι 70. ὃ 20 
(I. p. 369). Whether the epithet 
_ mavaperos was first used by Clement 
and derived from him by later writers, 
or not, it is impossible to say. At 
the same time the title ἡ mavdperos 
σοφία is given, not only to the canoni- 
cal Book of Wisdom, but also to the 
apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon 
_ (Method. Symp. i. 3, ii. 7, noted by 
_ Hilgenfeld; Epiphan. de Mens. δέ 
_ Pond. ὃ 4,11. p. 162 ed. Petau; Greg. 
_ Nyss. c. Eunom., vii, 11. p. 638, Paris 
1638; [Athanas. ] Synops. ὃ 45, IL. p. 
332 F, τῆς σοφίας Σολομῶντος τῆς λε- 
᾿ γομένης παναρέτου ; ; and others: and 
its title in the list of books prefixed 
Ripa i is σοφία ἡ" πανάρετος), and to the 
apocryphal Ecclesiasticus or Wis- 
dom of Jesus the son of Sirach 
_ (Euseb. Chron. ΟἹ. cxxxvii ‘quem 
-yocant Panareton, Dem. Evang. viii. 
Ῥ. 393 Ἰησοῦς ὁ τοῦ Σειρὰχ ὁ τὴν 

ρυμένην πανάρετον σοφίαν συντάξας, 


πον 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


Adc τοῖς δὲ ἐμοῖς ἐλέγχοιο ἐπειθέ caTe* 


ς la > ‘ > , 
TH YMETEPA ATIMAEIO ETTITEAACOMAI, 


Aé κἀτδοτροφὴ ὁμοίὰ κἀτὰιγίδι TapH, ἢ 
3) ε τῳ , \ , 
Ερχητὰι YMIN θλιψιο KAI πολιορκιὰ. 


familiar combination in 5. Paul, Rom. ii. 9, viii. 35. 5. has affictio (saydiy) et 
angustia (NYWIIN) quae a proelio (RAP }O%); where affictio represents θλέψις 
and angustia quae a proelio is a paraphrase of πολιορκία. 
angustia quae a proelio represents στενοχωρία καὶ πολιορκία, treated as a ἕν διὰ δυοῖν, 
is not likely. The space in A will not admit καὶ στενοχωρία, and these words are 
ἐπικαλέσησθε] επικαλεσησθαι A. 


167 


ὑμῖν ἐμῆς πνοῆς ῥῆοιν, διδάξω δὲ ὕμᾶο τὸν ἐμὸν λόγον. 
τὸ ἐπειδὲ ἐκάλουν Kal ΟΥ̓Χ ὑπηκούοδτε, KAl ἐξέτεινον λόγογςε 
Kal οὗ προςείχετε, ἀλλὰ AKYPOYC ἐποιεῖτε τὰς ἐμὰς Boy- 


τοιγὰροῦν κἀγὼ 
KATAXAPOYMAI δὲ FNIKA 


” J se » \ «ες Ἃ > ͵ ς σὰ Ὕ 
ἂν ἔρχητδι ὕμιν ὄλεθροο KAI WC AN ἄφικητὰι YMIN AMNO® 


STAN 


ἔοτδι rap, STAN ἐπικὰ- 


The alternative that 


Hieron. Prol. in Libr. Sal., 1X. p. 
1293, etc.). Joannes Damasc. de Fid. 
Orth. iv. 17 (I. p. 284) says ἡ mavdpe- 
Tos, τουτέστιν ἡ Σοφία τοῦ Σολομῶντος 
καὶ ἡ Σοφία τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, thus including 
both these apocryphal books under 
the term, but excluding Proverbs 
which he has before mentioned as 
παροιμίαι ; and so Jerome Praef. in 
Libr. Salom. (IX. p. 1293) ‘ Fertur et 
mavaperos Jesu filii Sirach liber et 
alius ψευδεπίγραφος qui Sapientia Sa- 
lomonis inscribitur’, Moreover the 
name of ‘ Wisdom’ is occasionally 
given also to Ecclesiastes (Fiirst l.c. 
p- 91) and to the Song of Songs 
(Fiirst lc. p. 85, and Cotelier here). 
And still more generally the third 
group of the Old Testament writings, 
the ἁγιόγραφα or ypadeia, is some- 
times called 7NSN ‘ Wisdom’ (Fiirst 
l.c. p. 55), because it comprises Pro- 
verbs and the allied books, as it is 
elsewhere called ψαλμοὶ or ὕμνοι (see 
above § 28) from another most im- 
portant component element. 

Ἰδοὺ «.7.A.] A close quotation 
from the LXx Prov. i. 23—33. The 
variations are unimportant, and not 
greater than between one MS and 
another of the LXx. 


168 


AécHcoé με, ἐγὼ δὲ οὐκ EICAKOYCOMAl ὑμῶν" ZHTFCOYCIN — 
με κἀκοὶ Kal ΟΥ̓Χ ΕΥ̓ΡΗΘΟΥΟΙΝ᾽ €MICHCAN - FAP COMIAN, τὸν 4 
Aé φόβον τοῦ Kypioy οὐ προείλαντο, οὐδὲ ἔθελον Emaic 
προσέχειν BOYAdic, ἐμγκτήριζον δὲ Emoyc ἐλέγχογο᾽ τοιγὰρ- 


οἵν ἔλοντὰι τῆς EayYT@N 


ἑδυτῶν δοεβείδο πλησθήσονται ἀνθ᾽ ὧν γὰρ ἠδίκουν νη- 
πίογο, ONEYOHCONTAI, Kal ἐξετδομός δοεβεῖο ὀλεῖ" ὁ δὲ 
> io > ͵ , > > ' ’ ‘ c 

ἐμοῦ ἀκούων κἀτδοκηνώσει ἐπ᾽ ἐλπίδι πεποιθώς, Kal HCY- 
χάσει ἀφόβως ἀπὸ TANTOC Kakof. 


1 ζητήσουσιν] ζητήσουσι C3 ζητ....... 


runt 8. 


6. πλησθήσονται] Our principal Ms 
(A) fails us at this point. The letters 
πλησθησον occur towards the end of 
the last line in a page, fol. 167 b. 
The margin is torn, so that a few 
letters have disappeared. It resumes 
again at the beginning of § 64, a leaf 
having been lost ; see the introduc- 
tion, I. p. 118. 

7. ἐξετασμὸς ‘enquiry’, ‘investi- 
gation’, i.e. ‘trial and judgment’, 
as in Wisd. iv, 6. The Hebrew 
however is mov, ‘security’, i.e. 
‘false confidence’; which the LxXx 
translators seem either to have mis- 
read or to have connected with nw, 
‘to ask, enquire’. In the earlier 
part of the verse the LXx departs 
widely from the Hebrew. 

8. πεποιθώς] This word does not 
occur in the great MSS of the Lxx 
(SBA); nor indeed, so far as I know, 
is the reading κατασκηνώσει ἐπ᾽ (v. 1. 
ev) ἐλπίδι πεποιθώς found in any MS 
of this version, though ἀναπαύσεται 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ πεποιθώς appears in place of 
it in no. 248 (Holmes and Parsons), 
this last being a Hexaplaric reading 
(see Field’s Hexapla ad loc.). Clem. 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


ὁλοῦ TOYC KapToye, 


Α; ζητοῦσιν (?) S. 
προείλαντο] προειλα... A (as in the Lxx; Tischendorf who formerly read προσίλα 
afterwards accepted my reading of A); προείλοντο C (see above, I. p. 127); elege- 
ἡ ἐξετασμὸς ἀσεβεῖς ὀλεῖ] C3; inguisitio impiorum perdit ipsos 8. 
8 πεποιθώς] confidens S, using the same expression which occurs just below (§ 58) 
as the rendering of πεποιθότες ; om. C: see the lower note. 






































[LVII 


eo 
Kal TAC 5. 


3 τοῦ] A; om. C. 


10 mavaryly] C3 


Alex. however clearly so quotes it, 
Strom. ii. 22 (p. 501 sq) ἡ mavdperos — 
Σοφία λέγει" Ὃ δὲ ἐμοῦ ἀκούων κατα- — 
σκηνώσει ἐπ᾽ ἐλπίδι πεποιθώς" ἡ γὰρ τῆς 
ἐλπίδος ἀποκατάστασις ὁμωνύμως ἐλπὶς — 
εἴρηται" διὰ []. διὸ] τοῦ Κατασκηνώσει — 
τῇ λέξει παγκάλως προσέθηκε τὸ Πε- — 
ποιθώς ; though elsewhere, Strom. ii. 8 
(Ρ. 449), iv. 23 (p. 632), he has — 
ἀναπαύσεται ἐπ᾽ εἰρήνης (-νῃ) πεποιθώς. 
It is clear that πεποιθώς is genuine — 
in the text of our Clement; since he 
dwells upon it in the beginning οὗ 
the next chapter, κατασκηνώσωμεν 
πεποιθότες κιτιλ. For other examples — 
of this manner of emphasizing the — 
key-word of a quotation see the 
note on ὃ 46. From the manner in ~ 
which Clem. Alex. begins his quota-— 
tion from Prov. i. 33, it may perhaps” 
be inferred that the passage of his — 
elder namesake was in his mind. 
LVIII. ‘Let us therefore obey, 
that we may escape these threatened 
judgments, and dwell in safety. Re- 
ceive our counsel, and you will neve 
have occasion to regret it. As surely 
as God liveth, he that perform 
all His commandments shall ha 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 169 


LVI] 


ΑΝ LVI. Ὑπακούσωμεν οὖν τῷ παναγίῳ Kai ἐνδόξῳ 
ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ, φυγόντες τὰς προειρημένας διὰ τῆς 
σοφίας τοῖς ἀπειθοῦσιν ἀπειλάς, ἵνα κατασκηνώσωμεν 
πεποιθότες ἐπὶ τὸ ὁσιώτατον τῆς μεγαλωσύνης αὐτοῦ 





ὄνομα. δέξασθε τὴν συμβουλὴν ἡμῶν, καὶ ἔσται 


ζ γὰρ ὁ Θεὸς καὶ ζῃ ὁ Κύριος 


lal \ \ ΄σ \ v4 / £ 
᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστὸς καὶ TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον, ἣ TE πίστις 
3 


15 ἀμεταμέλητα ὑμῖν. 


\ € > \ “ > -~ « € / ? 
καὶ ἡ ἐλπίς τών ἐκλεκτῶν, OTL O ποιήσας EV ταπει- 
/ 5... fon > 7 ? / \ 
νοφροσύνη μετ᾽ ἐκτενοῦς ἐπιεικείας ἀμεταμελήτως Ta 


S translates as if ἁγίῳ. In § 35 πανάγιος is fully rendered. 11 φυγόντες] ; 
φεύγοντες (?) 5. 13 ὁσιώτατον] C; S renders as if ὅσιον, but the translator’s 
practice elsewhere in rendering superlatives is so uncertain, that no inference can 


be drawn as to the reading. 
2] CS; Basil omits this second ζῇ. 
and the beginning of the next. 


a place among them that are saved 
through Jesus Christ, through whom 
is the glory unto Him for ever.’ 

10. παναγίῳ] So also above, ὃ 35 ; 
see the note there. 

11. τῆς σοφίας] Wisdom is re- 
presented as the speaker in the pas- 
sage of Proverbs just quoted. More- 
over this name Σοφία was given to 
the whole book ; see above, p. 166. 

12. katacknvdcwper]‘dwellinpeace’. 
As the common LXxX rendering of 
j2w, for which purpose it was chosen 
doubtless in part owing to the simi- 
larity of sound (see the note on μωμο- 
σκοπηθέν, § 41), it implies the idea of 
‘rest, peace’. 

15. . auerauéAnta] A somewhat 
favourite word of Clement, §§ 2, 54. 
So ἀμεταμελήτως, below. For the 
plural see Kiihner Gramm. 11. p. 59 sq. 

ᾧῇ yap κιτ.λ.] This passage is quoted 
by 5. Basil, de Spir. Sanct. 29 (III. 
p- 61); see above, I. p. 169, where the 
quotation is given. For the form of 
adjuration {7 ὁ Θεὸς...ὅτι, ‘As surely 
as God liveth...so surely’, comp. ζῇ 
᾿ς Κύριος érv...which occurs frequently 


14 ἡμῶν] add. ἀδελφοί [μου] S. 


15 καὶ 
Κύριος] twice in S, at the end of one line 


in the LXx, eg. I Sam. xx. 3, xxvi. 
16, xxix. 6, 1 Kings xxii. 14, 2 Kings 
v. 20, etc. So too Rom. xiv. I1 
ζῶ ἐγώ, λέγει Κύριος, ὅτι ἐμοὶ κιτιλ. 
(where S. Paul is quoting loosely 
from Is. xlv. 23, combining it how- 
ever with the ζῶ ἐγὼ κιτιλ. of Is. 
xlix. 18); comp. 2 Cor. i. 18, and see 
Fritzsche Rom. 11. p. 242 sq, III. 
p. 187. For a similar reference to 
the Trinity see above, § 46. Here 
They are described as ‘the faith and 
hope (i.e. the object of faith and 
hope) of the elect’; for 7 re πίστις 
κιτιλ. are obviously in apposition to 
the preceding words. For ἐλπίς, 
meaning ‘the object of hope’, see the 
note on Ign. Magu. 11 Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ 
τῆς ἐλπίδος ἡμῶν; comp. I Tim, 1. I. 
On the other hand the sense of πίστις 
is different in Ign. Smyrn. 10 ἡ 
τελεία πίστις, Ἰησοῦς Χριστός (see 
the note there). 

17. τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν]; A_ favourite 
word with Clement, §§ 1, 2, 6, 46, 49, 
52, 59 

18. μετ᾽ ἐκτενοῦς émvetxeias] The 
phrase occurs again below, ὃ 62. It 







170 THE EPISTLE OF 85. CLEMENT [uve 


ἣν Ἃ μὴ - - / 7 \ , δ᾽ 
ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ δεδομένα δικαιώματα καὶ προστάγματα, 
Φ 3 ῇ / ᾽ \ \ 
οὗτος ἐντεταγμένος Kal ἐλλόγιμος ἔσται εἰς τὸν ἀριθμὸν 
cad / \ > = ~ ? 25 3. ae q 
τών σωζομένων διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ, δι’ οὗ ἐστιν αὐτῷ 


ἡ jae εἰς TOUS αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 


δ ἡμῶν εἰρημένοις, γινωσκέτωσαν ὅτι παραπτώσει καὶ 
/ ~ \ / ~ A ~ 
κινδύνῳ οὐ μικρᾷ ἑαυτοὺς ἐνδήσουσιν, ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀθῷοι 


I καὶ προστάγματα] C; om. 5. 


is a sort of oxymoron, or verbal para- 
dox, like ‘strenua inertia’, ‘lene tor- 
mentum’: for ἐπιείκεια involves the 
idea of ‘concession’; comp. 1 Thess. 
iv. 11 φιλοτιμεῖσθαι ἡσυχάζειν. So 
Greg. Naz. Ovat. iv. 79 (I. p. 116), 
speaking of Julian’s persecution, says 
ἐπιεικῶς ἐβιάζετο. The substantive ém- 
εἰκεια occurs also §§ 13, 30, 56: the 
adjective ἐπιεικής, 1, 21, 29. The fre- 
quency of these words aptly indicates 
the general spirit of the letter; see 
the note on § 1, and the introduc- 
tion, I. p. 97. 

2. ἐλλόγιμος] Used here, as in 
§ 57, for those who have a place 
among the elect of God: see also 
§$ 44, 62. Comp. Plato Phi/eb. 17 E 
οὐκ ἐλλόγιμον οὐδ᾽ ἐνάριθμον. 

τὸν ἀριθμὸν As above §§ 2, 35, 
and below § 59, with the note. 

3. τῶν σωζομένων) ‘of those that 
are in the way of salvation’, as 
Luke xiii. 23, Acts ii. 47, 1 Cor. i. 18, 
2 Cor. ii. 15. The opposite is οἱ 
ἀπολλύμενοι, I Cor. i. 18, 2 Cor. ii. 15, 
iv. 3, 2 Thess. ii. 10. Comp. also 
Clem. Hom. xv. 10, Apost. Const. 
viii. 5, 7, 8. In the Apost. Const. viii. 
5 (comp. v. 15) the words are τὸν 
ἀριθμὸν τῶν σωζομένων as here. 

LIX. ‘If any disobey our counsels, 
they will incur the greatest peril ; 
while we shall have absolved our- 
selves from guilt. And we will pray 
that the Creator may preserve intact 



























ἀμήν. 


11 ἄθραυστον] C; add. deus S. 


the number of His elect through 
Jesus Christ, who called us from 
darkness to light. Open our eyes, 
Lord, that we may know Thee, who 
alone art Holiest of the holy and ~ 
Highest of the high ; who settest up ~ 
and bringest low; who bestowest — 
riches and poverty, life and death; — 
who art the God of all spirits and οὗ 
all flesh; whose eye is all-seeing, — 
and whose power is omnipresent; — 
who multipliest the nations and 
gatherest together Thine elect in 
Christ. We beseech Thee, Lord, — 
assist the needy, the oppressed, the _ 
feeble. Let all the nations know — 
that Thou art God alone, and Jesus — 
Christ is Thy Son, and we are ΤΥ 
people, the sheep of Thy pasture.’ : 

5. ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ] 1.6. rod Θεοῦ. In 
the same way they again claim to 
be speaking with the voice of God — 
below, ὃ 63 τοῖς ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν yeypappe- 
νοις διὰ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος ; Comp. — 
§ 56 μὴ ἡμῖν ἀλλὰ τῷ θελήματι τοῦ 
Θεοῦ. See also Ign. Phitad. 7 tom 
πνεῦμα ov πλανᾶται, ἀπὸ Θεοῦ dv... 
ἐλάλουν....... Θεοῦ φωνῇ, where a simi- — 
lar claim is made. 4 

6. παραπτώσει] ‘fault’, γα 4 
gression’; Jer. xxii. 20. Comp. Justin — 
Dial. 141 (p. 371). It does not occur _ 
elsewhere in the LXX, nor at allin the ~ 
N.T., though παράπτωμα is common 
Polybius uses it several times: comp. 
also Sext, Empir. adv. Math. i. 210, 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 171 


LIX] 


ἐσόμεθα ἀπὸ ταύτης THs ἁμαρτίας" καὶ αἰτησόμεθα, 
ἐκτενῆ τὴν δέησιν καὶ ἱκεσίαν ποιούμενοι, ὅπως τὸν 
ἀριθμὸν τὸν κατηριθμημένον τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν αὐτοῦ ἐν 
ὅλῳ τῷ κόσμῳ διαφυλάξη ἄθραυστον ὁ δημιουργὸς 
τῶν ἁπάντων διὰ τοῦ ἠγαπημένου παιδὸς αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ 
Χριστοῦ, δι’ οὗ ἐκάλεσεν ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ σκότους εἰς φώς, 
ἀπὸ ἀγνωσίας εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν δόξης ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ. 





13 Χριστοῦ] C; add. domini nostri S. 
a clerical error in transcribing the Syriac suffix. 


7. ἀθῷο] As above, ὃ 46. For 
the whole expression, ἀθῷος εἶναι ἀπὸ 
ἁμαρτίας, comp. Num. v. 31. 

9. τὸν ἀριθμὸν κιτ.λ.] See Rev. 
vii. 4 sq. The same phrase τὸν ἀριθ- 
μὸν τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν αὐτοῦ has occurred 
already ὃ 2. In one of the prayers 
in the last book of the AZostolic 
Constitutions (viii. 22) we have ὁ τὴν 
τοῦ κόσμου σύστασιν διὰ τῶν ἐνεργου- 
μένων φανεροποιήσας καὶ τὸν ἀριθμὸν 
τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν σου διαφυλάττων, where 
the expression here is combined with 
another which occurs below (§ 60) ; 
thus clearly showing that the writer 
borrows directly or indirectly from 
Clement. 

11. ἄθραυστον] The word does not 
occur in the Lxx or N.T. It is 
however not uncommon in classical 
writers: e.g. Dion Cass, liii. 24 
ἄθραυστον καὶ ὁλόκληρον τῷ διαδόχῳ 
τὴν πόλιν παρέδωκεν, Which passage 
illustrates its sense here. Comp. 
Apost. Const. viil. 12 διαφυλάξῃς 
ἄσειστον. 

ὁ δημιουργος κιτ.λ.] The same phrase 
occurs above ὃ 26; comp. § 33. For 
δημιουργὸς see the note on ὃ 20. 

12. τοῦ ἠγαπημένου παιδὸς κιτ.λ.] So 
again lower down in this chapter, 
διὰ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ ἠγαπημένου 
παιδός σου; and Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς ὁ παῖς 
gov. It is worth observing in con- 
nexion with the other coincidences, 


ἡμᾶς] C; meS; but this is doubtless 
14 ἀπὸ] C3; καὶ ἀπὸ 5. 


that these expressions ὁ ἠγαπημένος 
(ἀγαπητὸς) παῖς σου, 6 mais σου, Occur 
several times in the prayers in the 
Apost. Const. vill. 5, 14, 39, 40, 41. 
Comp. also List. ad Diogn. ὃ, 
and Mart. Polyc. 14, where it is 
twice put into the mouth of Poly- 
carp, who was certainly a reader of 
Clement’s Epistle. This designa- 
tion is taken originally from Is. xlii. 1, 
quoted in Matt. xii. 18 ἰδού, ὁ παῖς 
pov ὃν ἡρέτισα, ὁ ἀγαπητός pov [eis] 
ὃν εὐδόκησεν ἡ ψυχή μου ; where παῖς 
is ‘servant, minister’ (Jay). Comp. 
Acts iii. 13, 26, iv. 27, 30. But the 
higher sense of vids was soon im- 
ported into the ambiguous word mais: 
e.g. Apost. Const. viii. 40 τοῦ povoye- 
νοῦς σου παιδὸς Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, Epist. 
ad Diogn. 8, Iren. iii, 12. 5, 6, etc.; 
and probably Mart. Polyc. 14 6 τοῦ 
ἀγαπητοῦ παιδός σου Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ 
πατήρ. And so Clement seems to 
have used the word here. 

13. ἐκάλεσεν x.t.A.] From 1 Pet. 
ii. 9 τοῦ ἐκ σκότους ὑμᾶς καλέσαντος εἰς 
τὸ θαυμαστὸν αὐτοῦ φῶς. The epithet 
θαυμαστὸν which is wanting here is 
supplied by § 36 (as read in the 
Greek MSS) ἀναθάλλει εἰς τὸ Oav- 
μαστὸν [αὐτοῦ] φῶς, where however 
the epithet is omitted in the Syriac 
and in Clem. Alex. 

14. ἀγνωσίας] ‘stubborn ignorance’, 
a stronger word than ἀγνοίας : comp. 


172 


\ a 7 ra 
[Δὸς ἡμῖν, Κύριε), ἐλπίζειν ἐπὶ τὸ ἀρχεγόνον πάσης 
7 7 4 > / \ , \ ΄σ 7ὔ 
κτίσεως ὄνομα σου, ἀνοίξας τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς τῆς καρδίας 
lo > \ 4 \ / “ > ς a 
ἡμῶν εἰς TO γινώσκειν σε, TOV μόνον ὕψιοτον ἐν ὑψηλοῖς, 


> 


ἅγιον ἐν 


1 Δὸς ἡμῖν, Κύριε] om. CS; see below. 
καρδίας] cordium S. 


sanctum S 3; see below. 
ὑψίστοις C; see the lower note. 


1 Pet. ii. 15. It occurs also Job 
xxxv. 16, Wisd. xiii. 1, 1 Cor. xv. 34. 
See also Clem. Hom. ii. 6, iii. 47, 
iv. 8, xviii. 13, 18. 

εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν δόξης] Comp. Afost. 
Const. viii. 11 ὁ διὰ Χριστοῦ κήρυγμα 
γνώσεως δοὺς ἡμῖν εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν τῆς 
σῆς δόξης καὶ τοῦ ὀνόματός σου. 
The language of Clement here seems 
to be inspired by Ephes. i. 5 sq. 

I. ἐλπίζειν] Some words have been 
omitted in the Greek MS, as the first 
editor has correctly seen. The words 
supplied in the text, Ads ἡμῖν, Κύριε, 
will suffice. The same omission 
existed also in the text from which 
the Syriac Version was made. In 
consequence of this, σου, σε, σε, σου, 
ἐπαίδευσας, ἡγιάσας, ἐτιμήσας, are there 
altered to avoid the abrupt transition 
from the third person to the second ; 
and at length words are inserted 
before ᾿Αξιοῦμεν to introduce the 
second person. On the recurrence of 
lacunz in our authorities see above, 
I. p. 145 sq. Hilgenfeld gets over 
the difficulty in part by substituting 
ἄνοιξον for ἀνοίξας: while Gebhardt 
and Harnack deny that the text is 
either defective or corrupt, and at- 
tempt to justify the transition by 
such passages as Acts i. 4, xxiii. 22, 
etc. (see Winer § lxiii. p. 725). But 
the phenomena of our two authorities 
show that Bryennios was right. 

dpxeyovoy] i.e. ‘Thy Name which 
was the first origin of all crea- 
tion’, πάσης κτίσεως being governed 
by ἀρχεγόνον. As an active sense 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


ἁγίοις =ANATIAYUMENON, 


3 ve] Cs eum S. ὑψηλοῖς] 
5 διαλύοντα] dissipantem 5. ἐθνῶν 































[LIx 


\ an a 
TOV TATIEINOYNTA YBPIN 


2 ὄνομά σου] C3 momen ejus 


is obviously wanted, it must be 
accented ἀρχεγόνον, not ἀρχέγονον, 
as by Bryennios: comp. [Aristot.] 
de Mund. 6 (p. 399 Bekker) διὰ 
τὴν πρώτην καὶ ἀρχαιόγονον airiay, | 
where again we should accentuate 
dpxaoyovoy, for the expression is 
synonymous with 6 πάντων ἡγεμών 
τε καὶ yevérwp which follows imme- 
diately after. So too perhaps even 
in Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 16 (p. 810) 
τὴν apxeyovoy ἡμέραν, for just below 
it is defined as πρώτην τῷ ὄντι φωτὸς 
γένεσιν: but in Clem. Alex. Protr. 
5 (p. 56) τὸ πῦρ ws ἀρχέγονον σέβοντες 
it may be doubtful whether the fire 
is regarded as a principium prin- 
cipians (ἀρχεγόνον), or a principium 
principiatum (ἀρχέγονον). In Greg. 
Naz. Of. I. p. 694 we have τὸ 
ἀρχέγονον σκότος. The word occurs 
also Iren. i. I. 1 (twice), I. 5. 2, I 
9. 3, in the exposition of the Va- 
lentinian system, where likewise the — 
accentuation may be doubtful. ἢ 
is not found in the LXx or N. Τὸ 
Editors seem universally to accen- 
tuate it dpxéyovos (see Chandlers — 
Greek Accentuation § 467); but, I 
think, on insufficient grounds. 

2. Tovs ὀφθαλμοὺς καὶ] suggested 
by Ephes. i. 17 sq ἐν ἐπιγνώσει αὐ- 
τοῦ, πεφωτισμένους τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς, ᾿ 
τῆς καρδίας ὑμῶν εἰς τὸ εἰδέναι ὑμᾶς, 
κιτιλ. See also above ὃ 36 ἠνεώχθ᾽ 
σαν ἡμῶν οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ τῆς καρδίας. 
Comp. Mart. Polyc. 2, Apost. Const. 
Vii. 39. Ἃ, 
3. γινώσκειν κιτιλ.] Comp. John 


3 LIx] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


173 


c ͵ \ ͵ \ ee \ 
5 YTEPHMANWN, TOY AIdAAYONTA AOLICMOYC ἐθνῶν, TOV ποι- 


na > Qa \ c n 
OFNTA TATIEINOYC εἶο YYOC καὶ TOYC ὑψηλοὺς TATIEINOYNTA, 


\ \ 
TOV TAOYTIZONTA KAl TITWYIZONTA, TOV ATIOKTEINONTA καὶ 


ν pe , / , \ 
Ζῆν. TOIOfNTA, μόνον εὐεργέτην πνευμάτων καὶ Θεὸν 


, / > , > a > , \ 
πασῆς σάρκος, TOV ἐπιβλέποντὰ ἐν τὰϊς ABYCCOIC, TOV 


C; ἀνθρώπων (=avar) S. 
τὴν] C3; εὑρετήν 8. 


xvii. 3 ἵνα γινώσκωσίν σε τὸν μόνον 
ἀληθινὸν Θεόν. 

τὸν μόνον κιτ.λ.] Afost. Const. viii. 
5 ὁ ὧν μόνος ὕψιστος...ὁ ἐν ὑψηλοῖς 
κατοικῶν. 

ὕψιστον κιτιλ.] From the Lxx Is. 
Ivii. 15 ὁ ὕψιστος ὁ ἐν ὑψηλοῖς κατ- 
οἰκῶν τὸν αἰῶνα, ἅγιος ἐν ἁγίοις 
ὄνομα αὐτῷ, ὕψιστος ἐν ἁγίοις ἀνα- 
παυόμενος. So in the prayer Afost. 
Const. viii. 11 ὕψιστε ἐν ὑψηλοῖς, ἅγιε 
ἐν ἁγίοις ἀναπαυόμενε, doubtless taken 
from Clement. Similarly the ex- 
pression ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις ἀναπαυόμενος in 
other liturgies, D. Marc. pp. 178, 189, 
D. Facob. p. 49 (comp. p. 29), S. 
Chrysost. p. 94 (ed. Hammond). 

I have substituted ὑψηλοῖς, as the 
reading both of the Lxx and of the 
Afost. Const. Moreover the Syriac 
here translates by the same words, 
NDI02 NOM, which render ὕψιστος, 
ἐν ὑψηλοῖς, in the Hexaplaric Version 
of Is. lvii. 15: thus using two differ- 
ent words. This however is not de- 
cisive in itself. 

4. τὸν ταπεινοῦντα κιτ.λ.}] From 
Is. xiii. 11 ὕβριν ὑπερηφάνων ταπει- 
νώσω. 

5. τὸν διαλύοντα] Probably from 
Ps. xxxiii. 10 διασκεδάζει βουλὰς ἐθνῶν, 
ἀθετεῖ δὲ λογισμοὺς λαῶν. 
ο΄ τὸν ποιοῦντα κιτιλ.] Job v. I1 
᾿ς τὸν ποιοῦντα ταπεινοὺς εἰς ὕψος καὶ 
᾿ ἢ ἀπολωλότας ἐξεγείροντα, Is. x. 33 τα- 
᾿ πεινωθήσονται οἱ ὑψηλοί, Ezek. xxi. 26 

ἐταπείνωσας το ὑψηλὸν καὶ ὕψωσας 
τὸ ταπεινόν, 2b. xvii. 24 ἐγὼ Κύριος ὁ 
ταπεινῶν ξύλον ὑψηλὸν καὶ ὑψῶν ξύλον 






8 ζῆν ποιοῦντα] redimit et vivificat 5. 


evepyé- 


ταπεινόν. See also Matt. xxiii. 12, 
Luke xiv. 11, xviii. 14. 

7. τὸν πλουτίζοντα κιτ.λ.] From 
1 Sam. ii. 7 Κύριος πτωχίζει καὶ πλου- 
τίζει, ταπεινοῖ καὶ ἀνυψοῖ. Comp. also 
Luke i. 53. See Greg. Naz. Orat. 42 
ὃ 5 (1. p. 751) ὁ πτωχίζων καὶ πλου- 
τίζων Θεός, ὁ θανατῶν καὶ ζωογονῶν 
K.T.A. 

τὸν ἀποκτείνοντα x.t.A.| Deut. xxxii. 
39 ἐγὼ ἀποκτενῶ καὶ ζῆν ποιήσω, 
1 Sam. ii. 6 Κύριος θανατοῖ καὶ ζωογονεῖ: 
comp. 2 Kings v. 7 ὁ Θεὸς ἐγὼ τοῦ 
θανατῶσαι καὶ ζωοποιῆσαι; 

8. εὐεργέτην] Comp. Ps. cxv. 7 ἐπί- 
στρεψον, ψυχή μου...ὅτι Κύριος εὐηρ- 
γέτησέ σε. 80 ἴοο Liturg. D. Mare. 
p. 188 ψυχῆς εὐεργέτα. 

πνευμάτων κιτιλ] Modified from 
Num. xvi. 22, xxvii. 16. See also 
§ 62 δεσπότης τῶν πνευμάτων καὶ 
κύριος πάσης σαρκός, with the parallels 
in the note. Comp. Liturg. 7). Facob. 
Ρ. 45 μνήσθητι, Κύριε, ὁ Θεὸς τῶν πνευ- 
μάτων καὶ πάσης σαρκός. 

9. τὸν ἐπιβλέποντα κ-τ.λ.] Ecclus. 
xvi. 18, 19, ἄβυσσος καὶ γῆ σαλευθή- 
σονται ἐν τῇ ἐπισκοπῇ αὐτοῦ, ἅμα τὰ 
ὅρη καὶ τὰ θεμέλια τῆς γῆς ἐν τῷ 
ἐπίβλεψαι εἰς αὐτὰ τρόμῳ συσσείονται. 
Comp. Liturg. S. Basil. p. 106 ὁ 
καθήμενος ἐπὶ θρόνου δόξης καὶ ἐπι- 
βλέπων ἀβύσσους. For the unusual 
ἐπιβλέπειν ἐν, ‘to look into’, or 
‘at’, comp. Eccles. ii. 11, 2 Chron. 
Xvi. 9. 

τὸν ἐπόπτην κιιλ.)] See Ps. xxxii 
(xxxlii). 13, which passage Clement 
may perhaps have had in mind, as 








174 


ἐπόπτην ἀνθρωπίνων ἔργων, τὸν τῶν κινδυνευόντων — 
βοηθόν, τὸν τῶν ἀπηλπιομένων CHTAPA, τὸν παντὸς 
a κτίστην καὶ ἐπίσκοπον, τὸν πληθύνοντα — 
ἔθνη ἐπὶ γῆς καὶ ἐκ πάντων ἐκλεξάμενον τοὺς ἀγα- 
πῶντάς σε διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ ἠγαπημένου παιδός 5. q 
σου, Ot ot ἡμᾶς ἐπαίδευσας, ἡγίασας, ἐτίμησας. | 
οὔμέν σε, δέσποτα, βοηθὸν γενέσθαι καὶ ἀντιλήπτορὰ 


ἡμών. 


1 τῶν κινδυνευόντων] illorum qui affliguntur S, but it is probably a loose para- 


phrase. 5 ae] C; cum S. 


ἡγίασας, ἐτίμησας] instruxit nos et sanctificavit nos et honoravit nos S. 
μεν k.7..] 5 prefixes et dicemus illi cum supplicatione. 
S; om. C. It seems to be required, as Hilg. and Gebh. have seen. 


he has already adopted an earlier 
verse of the same Psalm in this con- 
text. For ἐπόπτης comp. 2 Macc. vii. 
35 τοῦ παντοκράτορος ἐπόπτου Θεοῦ, 
Esther v. I τὸν πάντων ἐπόπτην Θεόν. 

I. τὸν τῶν κινδυνευόντων k.T.A.] 
Judith ix. 11 ἐλαττόνων εἶ βοηθός, 
ἀντιλήπτωρ ἀσθενούντων, ἀπεγνωσμένων 
σκεπαστής, ἀπηλπισμένων σωτήρ. For 
ἀπηλπισμένοι comp. Is. xxix. 19, 
Esth. iv. ad fin. See also. Liturg. 
7. Mare. p. 181 ἡ ἐλπὶς τῶν ἀπηλ- 
πισμένων (comp. Liturg. S. Basil. 
p. 122), Act. S. Theodot. § 21 (in Rui- 
nart) ‘Domine Jesu Christe, spes 
desperatorum’. 

3. πνεύματος κτίστην] Zech. xii. 1 
Κύριος. «πλάσσων πνεῦμα ἀνθρώπου ἐν 
αὐτῷ, Is. lvii. τό πνεῦμα παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
ἐξελεύσεται, καὶ πνοὴν πᾶσαν ἐγὼ 
ἐποίησα. In Amos iv. 13 we have ἐγὼ 
οὐ κτίζων πνεῦμα, Where it apparently 
means ‘the wind,’ but might easily 
be understood otherwise. 

ἐπίσκοπον] Job x. 12 ἡ δὲ ἐπισκοπή 
σου ἐφύλαξέ μου τὸ πνεῦμα, τ Pet. ii. 
25 τὸν ποιμένα καὶ ἐπίσκοπον τῶν 
ψυχῶν ὑμῶν, Wisd. i. 6 ὁ Θεὸς.. τῆς 
καρδίας αὐτοῦ ἐπίσκοπος ἀληθής. Comp. 
Liturg. D. Marc. p. 181 ἐπίσκοπε 
πάσης σαρκός. 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


A / ΄ ΄-΄ 
τοὺς ἐν θλίψει ἡμῶν σῶσον" 








































[Lx q 


aE 
\ A 
TOUS ταπεινοὺς 


ἡμᾶς ἐπαίδευσας, 
ἀξιοῦ- 
7 σε] so apparently 
δέσποτα] 


6 σου] Ο; cjus 8. 


ἀξιοῦμεν κιτ.λ.] See the prayer 

in the Afost. Const. viii. 12 ἔτι 
ἀξιοῦμέν σε... ὅπως πάντων ἐπίκουρος 
γένῃ, πάντων βοηθὸς καὶ ἀντιλήπτωρ 
(with the context), which is evidently 
indebted to this passage of Clement. _ 
Comp. Ps. cxviii (cxix). 114 βοηθός 
μου καὶ ἀντιλήπτωρ pov εἶ σύ. δ᾿. 

8. τοὺς ἐν θλίψει κιτ.λ.] Compare — 
the prayer in Liturg. D. Marc. p. τ8 5. 
λύτρωσαι δεσμίους, ἐξέλου τοὺ — 
ἐν ἀνάγκαις, πεινῶντας χόρτασον, 
ὀλιγοψυχοῦντας παρακάλεσον, 
πεπλανημένους ἐπίστρεψον, ἐσκο 
τισμένους φωταγώγησον, πεπτωκότας 
ἔγειρον, σαλευομένους στήριξον, ' 
νοσηκότας ἴασαι ....... φρουρὸς ἡμῶν 
καὶ ἀντιλήπτωρ κατὰ πάντα γενό- 
μενος, where the coincidences are 
far too numerous and close to be > 
accidental. See also Afost. Const. — 
ii. 6. a 
10. ἀσεβεῖς] Comp, ὃ 3 ζῆλον ἄδικον 
καὶ ἀσεβῆ ἀνειληφότας. The reference 
in ἀσεβεῖς is not to unbelievers, but — 
to factious and unworthy members of — 
the Church. For this word Geb-— 
hardt (Zeztschr. f. Kirchengesch. τ. p. 
307, and ad loc.) conjectures ἀσθενεῖς; 
and this may have been the reading 
of S. But the occurrence of rods 


LIx] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


175 


, \ , ᾽ - 7 
ἐλέησον τοὺς πεπτωκότας ἔγειρον" τοῖς δεομένοις 


/ \ > -~ of \ , ἢ 
ο ἐπιφάνηθι" τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς ἴασαι: τοὺς πλανωμένους τοῦ 


“᾿ ΠΣ 3 / \ ~ ͵ 
λαοῦ σου ἐπίστρεψον" χόρτασον τοὺς πεινῶντας" λύ- 


οῇ \ ε ~ 3 U \ 
Tpwoat τοὺς δεσμίους ἡμῶν" ἐξανάστησον τοὺς ἀσθε- 


΄ 7 \ 3 - , 
νοῦντας" παρακάλεσον Tous ὀλιγοψυχοῦντας" γνώτω- 


, ΄ \ ΕἸ 24 ‘ ς ᾿ \ 
οὖν OE παντα τὰ ἔθνη, OTL οὐ εἶ ὁ Θεὸς μόνος, Kat 


΄σ \ ~ \ ε a , A 
5’Incovs Χριστὸς ὁ παῖς σου, καὶ ἡμεῖς Aadc coy καὶ 


πρόβὰτὰ τῆς νομῆς coy. 


domine bone S. 
10 ἐπιφάνηθι] C3 ἐπιστράφηθι S. 
S; see the lower note. 
presented in S. 


ἀσθενοῦντας just below is a serious 
difficulty, and on this account I have 
hesitated about accepting it. It is 
not sufficient to answer with Harnack, 
“ἀσθενοῦντες animo, ἀσθενεῖς Corpore 
imbecilles sunt’; for both words are 
used indifferently either of physical 
or of moral weakness. Supposing 
that ἀσεβεῖς were the original read- 
ing, the rendering of S may repre- 
sent either ἀσθενεῖς (a corruption of 
ἀσεβεῖς) Or νενοσηκότας (a substitu- 
tion of a familiar liturgical form, as 
appears from Lit. D. Marc. p. 185, 
quoted above). The Syriac word 
here, NAD, is the same as in the 
Peshito Luke ix. 2 ἰᾶσαι τοὺς ἀσθε- 
veis (v. 1. ἀσθενοῦντας). Comp. Polyc. 
Phil. 6 ἐπιστρέφοντες τὰ ἀποπεπλανη- 
μένα, ἐπισκεπτόμενοι τοὺς ἀσθενεῖς, 
_ which, so far as it goes, is in favour 
__ of Gebhardt’s emendation. 
᾿ς τοὺς πλανωμένους k.7.A.] Ezek. xxxiv. 
43 16 τὸ πεπλανημένον ἐπιστρέψω (where 
_ Bhas τὸ πλανώμενον ἀποστρέψω). 
IL. λύτρωσαι τοὺς δεσμίους] The re- 
_ ference in this and the neighbouring 
_ clauses is doubtless to the victims 
οὗ the persecution under Domitian; 
_ see the note on § 1. The care of 
_ the ‘prisoners’ naturally occupied a 
_ large space in the attention of the 


4 








Ὁ 
<> 


8 τοὺς ταπεινοὺς ἐλέησον) om. S, owing to the homceoteleuton. 
ἀσεβεῖς] C; aegrotos (ἀσθενεῖς or νοσοῦντας ?) 
14 ge] See Bryennios Didache p. py. It is unre- 
15 ὁ παῖς σου] add. dilectus (6 ἠγαπημένος) 8. 


early Church in the ages of per- 
secution: comp. Heb. x. 34, xiii. 3, 
and see the note on Ign. Smyrn. 6. 
A prayer for those working ‘in the 
mines’ is found generally in the 
early liturgies; comp. Afost. Const. 
Vili. 10 ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐν μετάλλοις καὶ ἐξο- 
ρίαις καὶ φυλακαῖς καὶ δεσμοῖς ὄντων 
διὰ τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν, 
Liturg. 75. Marc. p. 181 τοὺς ἐν φυλα- 
καῖς ἢ ἐν μετάλλοις..-κατεχομένους πάν- 
τας ἐλέησον, πάντας ἐλευθέρωσον, Lit. 
D. Fac. p. 44 μνήσθητι, Κύριε...... 
Χριστιανῶν τῶν ἐν δεσμοῖς, τῶν ἐν 
φυλακαῖς, τῶν ἐν αἰχμαλωσίαις καὶ 
ἐξορίαις, τῶν ἐν μετάλλοις καὶ βασάνοις 
καὶ πικραῖς δουλείαις ὄντων πατέρων καὶ 
ἀδελφῶν ἡμῶν. 

12. ἐξανάστησον κ-τ.λ.] Comp. I 
Thess. ν. 14 παραμυθεῖσθε τοὺς ὀλιγο- 
ψύχους, ἀντέχεσθε τῶν ἀσθενῶν, quoted 
by Harnack. 

13. γνώτωσαν x.r.A.] I Kings viii. 
60 ὅπως γνῶσι πάντες οἱ λαοὶ τῆς γῆς 
ὅτι Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς αὐτὸς Θεὸς καὶ οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἔτι, 2 Kings xix. 19 γνώσονται 
πᾶσαι ai βασιλεῖαι τῆς γῆς ὅτι σὺ 
Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς μόνος (comp. Is. xxxvii. 
20), Ezek. xxxvi, 23 γνώσονται τὰ ἔθνη 
ὅτι ἐγώ εἶμι Κύριος κιτιλ. Comp. John 
XVii. 3. 

15. ἡμεῖς κιτιλ.] From Ps. xcix (c). 








176 


\ \ / ~ / , », ἶ 
LX. Cv τὴν ἀέναον τοῦ κόσμου σύστασιν διὰ 
-“- ΄ 7 / ΄ al | 
τῶν ἐνεργουμένων ἐφανεροποίησας" σύ, Κύριε, τὴν 
3 / aI \ / q = 
οἰκουμένην ἔκτισας, ὁ πιστὸς ἐν πάσαις ταῖς γενεαῖς, 
/ ΄. 7 A Tee \ 
δίκαιος ἐν τοῖς κρίμασιν, θαυμαστὸς ἐν ἰσχύϊ Kal μεγα- 
7 ε \ > ΄“- / \ \ > a 
λοπρεπείᾳ, ὁ σοφὸς ἐν TH κτίζειν Kal συνετὸς ἐν THS 
A ’ ’ \ -- φ \ 
Ta γενόμενα ἑδράσαι, ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἐν τοῖς ὁρωμένοις Kat 
\ ΄. / / > a \ > 
πιστὸς ἐν τοῖς πεποιθόσιν ἐπὶ σέ, ἐλεῆμον καὶ οἰκτίρ- 
» Cc oA A > / 4 νὰ \ \ 3 / \ 
mon, ἄφες ἡμῖν Tas ἀνομίας ἡμῶν καὶ Tas ἀδικίας καὶ 


1 Σὺ] add. γὰρ 8. 
word in the same way. 
5 ὁ σοφὸς] C3 σοφὸς (om. 4) S. 
nus), probably χρηστός, S. 


2 γνῶτε ὅτι Κύριος αὐτός ἐστιν ὁ Θεός... 
ἡμεῖς [δὲ] λαὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ πρόβατα τῆς 
νομῆς αὐτοῦ : comp. 2d. xxviii (Ixxix). 
13, XCiv (xcv). 7. 

LX. ‘Thou didst create all things 
in the beginning. Thou that art 
faithful and righteous and marvellous 
in Thy strength, wise and prudent 
in Thy creative and sustaining en- 
ergy, beneficent and stedfast to them 
that put their trust in Thee, merciful 
and full of compassion, forgive us 
all our offences. Reckon not every 
sin against Thy servants: but purify 
us with Thy truth and direct our 
steps in holiness. Make Thy face to 
shine upon us, and protect us with 
Thy mighty hand and Thine out- 
stretched arm from them that hate 
us. Give peace to us and to all the 
inhabitants of the earth, as Thou 
gavest to our fathers when they 
called upon Thee’. 

I. Σὺ τὴν ἀέναον κιτ.λ.] The main 
part of this sentence is borrowed in 
Apost. Const. viii. 22 (quoted above 
on ἃ 59 τὸν ἀριθμόν x.r-A.). Comp. 
Wisd. vii. 17 εἰδέναι σύστασιν κόσμου 
kal ἐνέργειαν στοιχείων. 

διὰ τῶν ἐνεργουμένων K.T.A.] 1.6. 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


ἀέναον] ἀένναον C; comp. § 20, where C writes the 
τοῦ κόσμου] add. hujus S, as in other passages. 
καὶ] C; om. S. 

10 καθάρισον] καθαρεῖς C; purifica S: see below. — 

12 καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ καὶ ἁπλότητι] om. C; restored by Bensly from S, which has οὐ 


[Lx ; 






























7 πιστὸς] mitis (benig- 


‘didst reveal the inherent constitution 
of the world by the succession of 
external events’; comp. Rom. i. 20, © 
The word φανεροποιεῖν is late and — 
somewhat rare. Al 

a πιστὸς καιλ.}] Deut. vil. 9. 
Θεὸς πιστὸς 6 φυλάσσων διαθήκην. eis 5 
χιλίας γενεάς. ; 

6. ἑδράσαι] Comp. Prov. viii. 25. 
πρὸ τοῦ ὄρη ἑδρασθῆναι. 3 

ὁ ἀγαθὸς x.7.d.] ie. ‘He is benefi- — 
cent where His operations can be 
seen, and He is trustworthy where 
faith takes the place of sight’. The 
contrast here is between the things 
which are actually seen and the 
things which are taken on trust; 
comp. Heb. xi. 1 ἔστιν δὲ πίστις... 
πραγμάτων ἔλεγχος ov βλεπομένων. 
For ὁρωμένοις Hilgenfeld has ἐρω- 
μένοις; Harnack and Gebhardt (fol- 
lowed by Lipsius Yen. 1.11. Jan. 
13, 1877) read σωζομένοις, the latter 
having previously conjectured ὡρισ- 
μένοις (Zettschr. f. Kirchengesch. I. 

p. 307); Zahn proposes ὁσιουμένοις 
(Gb Gel. Anz. 1876, Ὁ. 1417). The 
is no sufficient reason however fo! 
questioning the text. The idea, ar 
in part the language, is taken fron 


Lx] 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


177 


᾿ς \ / \ / \ / - 
Ta παραπτωματα Kal πλημμελείας. μῆ Aoyion πασαν 


᾿ 7 / “ \ 
apuapTiay δούλων σου Kal παιδισκῶν, ἀλλὰ καθάρισον 


΄ Α a ΄ \ , 
ἡμᾶς Tov καθαρισμὸν τῆς σῆς ἀληθείας, καὶ κἀτεύθγνον 


͵ = > ε , \ , 
TA AlaBHMata ἡμῶν ἐν dcidtHTI καὶ δικαιοσύνη Kal 


/ ’ , \ a ᾿ ‘ 
ἁπλότητι KApAIAC πορεύήεοθδι Καὶ ποιεῖν τὰ κὰἀλὰ Kal 


nt , , / r ͵ὕ 
εὐάρεοταὰ ἐνώπιόν Gov καὶ ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀρχόντων 


, ἡμών. 


/ / > ' ’ , ? 
Val, δέσποτα, ἐπίφανον τὸ πρόσωπόν Coy ἐφ᾽ 


ε a > > ᾿ 3 / \ ΄σ ~ fe 
ἡμᾶς εἰς ἀγαθὰ ἐν εἰρήνη, εἰς TO σκεπασθῆναι ἡμᾶς τῇ 


in justitia et in simplicitate. 


The omission is due to homceoteleuton. 


I have 


not inserted the prepositions, because it is a common practice of S to repeat 


them, where they are not repeated in the Greek ; see 1. p. 137. 


16 ἐν εἰρήνῃ] 


pacis S ; but this is probably due to an error of Syriac transcription, since a single 
letter (4 for 2) would make the difference. 


Wisd. xiii. 1, ἐκ τῶν ὁρωμένων ἀγαθῶν 
οὐκ ἴσχυσαν εἰδέναι τὸν ὄντα οὔτε τοῖς 
ἔργοις προσχόντες ἐπέγνωσαν τὸν τεχ- 
νίτην. The language in the latter 
part of the sentence is suggested by 
Ecclus. 11. 10 sq ris ἐνεπίστευσε 
Κυρίῳ καὶ κατῃσχύνθη ;...διότι οἰκτίρ- 
μὼν καὶ ἐλεήμων ὁ Κύριος, καὶ ἀφίησιν 
ἁμαρτίας. 

7. ἐλεῆμον κιτ.λ.] A very frequent 
combination of epithets in the Lxx. 

10. καθάρισον) This is perhaps the 
simplest emendation of καθαρεῖς, the 
reading of the MS, which cannot 
stand ; καθάρισον having been written 
καθάρεισον, and the two last letters 
having dropped out. Otherwise we 
might read xa@dpys. Bryennios, Hil- 
-genfeld, and Gebhardt tacitly retain 
ka@apeis. For the expression comp. 
Num. xiv. 18 καθαρισμῷ οὐ καθαριεῖ 
τὸν ἔνοχον, quoted by Bryennios. 
Il. τῆς σῆς ἀληθείας] See John 
‘XVii. 17 ἁγίασον αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ ἀληθείᾳ 
κιτιλ.; COMP. XV. 3. 
᾿ κατεύθυνον κιτ.λ.] Ps. xxxix (xl). 3 
evOuve τὰ διαβήματά pov, cxviii 
ix). 133 τὰ διαβήματά μου κατεύθυ- 
κατὰ τὸ λόγιόν σου. The phrase 
υθύνειν τὰ διαβήματα occurs also 


CLEM. II. 










Ps. xxxvi (xxxvii). 23, Prov. xx. 24. 
The word διαβήματα, ‘steps’, is rare, 
except in the LXxX and writers influ- 
enced by it. 

12. ἐν ὁσιότητι κιτιλ.} 1 Kings ix. 4 
σὺ ἐὰν πορευθῇς ἐνώπιον ἐμοῦ, καθὼς 
>’ , \ > c , , 
ἐπορεύθη Δαυεὶδ, ἐν ὁσιότητι καρδίας. 

13. ποιεῖν κιιλ.}] Deut. xiii. 18 

~ A ‘4 Ἁ ‘ > ‘ > , 
ποιεῖν TO καλὸν Kal TO ἀρεστὸν ἐναντίον 
Κυρίου τοῦ Θεοῦ σου : comp. 2d. vi. 18, 
xii. 25, 28, xxi. 9. 

15. ἐπίφανον] Ps. lxvi (lxvii). 1 
> , 4 , > “ 473 ¢ A 
ἐπιφάναι τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς : 
comp. 20. xxx (xxxi). 18, Ixxix (Ixxx). 
3, 7, 19, cxvili (cxix). 135. So also 
Liturg. D. Marc. p.179, Apost. Const. 
viii. 18, 37. 

16. εἰς ἀγαθὰ] See Jer. xxi. 10 
ἐστήρικα TO πρόσωπόν pov ἐπὶ τὴν 
πόλιν...«οὐκ εἰς ἀγαθά; comp. Amos 
ix. 4, Jer. xxiv. 6. For εἰς ἀγαθὰ see 
also Gen. 1. 20, Deut. xxx. 9, etc. 
Comp. Liturg. D. Facob. p. 44 

, , ᾽ » > , 
μνήσθητι.. «πάντων eis ἀγαθόν. 

σκεπασθῆναι] For this connexion of 

᾿ . ey ‘ 
σκεπάζειν comp. Is. li. 16 ὑπὸ τὴν 
σκιὰν τῆς χειρός μου σκεπάσω σε 
(comp. Wisd. ν. 17, xix. 8), Deut. 
Xxxiil. 27 σκεπάσει σε...«ὑπὸ ἰσχὺν 
βραχιόνων ἀενάων : and for the anti- 


12 





178 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 
χειρί coy tH κραταιᾷ καὶ ῥυσθῆναι 
τίας τῷ Bpayioni coy τῷ ὑψηλῷ. 
ἀπὸ τῶν μεσουύνπνν ἡμᾶς ἀδίκως. 


εἰρήνην ἡμῖν τε καὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν τὴν γῆν, 
καθὼς ἔδωκας τοῖς πατράσιν ἡμῶν, ETIKAADYMEN@N GES 
αὐτῶν ὁσίως ἐν πίοτει Kal ἀληθείὰ, [ὥστε σώζεσθαι ἡμᾶς] 
ὑπηκόους γινομένους τῷ παντοκράτορι 


6 ὁσίως] ὃ; om. C. This use of the adverb is characteristic of Clement ; other- 
wise I should have hesitated to introduce it on such authority. 
ἡμᾶς] om. CS; see below. S renders et 2m veritate oboedientes fuerunt nomini tuo 
etc., thus connecting ἐν ἀληθείᾳ with the following clause. 
κράτορι καὶ παναρέτῳ] The words are transposed in S, but this does not imply 


thetical χειρὶ κραταιᾷ, βραχίονι ὑψηλῷ, 
Exod. vi. 1, Deut. iv. 34, v. 15, vii. 
19, ix. 26, xi. 2, xxvi. 8, Jer. xxxix 
(xxxii). 21, Ezek. xx. 33, 34. 

3. τῶν μισούντων κιτ.λ.] Comp. 
Justin. Aol. i. 14 (p. 61) τοὺς ἀδίκως 
μισοῦντας πείθειν πειρώμενοι, quoted 
by Harnack. 

5. ἐπικαλουμένων x.t.A.] Ps. cxliv 
(cxlv). 8 πᾶσι τοῖς ἐπικαλουμένοις αὐτὸν 
ἐν ἀληθείᾳ. For ἐν πίστει καὶ ἀληθείᾳ 
comp. 1 Tim. ii. 7. 

7. ὑπηκόους «7.A.] This might 
be a loose accusative, referring to 
the datives ἡμῖν re καὶ πᾶσιν κιτιὰλ.:; 
comp. Ephes. i. 17, 18 δώῃ ὑμῖν 
πνεῦμα σοφίας...... πεφωτισμένους 
τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς κιτιλ., Acts xxvi. 3 
ἐπὶ σοῦ μέλλων σήμερον ἀπολογεῖσθαι, 
μάλιστα γνώστην ὄντα σε κοτιλ., and 
see Winer § xxxiii. p. 290, ὃ lxiii. 
pp. 709 sq, 716, Kiihner 11. p. 667 sq. 
But a double transition, πατράσιν, 
ἐπικαλουμένων, γενομένους, would be 
very harsh; and for reasons which 
are stated in the introduction (I. p. 
145 sq), I cannot doubt that some 
words have dropped out, such as I 
have inserted. Bryennios supplies 
καὶ σῶσον ἡμᾶς; Gebhardt reads 
ὑπηκόοις γενομένοις : and Hilgenfeld 
alters the whole sentence. Lipsius 




























> \ ’ ε q 
ἀπὸ πάσης ἁμαρ- 
ἡμᾶς. 
\ ee Ὁ 
δὸς ὁμόνοιαν ΜΒ 


\ tn 
Kat ρυσαι. 


ἃ fi A 
καὶ παναρέτῳ 


ὥστε σώζεσθαι. δ 


7 παντο- 


(Fen. Lit. Jan. 13, 1877) would insert — 
ἐπικαλοῦμέν σε ῥῦσαι τοὺς before ἐν 
πίστει K.TA. Υ 

παντοκράτορι) So Hermas VZs. iii. 3. 
TO ῥήματι τοῦ παντοκράτορος καὶ ἐν- 
δόξου ὀνόματος. At first it had oc- 
curred to me to read παντοκρατορικῷ, 
as it occurred to Gebhardt, and as 
Hilgenfeld actually reads; comp. §8 
τῷ παντοκρατορικῷ βουλήματι αὐτοῦ. 
The expression παντοκρατορικὸν ὄνομα 
occurs in Macar. Magn. Afoer. iv. 30 
(p. 225). The omission of -κῷ before 
καὶ would be easily explained, es- 
pecially as the archetypal MS 
shown to have been mutilated in this 
neighbourhood. But the parallel pas- 
sage from Hermas quite justifies th 
reading of the MS. Inthe LXx a 
κράτωρ seems to be always applic 
directly to God either as an epith 
of Θεὸς or Κύριος, or independently; 
and so in Clement himself, — 
32. But the sense of rd ὄνομα, as 
almost an equivalent to ὁ Θεὸς (set 
[Clem. Rom.] ii. § 13, and the not 
on Ign. Ephes. 3), explains the e 
ceptional usage here and in Hermas 

mavapér@ x.T.A.] For this expressit 
comp. § 45, and for the word 
ros the note on § 1. 

8. τοῖς τε ἄρχουσιν κιτιλ] T 










ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 


1.Χ1] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 179 
ὀνόματί σου, τοῖς TE ἄρχουσιν Kal ἡγουμένοις ἡμῶν 
LXL Οὐ, δέσποτα, ἔδωκας τὴν ἐξουσίαν τῆς βα- 


7 > ~ \ ΄σ “ \ 3 ὃ 
σιλείας αὐτοῖς διὰ τοῦ μεγαλοπρεποὺς καὶ ἀνεκοιηγή- 
\ / ΄σ \ ε \ 

TOU κράτους σου, εἰς τὸ γινώσκοντας ἡμᾶς τὴν ὑπὸ 


“ > ~ , / \ \ ε , 
σοῦ αὐτοῖς δεδομένην δόξαν καὶ τιμὴν ὑποτάσσεσθαι 


> ~ \ > / ~ 0 “ / sf - δό 
αὐτοῖς, μηδὲν ἐναντιουμένους τω θελήματι σου" οἷς δὸς, 


any different Greek text: see above, I. p. 137. Also παναρέτῳ is translated as if 
ἐντίμῳ, SIPND (see § 3). But a single letter would make the difference, NIN) 
excellenti. Elsewhere 058 ‘IND is the translation of πανάρετος (see 881, 2, 48, 
57); and the translator might here consider himself excused from the repetition of 
may- which occurs in both words. See also on παναγίῳ above, § 58. 8 τοῖς 


τε] C3 καὶ τοῖς ὃ. 


punctuation, which I have adopted, 
was suggested to me by Hort. It 
accords with the preceding words 
εὐάρεστα ἐνώπιόν σου καὶ ἐνώπιον τῶν 
ἀρχόντων ἡμῶν ; it disposes of the 
superfluous αὐτοῖς (see however ὃ 21, 
note); and it throws Σύ into its 
proper position of prominence; e.g. 
ὃ 60 Σὺ τὴν ἀέναον κιτιλ. and § 61 
just below, Σὺ γάρ, δέσποτα «rn. 
See Athenag. Suppl. 1 εὐσεβέστατα 
διακειμένους καὶ δικαιότατα πρός τε τὸ 
θεῖον καὶ τὴν ὑμετέραν βασιλείαν ; 
comp. Theoph. ad Auxfol. i. 11, who 
quotes Prov. xxiv. 21 Τίμα, υἱὲ, Θεὸν 
kai βασιλέα κιτιλ. The previous edi- 
tors have all connected the words 
τοῖς τε ἄρχουσιν κιτιλ. with the follow- 
ing sentence, as apparently does C. 
LXI. ‘To our earthly rulers, O 
Lord, Thou hast given the power, 
that we may render them due obe- 
_dience in entire submission to Thy 
will. Therefore grant them health, 
hl stability. For Thou, O 
Sovereign of heaven and King of 
_ Eternity, givest honour and authority 
‘to the sons of men upon earth. So 
guide their counsels, that they may 
dminister well the power thus en- 
rusted to them, and may obtain 









10 ἔδωκας] add. zis 8. 


14 δὸς] precamur ut des S. 


Thy favour. O Thou, who alone 
art able to do this and far more 
than this, we praise Thee through 
our High-priest Jesus Christ, through 
whom be glory unto Thee for ever’. 

10. τῆς βασιλείας] ‘of the sove- 
reignty’, i.e. ‘of the secular power’. 
For the genitive comp. Dan. xi. 20 
πράσσων δόξαν βασιλείας, 2b. 21 ἔδω- 
κεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν δόξαν βασιλείας. The 
βασιλεία is the secular as contrasted 
with the spiritual power; and, as 
such, it is frequently opposed to 
ἱερωσύνη, e.g. Apost. Const. ii. 34 ὅσῳ 
ψυχὴ σώματος κρείττων, τοσούτῳ ἱερω- 
σύνη βασιλείας (comp. vi. 2), Test. 
Duod. Patr. Jud. 21. 

13. ὑποτάσσεσθαι αὐτοῖς x.r.X.] 
See 1 Pet. ii. 13, 15 ὑποτάγητε πάσῃ 
ἀνθρωπίνῃ κτίσει διὰ τὸν Κύριον... ὅτι 
οὕτως ἐστὶν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ Θεοῦ; 
comp. Rom. xiii. 2 ὁ ἀντιτασσόμενος 
τῇ ἐξουσίᾳ τῇ τοῦ Θεοῦ διαταγῇ ἀν- 
θέστηκεν. 

14. δὸς «.7.A.] In accordance with 
the Apostolic injunctions, Rom. xiii. 
I sq, Tit. iii, 1, 1 Pet. ii. 13 sq: 
comp. Wisd. vi. 1 sq. See also Polyc. 
Phil. 12. For other passages in 
early Christian writers relating to 
prayers for temporal rulers, see 


12---2 


180 


Κι ε “ oe Ὁ ε ῇ 3 / > \ 

ple, ὑγιείαν, εἰρήνην, ὁμόνοιαν, εὐστάθειαν, εἰς TO 
/ 9 \ A \ la f σ΄ 

διέπειν αὐτοὺς τὴν ὑπὸ σοῦ δεδομένην αὐτοῖς ἡγεμονίαν 


3 / 
απροσκοπως. 


lad ι. δ / ~ ~ “ 
τῶν αἰώνων, δίδως τοῖς υἱοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων δόξαν Kat 
\ \ / ~ \ ΄σ ΄ 
τιμὴν καὶ ἐξουσίαν τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ὑπαρχόντων" σύ, 5 
’ ἕ \ \ ΄ 
Κύριε, διεύθυνον τὴν βουλὴν αὐτών κατὰ τὸ καλὸν καὶ 
4. ,Κ 4 / 14 
εὐάρεστον ἐνώπιόν σου, ὅπως διέποντες ἐν εἰρήνη καὶ 
nA Η “ \ ε \ “ ΄ 
πραὕτητι εὐσεβῶς τὴν ὑπὸ σοῦ αὐτοῖς δεδομένην ἐξου- 
, « / / / \ ΄σ 
σίαν ἵλεω σον τυγχάνωσιν. ὁ μόνος δυνατὸς ποιῆσαι 
“ \ / \ a 
ταῦτα καὶ περισσότερα ἀγαθὰ μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν, σοὶ ἐξομο- τὸ 
9 ἵλεώ σου τυγχάνωσιν] tranguille compotes fiant auxilii quod (est) a te S, ob- 
13 γενεὰν] C; γενεὰς S. 
The clause is translated in S ‘et de tis (rebus) scilicet (T1") quae in ea (religione), 
quae maxime utiles sunt illis qui volunt dirigere vitam (conversationem) excellentiae 
et pietatis et juste, as if the translator had read τῶν ὠφελιμωτάτων δὴ (?) ἐν αὐτῇ 


At all events he must have had a text which a corrector 
had emended by striking out or altering εἰς, so as to govern βίον by διευθύνειν : 


viously a paraphrase. 


ἐνάρετον... .διευθύνειν. 


Bingham Azz. xiii. 10. 5, Harnack 
Christl. Gemeindegottesd. p. 218 sq 
(Justin Martyr), p. 378 sq (Tertullian). 
The Apologists naturally lay stress 
on the practice, as an answer to the 
charge of sedition. 

1. εὐστάθειαν] ‘stability’, ‘tran- 
guillity’, comp. § 65. The word may 
mean either ‘firmness, steadiness’ 
as a moral quality, or ‘stability’ as a 
material result. The latter seems to 
be intended here: comp. 2 Macc. 
xiv. 6 οὐκ ἐῶντες τὴν βασιλείαν εὐστα- 
θείας τυχεῖν, Wisd. vi. 26 βασιλεὺς 
φρόνιμος εὐστάθεια δήμου. 

3. ἀπροσκόπως) ‘without stum- 
bling’, ‘without any jar or collision’ ; 
as ὃ 20 τὴν λειτουργίαν αὐτῶν ἀπροσ- 
κόπως ἐπιτελοῦσιν. 

βασιλεῦ τῶν αἰώνων] The phrase 
occurs only 1 Tim. i. 17 in the N.T., 
and as ἃ ν.]. in Rev. xv. 3; but it is 
found in the LxXx, Tobit xiii. 6, 10; 
see also Liturg. D. Fac. p. 40. 
Comp. ὃ 35 πατὴρ τῶν αἰώνων, ὃ 55 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


\ / / a ) 
σὺ yap, δέσποτα ἐπουράνιε, βασιλεῦ — 






























[ΠΧῚ 


16 καὶ] S; om. C. 


Θεὸς τῶν αἰώνων. Here the Eternal 
King is tacitly contrasted with the — 
temporary kings, the βασιλεὺς τῶν 
αἰώνων with the βασιλεῖς τοῦ αἰῶνος 
τούτου (comp. Ign. Rom. 6). i 
6. διεύθυνον] As above ὃ 20. Other- 
wise it is not a common word, and ~ 
does not apparently occur at all in © 
the LXx or N.T. 7 
10. ped’ ἡμῶν] As Luke i. 72. 
ποιῆσαι ἔλεος μετὰ τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν, 
2b. x. 37, and so probably Acts xiv. 27, 
xv. 4; comp. Ps. cxviii (cxix). 65 — 
χρηστότητα ἐποίησας μετὰ τοῦ δούλου 
σου. It is the Hebraism py Awy. 
11. ἀρχιερέως κ-ιτ.λ.] See the note 
on § 36. 
12. ἡ δόξα κ-τ.λ.] See the note on — 
§ 20. It is a favourite form of dox- — 
ology in Clement. a 
13. εἰς γενεὰν γενεῶν] i.e. ‘the 
generation which comprises all the 
generations’; as Ps. ci (cii). 24 & 
γενεᾷ γενεῶν τὰ ἔτη σου : comp. Ephes. 
iii, 21 τοῦ αἰῶνος τῶν αἰώνων. This i 







1Χπ] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 181 


/ \ “~ > / , ΄σ 

λογούμεθα διὰ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως καὶ προστάτου τῶν 

΄ ε a ᾽ a ΄σ > ἫΝ € / \ 

ψυχῶν ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ, δὲ οὗ σοι ἡ δόξα καὶ 

, \ ~ \ \ ~ \ 3 

ἡ μεγαλωσύνη καὶ νῦν καὶ εἰς γενεὰν γενεῶν καὶ εἰς 
/ 
apy. 


A ΄σ ΄σ / 
TOUS αἰῶνας των αἰώνων. 




























Β΄. EXT 


see above, I. pp. 144, 145. 





om. CS: see below. 


περί. 


safely infer a different Greek text. 


a rare mode of expression, the com- 
moner forms being εἰς γενεὰς γενεῶν 
or eis γενεὰν καὶ γενεὰν, which are 
quite different in meaning. 

LXII. ‘Enough has been said 
by us however concerning the things 
pertaining to our religion and neces- 
sary for a virtuous life. For we have 

left no point untouched concerning 
faith and repentance and the like, 
‘reminding you that ye ought in all 
‘righteousness to pay your thanks- 
‘giving to God, living in harmony 
and peace and love; like as our 
fathers behaved with all humility 
~ towards God and towards all men. 
_And we have done this with the 
nore pleasure, because we knew that 
were speaking to faithful men, 


o had made a diligent study of 
Gods oracles’, 


15. τῶν ἀνηκόντων] With a dative 
in § 35; see the note on Ign. 
I. It has a different con- 
ction, ἀνήκειν εἰς, ὃ 45. See the 


ς - > ΄ 7 ? / 
ἱκανῶς ἐπεστείλαμεν ὑμῖν, ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί. 


Περὶ μὲν τῶν ἀνηκόντων τῇ θρησκείᾳ ἡμῶν, 

δ \ ~ > / > ELA / - , 

καὶ τῶν ὠφελιμωτάτων εἰς ἐνάρετον βίον τοῖς θέλουσιν 
> ~ \ / / ‘ , > ΄σ 

εὐσεβῶς καὶ δικαίως διευθύνειν [ τὴν πορείαν αὐτῶν), 


περὶ γὰρ 


\ / \ / ? , \ 
πίστεως καὶ μετανοίας Kal γνησίας ἀγάπης Kal ἐγ- 


In the Syriac we should probably read NWSW for 
NIVDW, 1.6. in pietate (Ξ-: εὐσεβῶς) for et fietatis. 
19 ἐγκρατείας] NNVVWY by super continentia (as if 
ὑπὲρ ἐγκρατείας) S, for another preposition dyn de) has been used before for 
Perhaps however the insertion of a different preposition is a mere rhetorical 


17 τὴν πορείαν αὐτῶν] 


device of the translator; or ὃν may be an accidental repetition of the first syllable 
of the following word, as the Syriac forms of the letters would suggest. 


We cannot 


note there. 

τῇ θρησκείᾳ ἡμῶν] Comp. ὃ 45 τῶν 
θρησκευόντων τὴν μεγαλοπρεπῆ καὶ 
ἔνδοξον θρησκείαν τοῦ ὑψίστου. This 
passage explains the force of the 
words here: ‘that befit men who 
serve the one true God’. 

16. ἐνάρετον] Sée the note on Ign. 
Philad. τ. 

17. Ovevddvew] The MS is ob- 
viously defective here ; and we must 
supply some such words as τὴν 
πορείαν αὐτῶν (see ὃ 48), or τὰ διαβή- 
ματα (§ 60), or perhaps with Bryen- 
nios τὴν βουλὴν αὐτῶν (ὃ 61). See 
the introduction, I. p. 145 sq. 

18. ἱκανῶς ἐπεστείλαμεν] Bryennios 
has called attention to the similarity 
of language used by Irenzeus, when 
describing this epistle, iii. 3. 3 ἐπὶ 
τούτου οὖν τοῦ Κλήμεντος, στάσεως 
οὐκ ὀλίγης τοῖς ἐν Κορίνθῳ γενομένης 
ἀδελφοῖς, ἐπέστειλεν ἡ ἐν Ῥώμῃ ἐκ- 
κλησία ἱκανωτάτην γραφὴν τοῖς Κο- 
ρινθίοις. 














182 THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT (uxm 


4 A / ~ , / 
KpaTelas καὶ σωφροσύνης καὶ ὑπομονῆς πάντα τόπον 
> ε ΄ ΄ ε Lg > 
ἐψηλαφήσαμεν, ὑπομιμνήσκοντες δεῖν ὑμᾶς ἐν δικαιο- 

, \ ᾽ , \ , “- / 
συνὴ και ἀληθείᾳ και μακροθυμίᾳ TW TWAVYTOKPATOPL 


~ ς / 3 ~ Fa 3 
Θεῴ οσίως gai organ: ὁμονοοῦντας ἀμνησικάκως ἐν 


ἀγάπη καὶ εἰρήνη μετὰ ἐκτενοῦς ἐπιεικεί δα, καθὼς καὶ 5 
ol προδεδηλωμένοι πατέρες ἡμῶν εὐηρέστησάν ταπεινο- 
φρονοῦντες τὰ πρὸς τὸν πατέρα καὶ Θεὸν καὶ κτίσ- 


1 τόπον] add. scripturae 8. 4 εὐαρεστεῖν] S; εὐχαριστεῖν C: see the 
same confusion above, § 41. The reading of S was anticipated by Hilg. and Gebh. ~ 
5 καθὼς καὶ] καθὼς (om. καὶ) S. 7 Θεὸν καὶ κτίστην] universi creatorem Ὁ 
deum (θεὸν παγκτίστην ?) 5. ; comp. § 19. 8 πρὸς] S; om. Ὁ, The authority 
of S in such a case is valueless in itself (see 1. p. 137), but the preposition seems to 
be required here. 9. ἥδιον] 7 δ ὧν S, which translates the clause, e¢ haec ~ 
tanto sint (erunt) per ea quae monuimus. The translator has had a corrupt text and 
has translated it word for word, regardless of sense. ἐπειδὴ σαφῶς ἤδειμεν 


I. πάντα τύπον x.t.A.] ‘we have 
handled every topic’; Bryennios adds 
by way of explanation, μάλιστα δὲ τῶν 
ἁγίων γραφῶν, thus taking πάντα τό- 
mov to mean ‘every passage’; and 
so it is rendered in the Syriac Ver- 
sion, ‘place of Scripture’. In this 
sense τόπος occurs above in the ex- 
pression ἐν ἑτέρῳ τόπῳ, δὲ 8, 29, 46. 
But this meaning does not seem at 
all natural here, where the word is 
used absolutely. For τόπος ‘a topic, 
argument’ » comp. e.g. Epict. Dass. 
REA Mie ἐπίσκεψίν τινα ποιητέον τῶν 
τόπων τούτων, ii. 17. 31 ὅταν τοῦτον 
ἐκπονήσῃ..«τὸν τόπον, and see other 
references in Schweighzeuser’s index 
to Epictetus, s.v. For ψηλαφᾶν 
comp. e.g. Polyb, viii. 18. 4 πᾶσαν 
ἐπίνοιαν ἐψηλάφα. 

4. εὐαρεστεῖν] Doubtless the cor- 
rect reading, as it explains the sub- 
sequent εὐηρέστησαν. For another 
example of the confusion of evapeo- 
reiv, εὐχαριστεῖν, in the authorities, 
see ὃ 41. 

ἀμνησικάκως] See § 2 ἀμνησίκακοι 
(with the note). This word involves 
an appe τὴ] to the sufferers from the 














schisms, who are bidden to harbour ~ 
no grudge. 

5. pera ἐκτενοῦς κιτιλ. See the 
note on § 58, where the same ex- 
pression occurs. ‘ 

6. of προδεδηλωμένοι κ-τ.λ. See 
S$ 17, 18, 19; comp. also ὃ 30 ἐδόθη 
[ἡ μαρτυρία] τοῖς πατράσιν ἡμῶν τοῖς 
δικαίοις, and § 31 ἀνατυλίξωμεν τὰ 
dn ἀρχῆς γενόμενα" τίνος χάριν ηὐ- 
λογήθη 6 πατὴρ ἡμῶν ᾿Αβραάμ; κ.τ.λ., 
For this use οὗ πατέρες in speaking” 
of Jewish worthies, see the note on 
§ 4. i 
Io. ἐλλογιμωτάτοις] See the note 
on § 58 ἐλλόγιμος. 

ἐγκεκυφόσιν] Comp. ὃ 53 Karas 
ἐπίστασθε τὰς ἱερὰς γραφάς, ἀγαπητοί, 
καὶ ἐγκεκύφατε εἰς τὰ λόγια τοῦ Θεοῦ, 
with the note. For the word éy 
τειν see the note on ὃ 40. 

LXIII. ‘We ought therefore to 
regard so many great examples, and 
to bow the neck in submission; that 
laying aside all strife we may reach 
our destined goal. Ye will make 
us happy indeed, if ye obey an 
cease from your dissensions in ac 
cordance with our exhortation 






























10 ἐλλογιμωτάτοιΞ9] doctis S. 
nostrum et subjiciamus nos S. 


peace. And we have sent to you faith- 
' ful men who have lived among us 
unblameably from youth to old age, 
to be witnesses between us and you. 
This we have done, to show you 
how great is our anxiety that peace 
may be speedily restored among 


12. Θεμιτὸν] The use of this word 
seems to be extremely rare, except 
with a negative, οὐ θεμιτόν (e.g. Tobit 
ii. 13) or ἀθέμιτον (see below). 

τοῖς τοιούτοις κιτ.λ.] ὃ 46 Τοιούτοις 
οὖν ὑποδείγμασιν κολληθῆναι καὶ ἡμᾶς 
δεῖ κιτιλ. For τοιούτοις καὶ τοσούτοις 

- comp. § 19. 

13. προσελθόντας] ‘having acceded 
to, attended to, assented to, studied’, 
as in ὃ 33; comp. 1 Tim. vi. 3 εἴ 
τις ἑτεροδιδασκαλεῖ καὶ μὴ προσέρχεται 
Ἧς ὑγιαίνουσιν λόγοις. So we find προσ- 
ppexe Oat ἀρετῇ ‘to apply oneself to 
virtue’, Philo de Migr. Abr. 16 
by! (I. p. 449); προσέρχεσθαι τοῖς νόμοις 
‘to study the laws’, Diod. i. 95; 
προσέρχεσθαι τῇ σοφίᾳ, τῇ φιλοσοφίᾳ, 
" iho become a follower of wisdom, of 
philosophy’, Philostr. Vit, 42. i. 2 
(p. 2), iii, 18 (p. 50), comp. LXx 


Lx] TO THE CORINTHIANS. 183 


‘ “ > , \ ~ / 
την καὶ πρὸς πάντας ἀνθρώπους. Kal ταῦτα τοσούτῳ 
ἥδιον ὑπεμνήσαμεν, ἐπειδὴ σαφῶς ἤδειμεν ἄφειν 

« hae \ ᾿ , 4 i 

ε ~ > ~ 2 \ 
οἡμᾶς ἀνδράσιν πιστοῖς Kat ἐλλογιμωτάτοις καὶ ἐγκε- 
/ > \ / “ 7 od ΄ 
κυφόσιν εἰς τὰ λόγια τῆς παιδείας τοῦ Θεοῦ. 
\ 3 3 ~ “ \ 
LXIL Θεμιτὸν οὖν ἐστιν τοῖς τοιούτοις Kat 
, ς / , ΄- \ 
τοσούτοις ὑποδείγμασιν προσελθόντας ὑποθεῖναι Tov 
/ \ \ ~ ε “ , ? / 
τράχηλον Kal TOV τῆς ὑπακοῆς τόπον ἀναπληρώσαντας 


γράφειν] guia scilicet manifeste est iis; oportuit enim (μὲν) ut scriberemus S, i.e. 
ἐπειδὴ σαφῶς ἢ" δεῖ (or ἔδει) μὲν γὰρ γράφειν x.7.X. Again a corrupt reading, or 
rather a false division of the words, has been translated almost verdatim. For the 
facility with which γὰρ might be omitted or inserted before γράφω, see Ign. Rom. 7. 
13 ὑποθεῖναι τὸν τράχηλον] inclinemus collum 

14 ἀναπληρώσαντας... ἡμῶν] implentes in- 
clinemur illis qui sunt duces animarum nostrarum 5.; ἀναπληρῶσαι C, omitting 
all the other words: see the lower note. 


Ecclus. vi. 26 ὁ προσελθὼν αὐτῇ (1.6. 
τῇ σοφίᾳ); προσέρχεσθαι φόβῳ Κυρίου 
‘to give heed to the fear of the Lord’, 
LXx Ecclus. i. 30; προσέρχεσθαι μη- 
devi τῶν εἰρημένων Philo de Gig. 9 (1. 
Ρ. 267); προσέρχεσθαι τῷ λόγῳ, Orig. 
c. Cels. iii. 48. These senses are 
derived ultimately from the idea of 
‘approaching a person as a disci- 
ple’; e.g. Xen. Mem. i. 2. 47 ὧνπερ 
ἕνεκεν καὶ Σωκράτει προσῆλθον. 

ὑποθεῖναι τὸν τράχηλον] ‘submit 
your neck’, i.e. ‘to the yoke’; 
comp. Ecclus. li. 26 τὸν τράχηλον 
ὑμῶν ὑπόθετε ὑπὸ ζυγόν (comp. 26. vi. 
24, 25), Epictet. Dzss. iv. 1. 77 
παρέδωκας σαυτὸν δοῦλον, ὑπέθηκας 
τὸν τράχηλον. So too Acts xv. 10 
ἐπιθεῖναι ζυγὸν ἐπὶ τὸν τράχηλον. The 
expression is used in a different 
sense in Rom. xvi. 4 ὑπὲρ τῆς ψυχῆς 
pov τὸν ἑαυτῶν τράχηλον ὑπέθηκαν, 
where it means ‘laid their neck on 
the block’, not ‘pledged their lives’, 
as Wetstein and others take it. 

14. τόπον ἀναπληρώσαντας] ‘ to oc- 
cupy the place’, ‘fulfil the function’ ; 
comp. 1 Cor. xiv. 16 ὁ ἀναπληρῶν 
τὸν τύπον τοῦ ἰδιώτου, where the 





184 


ea ΄ / > nw ΄σ ΄ 
προσκλιθῆναι τοῖς ὑπάρχουσιν αρχήγοις τῶν ψυχῶν 
ε “ «“ ς / ΄σ Ud ge" 8 A 
μῶν, OTTWS NOUVUXKATAVTES Τῆς ματαίας CTAGEWS ETL τον. 

Φ © ~ > la / \ / 
προκείμενον ἡμῖν ἐν ἀληθείᾳ σκοπὸν δίχα παντὸς μώμου 


/ 
καταντήσωμεν. 


2 ἡσυχάσαντες] guiescentes et tranguilli S. 


4 ἀγαλλίασιν] add. magnam S. 


choice of this elaborate expression 
is probably a studied paradox to 
bring out the honourable character 
of a private station; τόπος denoting 
official position or dignity (see above, 
§ 40, and the note on Ign. Polyc. 1), 
while ἰδιώτης implies the opposite of 
this. So too here the object may 
be to enhance the important function 
of obedience. See Clem. Hom. iii. 
60 τὸν ἐμὸν ἀναπληροῦντα τόπον, and 
comp. Joseph. B. F. ν. 2. 5 στρατιώ- 
του τάξιν ἀποπληροῦντα. 

I. προσκλιθῆναι .T.A.| These 
words are wanting in the Greek 
MS, and I have restored them by 
retranslation from the Syriac: see 
the critical note. The true partisan- 
ship is here tacitly contrasted with 
the false; the rightful Zeaders with 
the wrongful. The language is ex- 
plained by what has gone before; 
δ᾽ 14 μυσεροῦ ζήλους ἀρχηγοῖς ἐξα- 
κολουθεῖν, § 51 ἐκεῖνοι οἵτινες ἀρχηγοὶ 
τῆς στάσεως καὶ διχοστασίας ἐγενήθη- 
σαν, ὃ 47 διὰ τὸ καὶ τότε προσκλίσεις 
ὑμᾶς πεποιῆσθαι .... προσεκλίθητε γὰρ 
κιτιλ., § 50 ἵνα ἐν ἀγάπῃ εὑρεθῶμεν δίχα 
προσκλίσεως ἀνθρωπίνης ἄμωμοι (comp. 
§ 21 μὴ κατὰ προσκλίσεις). The com- 
mand to choose the right partisan- 
ships here has a parallel in § 45 
φιλόνεικοι ἔστε...περὶ τῶν ἀνηκόντων 
εἰς σωτηρίαν (see the note) The 


THE EPISTLE OF S. CLEMENT 


χαρὰν yap καὶ ἀγαλλίασιν ἡμῖν παρέ- 
ἕξετε, ἐὰν ὑπήκοοι γενόμενοι τοῖς ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν γεγραμμένοις 5. 
διὰ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος ἐκκόψητε τὴν ἀθέμιτον τοῦ 
ζήλους ὑμῶν ὀργὴν κατὰ τὴν ἔντευξιν ἣν ἐποιησάμεθα 
περὶ εἰρήνης καὶ ὁμονοίας ἐν τῆδε τῇ ἐπιστολῇ. 


5 γεγραμμένοι5] add. vobis 8. 





























[ΧΠῚ q 


Επέμ- 
3 μώμου] add. et scandalo 8. 
ἡ ἔντευξιν] 


Syriac is pram pond pony 
}NYHITNIIIAD. For j35n) I cannot 
think of any word so probable as 
προσκλιθῆναι, since 12 is a common 
translation of xAivew, and in ὃ 21 
προσκλίσεις isrendered NDN7I NN"; 
though προσκλίνεσθαι, πρόσκλισις, are 
rendered otherwise, but variously, in — 
δὲ 47, 50, Acts v. 36, 1 Tim. v. 21. On 
the other hand δ) Ἴ2 ‘ductores’ 
might be variously rendered. It most 
commonly represents ὁ ἡγούμενος (ὅδ 1, 
32, 37 in a double rendering, 55, Heb. — 
xiil. 7, 17, 24); but elsewhere ἡγεμών, ὦ 
καθηγητής, ὁδηγός, etc., even βουλευτής. — 
I have given ἀρχηγός, because it 
brings out the contrast which Cle-— 
ment seems to have had in his mind. 
In S§ 14, 51, however, ἀρχηγός is ren- 
dered otherwise, NW, NI’, and 50 
commonly. 

2. στάσεως] Comp. Clem. Hom. 
1. 4 τῶν τοιούτων λογισμῶν novxatew. 
This construction follows the analogy — 
of verbs denoting cessation, etc. 
(see Kihner 11. p. 341 sq). It is un- 
necessary therefore to read ἡσυχασά- 
ons, as Gebhardt suggests. 

3. σκοπὸν] Comp. ὃ 6 ἐπὶ τὸν τὴν ᾿ 
πίστεως βέβαιον δρόμον καταντήσωμεν, 
and § 19 ἐπαναδράμωμεν ἐπὶ τὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς, 
παραδεδομένον ἡμῖν τῆς εἰρήνης σκοπόν, 
which explains the idea in the wri- 
ter’s mind here. The expressioi 
































εἰρηνεῦσαι. 


΄ ’ \ / 
τῶν πνευμάτων καὶ Κύριος 


supplicationem et exhortationem 8. 
τινες καὶ] S; οἵτινες (om. καὶ) Ὁ. 


itself is perhaps suggested by Heb. 
xii. I τρέχωμεν τὸν προκείμενον ἡμῖν 
ἀγῶνα. For σκοπόν comp. Phil. iii. 14. 

μώμου] ‘fault, defect’: see the 
note on μωμοσκοπηθέν ὃ 41. In the 
Old Testament it is always a trans- 
lation of py ‘a blemish’. 

4. χαρὰν κιτ.λ. As in Luke i. 14 
(comp. Matt. v. 12, Rev. xix. 7); see 
also Mart. Polyc. 18. This combi- 
nation of words χαρὰ καὶ ἀγαλλίασις 
does not occur in the Lxx. 

6. διὰ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος] See 
the note on ὃ 59 τοῖς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ δι᾽ 
ἡμῶν εἰρημένοις. Harnack takes these 
words with ἐκκόψητε, but this does 
not seem so natural. 

ἀθέμιτον] Acts x. 28, 1 Pet. iv. 3; 
and so too 2 Macc. vi. 5, vii. 1, x. 34. 

7. ζήλους] See the note on § 4. 

ἔντευξιν] This should probably be 

explained of the ‘appeal’ to the Cor- 
inthians themselves ; see the note on 
[Clem. Rom.] ii. ὃ 19. Itmight how- 
ever refer to the foregoing ‘prayer’ 
to God for concord; comp. e.g. 1 Tim. 
ii. 1, iv. 5, Herm. Mand. x. 2. 
_ 9. ἄνδρας] Claudius Ephebus and 
Valerius Bito, whose names are given 
below, § 65. For the light which 
this notice throws on the early history 
of the Roman Church see the in- 
oduction, I. p. 27 sq; and for its 
aring on the date, see I. p. 349. 





΄σ \ ? / .« 
τοῦτο δὲ ἐποιήσαμεν ἵνα 


LXIV | TO THE CORINTHIANS. 185 
ψαμεν δὲ Kal ἄνδρας πιστοὺς Kai σώφρονας, ἀπὸ νεό- 
>THTOS ἀναστραφέντας ἕως γήρους ἀμέμπτως ἐν ἡμῖν, 
οἵτινες καὶ μάρτυρες ἔσονται μεταξὺ ὑμῶν καὶ ἡμῶν. 


~ « ΄σ ~ 
εἰδῆτε OTL πᾶσα ἡμῖν 


᾽ Α ’ὔ ΄ 
φροντὶς καὶ γέγονεν καὶ ἔστιν εἰς τὸ ἐν τάχει ὑμᾶς 


; LXIV. Λοιπὸν 6 παντεπόπτης Θεὸς καὶ δεσπότης 


/ , ε ? ͵ 
πάσης σαρκὸς, ὁ ἐκλεξα- 


9 δὲ καὶ] S; δὲ (om. καὶ) Ὁ. II οἵ- 
15 Λοιπὸν] Ο ; ..crov A; λοιπὸν δὲ 5. 


10. γήρους] So Luke i. 36 γήρει 
(the correct reading), and in several 
passages in the LXX, e.g. Ps. xci (xcii). 
14 γήρει, τ Kings xiv. 4 γήρους, 
Ecclus. viii. 6, etc., with more or less 
agreement in the principal MSS; so 
also Clem. Hom. iii. 43. On this 
form see Winer Gramm. ὃ ix. p. 73 sq, 
Steph. Zhes. 5. v., ed. Hase. Our MS 
has also γήρει above in § 10, where A 
reads γήρᾳ. 

LXIV. ‘Finally, may the God of 
all spirits and all flesh, who hath 
chosen us in Christ Jesus, grant us 
all graces through Christ, our High- 
priest, through whom be glory and 
honour to Him. Amen.’ 

15. Λοιπὸν] For λοιπὸν or τὸ λοι- 
mov, with which 5. Paul frequently 
ushers in the close of his epistles, 
see Philippians iii. 1. The happy 
conjecture of Vansittart which I 
adopted in my first edition is con- 
firmed by our new authorities. 

mavterontns| See the note on ὃ 55. 

Θεὸς... τῶν πνευμάτων x.t.A.] Num. 
XXVil. 16 Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς τῶν πνευμάτων 
καὶ πάσης σαρκός (comp. xvi. 22): see 
also Heb. xii. 9 τῷ πατρὶ τῶν πνευμά- 
των, Rev. xxii. 6 Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς τῶν 
πνευμάτων τῶν προφητῶν. 

16. ὁ ἐκλεξάμενος] See Luke ix. 35 
ὁ vids μου ὁ ἐκλελεγμένος (the correct 
reading, though there are νν. ll. 





186 


\ / 3 ~ \ \ ε ΄“ ᾽ 3 Le) a 
μενος τὸν Κύριον ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν καὶ ἡμᾶς δι’ αὐτοῦ 
εἰς λαὸν περιούσιον, δῴη πάση ψυχῆ ἐπικεκλημένη τὸ 

s λαὸν περιούσιον, δῴη πάσῃ ψυχῇ ἐπικεκλημένη τὸ 
\ / ’ ΄σ 7 ig 
μεγαλοπρεπὲς Kal ἅγιον ὄνομα αὐτοῦ πίστιν, φόβον, 
΄ ε , , > ΄ , ᾿ 
εἰρήνην, ὑπομονήν, μακροθυμίαν, ἐγκράτειαν, ἁγνείαν 
\ , , ὡς a8 aa 
καὶ σωφροσύνην, εἰς εὐαρέστησιν τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ 5 


1 ἡμᾶς] AS; ἡμεῖς Ο. 


μίαν] A; καὶ μακροθυμίαν CS. 
ἐγκράτειαν καὶ ἁγνείαν S. 
ὀνόματι] AC; add. sancto 8. 


ἐκλεκτός and ἀγαπητός). So too Luke 
xxiii. 35 ὁ Χριστὸς ὁ τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐκ- 
λεκτός : comp. I Pet. ii. 4 5ᾳ. Harnack 
refers to Hermes Szm. v. 2 ἐκλεξά- 
μενος δοῦλόν Twa πιστὸν Kal εὐάρεστον 
ἔντιμον, where the servant entrusted 
with the vineyard represents Christ, 
It is clear from Enoch xl. 5, xlv. 3, 4, 
li. 3, liii. 6, Lxii. 1, that ὁ ἐκλεκτὸς was 
a recognized designation of the 
Messiah. 

I. ἡμᾶς δι’ αὐτοῦ] Ephes. i. 4 καθ- 
ὡς ἐξελέξατο ἡμᾶς ἐν αὐτῷ (1.6. ἐν 
Χριστῷ). 

2. εἰς λαὸν περιούσιον] Deut. xiv. 
4 καὶ σὲ ἐξελέξατο Κύριος ὁ Θεός σου 
γενέσθαι σε λαὸν αὐτῷ περιούσιον ; 
comp. Ζὦ. vii. 6, xxvi. 18, Exod. xix. 5, 
Ps. cxxxiv. 4, Tit. 11. 14 καθαρίσῃ 
ἑαυτῷ λαὸν περιούσιον. In the LXX 
λαὸς περιούσιος is a translation of 
πολ py, the expression doubtless 
present to S. Peter's mind when he 
spoke of λαὸς εἰς περιποίησιν (1 Pet. 
ii. 9). In Mal. ili. 17 mo3p is trans- 
lated εἰς περιποίησιν in the LXxX, and 
περιούσιος by Aquila. As mba is 
‘ peculium ’, ‘opes’, (bap ‘ acquisivit’), 
περιούσιος would seem to mean ‘ac- 
quired over and above’, and hence 
‘specially acquired’ with a meaning 
similar to the classical ἐξαίρετος. It 
was rendered at once literally and 
effectively in the Latin Bible by 
‘peculiaris’. See my Revision of the 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 


3 μεγαλοπρεπὲς καὶ ἅγιον] AC; sanctum et decens — 
(in) magnitudine et gloriosum S; see above, I. p. 137- q 
μονήν] AC; et timorem et concordiam et amorem et patientiam 8. 
ἐγκράτειαν, ἁγνείαν] AC (but ἀγνιαν A); καὶ — 

5 καὶ σωφροσύνην] AS; σωφροσύνην (om. καὶ) C. — 
6 dpxsepéws] AC; add. magni S. 























[LXIV q 


φόβον, εἰρήνην, ὑπο- — 
4 μακροθυ- — 


ἡ δόξα] 
English New Testament p. 195 54 
(ed. 2). ξ 
ἐπικεκλημένῃ] ‘which hath ἐπε 
voked his name’; comp. Acts ii. 21) 
ix. 14, 21, xxii. 16, etc. So it is trans- — 
lated actively in the Syriac. Or is it — 
rather, as the perfect tense suggests, — 
‘which ts called by his name’? ‘This © 
latter makes better sense, especially 
in connexion with λαὸς περιούσιος ; 
but with this meaning the common 
constructions in biblical Greek would — 
be ἐφ᾽ ἣν (or ἐφ᾽ ἡ) ἐπικέκληται τὸ 
ὄνομα αὐτοῦ (e.g. Acts xv. 17, James 
ii. 7, and freq. in the LXX), or τῇ ἐπι-. 
κεκλημένῃ τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ (Is. xliii. 7). 
4. ἁγνείαν καὶ σωφροσύνην] So too 
Ign, Ephes. 10; comp. Tit. ii. 5. 
σώφρονας, ἁγνάς. 4 
5. εὐαρέστησιν] The word occurs” 
Test. xit Patr. Is. 4. 4 
6. ἀρχιερέως καὶ προστάτου] See 
the note on ὃ 36 above, where the 
expression is expanded. ᾿ 
7. δόξα καὶ μεγαλωσύνη] See the 
note on ὃ 20, where also these two 
words occur together in a doxology: 
comp. also § 59, where nearly the 
same combination of words as here 
is repeated. In Rev. v. 13 we have 
Lm τιμὴ καὶ ἡ δόξα καὶ τὸ κράτος εἰς τοὺ 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. a 
LXV. ‘We have sent Claudiu 
Ephebus and Valerius Bito to y 
Let them return to us quickly accon 









































Lxv| 


καὶ νῦν καὶ. 
om. 5. 


καὶ] om. C, 


scribe. 


σὺν (om. καὶ) S. 


panied by Fortunatus, and bear glad 
tidings of harmony and peace re- 
stored among you. The grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you 
and with all. Through Him be glory 
to God for ever.’ 

9. Κλαύδιον «7.A.] These two 
names, Claudius and Valerius, sug- 
gest some connexion with the im- 
perial household ; as the fifth Caesar 
with his two predecessors belonged 
to the Claudian gens and his empress 
Messalina to the Valerian. Hence 
it happens that during and after the 
reign of Claudius we not unfre- 
quently find the names Claudius 
(Claudia) and Valerius (Valeria) in 
conjunction, referring to slaves or 
retainers of the Czesars. It is not 
impossible therefore that these two 
delegates of the Roman Church were 
among the members of ‘ Czsar’s 
_ household’ mentioned in Phil. iv. 22, 
and fairly probable that they are in 
_ some way connected with the palace; 
_ see the dissertation in Philippians p. 
_ 169 sq. On this subject see also the 
_ introduction, 1. p. 27 sq. Of the two 
_ cognomina Ephebus is not so un- 
- common, On the other hand Bito 
| is rare in Latin, though commoner 
in Greek (comp. Pape-Benseler 
_ Weorterb. d. Griech. Eigennamen sv. 
Birey). For instances in Latin of 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 


΄ 7 A IA ΄σ ἌΣ 
νυν καὶ εἰς σαντας TOUS ALWVAS Τῶν αιωνῶν. 


187 


΄ Py 7 ε ΄σ' > ~ “Ὄ 

διὰ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως καὶ προστάτου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ" 
ec ΄:- / / 7 \ 

δι οὗ αὐτῷ δόξα καὶ μεγαλωσύνη, κράτος, τιμή, καὶ 


ἀμήν. 


. pe ~ / 

LXV. Τοὺς δὲ ἀπεσταλμένους ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν Κλαύδιον 
? \ \ , 

Ἔφηβον καὶ Οὐαλέριον Βίτωνα σὺν καὶ Φορτουνάτῳ ἐν 
AC; πᾶσα δόξα S, which omits the following words καὶ μεγαλωσύνη, κράτος, τιμή, 
τιμή] A; καὶ τιμή C. 
10 καὶ Οὐαλέριον] AC; Valerium (om. καὶ) or e¢ Alerium S; but this 
is doubtless owing to the accidental omission of a Ἷ before D)N2N) by a Syrian 
Βίτωνα] AC; om. S. The punctuation of both C and § is faulty 

here, in separating names which belong to the same person. 
Poprovvdtw] A; Φουρτουνάτω C; Frutunato S. 


8 wavras] AC; 


σὺν καὶ] AC; 


this and allied names see above, I. 
p. 28. In Muratori, 1367 no. 12, it 
occurs as awoman’s name, LONGINVS. 
BITONI. VXORI. AMENTO. 

10. σὺν καὶ Φορτουνάτῳ] For the 
position of καὶ comp. Phil. iv. 3 pera 
καὶ Κλήμεντος (quoted by Laurent 
p- 425). Hilgenfeld adds ‘from the 
Assumption of Moses’ Clem. Alex. 
Strom. vi. 15 (p. 806) σὺν καὶ τῷ 
Xad¢8. The clever emendation of 
Davies σὺν Γαΐῳ Φορτουνάτῳ is there- 
fore unnecessary ; and moreover the 
testimony of A is now reinforced by 
one other Greek MS. The form of 
expression seems to separate Fortu- 
natus from Ephebus and Bito: and, 
if so, he was perhaps not a Roman 
who accompanied the letter, but a 
Corinthian from whom Clement was 
expecting a visit. In this case there 
is no improbability in identifying 
him with the Fortunatus of 1 Cor. 
xvi. 17; for Fortunatus seems to be 
mentioned by S. Paul (A.D. 57) as 
a younger member of the household 
of Stephanas, and might well be alive 
less than forty years after, when 
Clement wrote. It must be remem- 
bered however, that Fortunatus is a 
very common name. See above, 1. 


-p. 29, note 3, p. 62, note 1. 


ev εἰρήνῃ κιτ.λ.} 1 Cor. xvi. ΠῚ mpo- 
πέμψατε δὲ αὐτὸν ἐν εἰρήνῃ. 








188 


> / ‘ ~ ᾽ , > , \ « ΄ 

εἰρήνῃ μετὰ χαρᾶς ἐν τάχει ἀναπέμψατε πρὸς ἡμᾶς 

ε - \ , / cn > 

ὅπως θᾶττον τὴν εὐκταίαν καὶ ἐπιποθήτην ἡμῖν εἰρήνην 
7 \ \ ~ 

καὶ ὁμόνοιαν ἀπαγγέλλωσιν: εἰς TO τάχιον καὶ ἡμᾶς 

΄σ \ ad ’ Lol 
χαρῆναι περὶ τῆς εὐσταθείας ὑμῶν. 


THE EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT. 






[LXV 


Ἢ xapis τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν 5 


\ \ ’ - ΄σ / « \ - 
καὶ META TAVTWYV πανταχῆ τῶν κεκλημένων Uu7TO TOU 


Θεοῦ καὶ δι’ αὐτοῦ" δι’ οὗ αὐτῷ δόξα, τιμή, κράτος Kal 


,ὔ ,ὔ a ας > \ - > 3 ‘ 
μεγαλωσύνη, θρόνος αἰώνιος, ATO Τῶν ALWYWV εἰς TOUS 


αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 

I ἀναπέμψατε] ἀνεπεμψατε A. 2 ἐπιποθήτην)] A; ἐπιπόθητον Ο. εἰρήνην 
καὶ ὁμόνοιαν] AC; ὁμόνοιαν καὶ εἰρήνην 8. 3 ἀπαγγέλλωσιν] A (the first ἃ being 
supplied above the line but prima manu); ἀπαγγείλωσιν C. τάχιον] Taxero A. 
4 εὐσταθείας] evoratiac A. ἡ καὶ δι᾿ αὐτοῦ] AS; δι αὐτοῦ (om. καὶ) C. τιμὴ 
«(ἀπὸ τῶν αἰώνων] AC; om.S. As the general tendency of S is rather to add than 
to omit, the omissions in this neighbourhood (more especially in the proper names) 
suggest that the translator’s copy of the Greek was blurred or mutilated in this part. 
It must be observed however that the omissions of S, here and above § 64, reduce 


the doxology to Clement’s normal type; comp. e.g. 88 32, 38, 43) 45, 50. 


AS; καὶ εἰς C. 


8 els] 


For the subscriptions in our authorities see above, I. pp. 117, 122, 131- 


2. θᾶττον] This form is doubly 
strange here, as it does not occur in 
the New Testament, and Clement 
uses the usual τάχιον two lines be- 
low. Θᾶττον however is found in 
Mart. Ign. 3, 5, Mart. Polyc. 13, in 
which latter passage θᾶττον and ra- 
χίον occur in consecutive sentences 
as here. Both our MSS agree in 
reading θᾶττον here, and τάχιον just 
below. 

εὐκταίαν] The word does not oc- 
cur in the LXx or New Testament, 
though common in classical Greek. 

ἐπιποθήτην͵ἢ As an adjective of 
three terminations; comp. Barnab. 
S$ 1 ἡ ἐπιποθήτη ὄψις ὑμῶν, where 
Hilgenfeld unnecessarily reads ἐπιπό- 
@nros. The feminine does not occur 
in the LXX or New Testament. For 
similar instances of adjectives of 
three terminations in the New Tes- 
tament see A. Buttmann p. 22 sq; 
and on the whole subject refer to 


Lobeck Parad. p. 455 sq, especially 
Ρ: 473 Sq. 

4. εὐσταθείας] ‘tranquillity’; comp. 
Wisd. vi. 26, 2 Macc. xiv. 6. On ev- 
σταθεῖν see the notes to Ign. Polyc. 4. 

6. καὶ pera πάντων κ-τιλ.] For a 
benediction similarly extended see 
1 Cor. i. 2 σὺν πᾶσι τοῖς ἐπικαλουμένοις 
TO ὄνομα K.T.A. 

8. θρόνος αἰώνιος] This doxology © 
is imitated in Mart. Polyc. 21 Ἰησοῦ 
Χριστοῦ ᾧ ἡ δόξα, τιμή, μεγαλωσύνη, 
θρόνος αἰώνιος, ἀπὸ γενεᾶς εἰς γενεάν. 
Here θρόνος αἰώνιος seems to 6 
thrown in as an after thought, the 
ascription having ended with καὶ 
μεγαλωσύνη ; and the idea of αἰώνιος 
is prolonged by the thrice repeated — 
αἰώνων, αἰῶνας, αἰώνων. 

For the obligations of the begin- 
ning and end of this same document 
to the Epistle of Clement see Zgnat. 
and Polyc. 1. p. 610 sq, ed. 1 (p. 626 
sq, ed. 2). δι 


THE SO-CALLED 


@COND EPISTLE OF 5. CLEMENT 





TO 


THE CORINTHIANS. 


ὯΝ 
SS RY 























AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


I. 


E have seen that the table of contents prefixed to our leading 
Ms (A) ascribes to Clement the Second Epistle equally with 
the First. On the other hand it ought to be noticed that there is no 
heading mpoc kopin@ioyc B, as the corresponding title of the First would 
lead us to expect. If we could feel sure that this phenomenon was 
hot due to the mutilation of the ms (see above, 1. p. 117), the fact 
would be significant. Though the scribe held the Second Epistle to 
be not only a letter of Clement, but also (as we may perhaps infer) 
a letter to the Corinthians; yet the absence of such a title might 
have been transmitted from an earlier copy, where the work was 
anonymous and not intended to be ascribed to this father. But the 
alternative supposition that the title has disappeared by mutilation is 
at least not improbable (see below, p. 199). In the later Greek ms (Ὁ) 
the second Epistle is entitled ‘Of Clement to the Corinthians’, like the 
first (see above, I. p. 122). 
On the other hand the Syriac Version makes a distinction between 
_ the two (see I. p. 131 sq). The First Epistle is described as ‘The 
_ Catholic Epistle of Clement the disciple of Peter the Apostle to the 
_ Church of the Corinthians’; where not only is the epistle not numbered, 
| but a distinguishing epithet is prefixed. In the case of the Second 
_ however, though the scribe makes no difference in the authorship and 
"designation of the two, the title is given more simply ‘Of the same 
Re Clement) the Second Epistle to the Corinthians.’ This distinction 
om ay be accidental; but a probable explanation is, that in some Greek 
Ms, from which the Syriac Version was ultimately derived, the First 
Epistle stood alone, the Second not having yet been attached to it. 


_ While the First Epistle is universally attributed to Clement, the 
balance of external testimony is strongly opposed to his being regarded 





192 THE EPISTLES OF S CLEMENT. 


as the author of the Second. It is first mentioned by Eusebius, who — 
throws serious doubts on its genuineness (4/.Z. iii. 37). After describing 
the First he adds, ‘I should mention also that there is said to be ἃ 
Second Epistle of Clement (ἰστέον δ᾽ ὡς καὶ δευτέρα τις εἶναι λέγεται Tod 
Κλήμεντος ἐπιστολή) : but we do not know that this 15 recognised like the - 
former (ov μὴν ἔθ᾽ ὁμοίως τῇ προτέρᾳ καὶ ταύτην γνώριμον ἐπιστάμεθα) ; for 
we do not find the older writers making any use of it (ὅτι μηδὲ καὶ τοὺς 
ἀρχαίους αὐτῇ κεχρημένους ἴσμεν). Then after summarily rejecting other — 
pretended Clementine writings, because ‘ they are never once mentioned — 
by the ancients’ and ‘do not preserve the stamp of Apostolic orthodoxy — 
intact’, he concludes by referring again to the First Epistle, which he ~ 
calls ‘the acknowledged writing of Clement (ἡ τοῦ Κλήμεντος ὁμολογου- Ὁ 
μένη γραφή). And in other passages, where he has occasion to 
speak of it, he uses similar expressions, ‘ie Epistle of Clement’, ‘the 
















acknowledged Epistle of Clement’ (7. £. iii. 16, iv. 22, 23, vi. 13). 
statement of Eusebius is more than borne out by facts. 
Second Epistle of Clement not mentioned by early writers ; but it isa 
reasonable inference from the language of Hegesippus and Dionysius of 
Corinth’ (as reported by Eusebius), and of Irenzeus and Clement of © 
Alexandria (as read in their extant writings), that they cannot have known © 
or at least accepted any such epistle’. 
more decisive language. The former professedly translates Eusebius, 
‘Dicitur esse et alia Clementis epistola cujus nos notitiam non accepi- 
mus’; the latter tacitly paraphrases him, ‘ Fertur et secunda ejus nomine 
epistola guae a veteribus reprobatur’ (de Vir. il. 15). These writers are 
not independent witnesses, but the strength, which they consciously or 
unconsciously add to the language of the Greek original, has at least a 
negative value ; for they could not have so written, if any Second Epistle 


1 Hegesippus, H. Z. iii. 16, iv. 22: 
Dionysius, H. Z. iv. 23. The words of 
the latter are τὴν σήμερον οὖν κυριακὴν 
ἁγίαν ἡμέραν διηγάγομεν, ἐν ἣ ἀνέγνωμεν 
ὑμῶν τὴν ἐπιστολήν, ἣν ἕξομεν ἀεί ποτε 
ἀναγινώσκοντες νουθετεῖσθαι, ὡς καὶ τὴν 
προτέραν ἡμῖν διὰ Κλήμεντος γραφεῖσαν. 
He is writing in the name of the Corin- 
thians to the Romans, acknowledging a 
letter which they had received from the 
brethren in Rome written apparently by 
their bishop Soter ; and he declares that 
his Church will preserve and read from 
time to time this second letter from the 
Romans, as they do the former which 


























The © 
Not only is a 


Rufinus and Jerome use still — 


was written by Clement. Thus he seems_ 
to know of only one letter of Clement to 
the Corinthians. The passage however © 
has been strangely misinterpreted, as 
though τὴν προτέραν meant the forme. 
of Clement’s two epistles—a meaning 
which the context does not at all favour 
and which the grammar excludes, for then 
we should require τὴν προτέραν τῶν διὰ 
Κλήμεντος γραφεισῶν. ἊἜ 

3 The passages from these, and 
fathers, to whom I shall have occasic 
to refer, are given in full above, 1. ἢ" 
153 56. a 


S 

































AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 193 


of Clement which might be accepted as genuine had fallen within the 
range of their knowledge. 

Early in the 9th century Georgius Syncellus still speaks of ‘the one 
genuine letter to the Corinthians’ (Chronog. a.D. 78, 1. p. 651, ed. Dind.); 
and later in the same century Photius (5222, 113) writes, ‘The so-called 
Second Epistle (of Clement) to the same persons (the Corinthians) is 
rejected as spurious (ὡς νόθος ἀποδοκιμάζεται). 

Meanwhile however this epistle had been gradually gaining recog- 
nition as a genuine work of Clement. The first distinct mention of it 
as such is in the ms A, which belongs probably to the fifth century ; but 
the notice of Eusebius implies that even in his day some persons 
were disposed to accept it. At a later period its language and teaching 
made it especially welcome to the Monophysites and from the close 
of the 5th century it is frequently quoted as genuine. Thus citations 
are found in TIMoTHEUS of ALEXANDRIA (I. p. 180 sq) in the middle 
Τοῦ the 5th century and in Severus of ANTIOCH (I. p. 182 sq) during 
Hthe early decades of the 6th, besides certain anonymous Syriac 
ollections (1. p. 183 sq), which may date from this latter period or 

subsequently. The doubtful reference in the Pszupo-JusTIN has been 

Hdiscussed above (I. p. 178 sq). To the 6th century also may perhaps 
δε ascribed the AposroticaL Canons, where (can. 85) ‘Two Epistles 
of Clement’ are included among the books of the New Testament (see 
above, 1. p. 187). About the opening of the 7th century again it 
is quoted by DororHEeus the ARCHIMANDRITE (see I. p. 190); in the 
8th century by JoaNnNes DamasceENus (see I. p. 193), if indeed the 
passage has not been interpolated’; and in the 11th by Nicon of 
HETHUS (see the notes, ὃ 3). If in the Stcchometria attached to the 
hronography of NicepHorus (ta.D. 828) it is placed with the First 
Epistle among the apocrypha, this classification does not question its 
“Wenuineness but merely denies its canonicity. 


But what is the external authority for considering it an Zfistle to the 
orinthians ? We have seen that it is called an Zfzst/e from the first ; 
but the designation 20 the Corinthians is neither. so early nor so 
miversal. It was not so designated by Eusebius or Jerome or 

motheus. But in Severus of ANTIOCH (c. A.D. 520) for the first 
tir € a quotation is distinctly given as ‘from the Second Epistle to 
the Corinthians’. ‘The Syriac ms itself which contains the extract from 
Severus ‘can hardly,’ in Cureton’s opinion, ‘have been transcribed later 
chan the commencement of the 8th century and might have been 


1 See the investigation above, I. p- 373 56. 
CLEM., II. 13 





᾿ 
' 
} 





194 . THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 





















written about the end of the 6th.’ In other Syriac extracts also which 
perhaps belong to the 6th century, it is quoted in this way. In the 
copy used by Photius again it appears to have been so entitled (Bzd/. 
126 βιβλιδάριον ἐν ᾧ Κλήμεντος ἐπιστολαὶ πρὸς Κορινθίους β΄ évepépovto, — 
compared with Bibl. 113 ἡ λεγομένη δευτέρα πρὸς τοὺς αὐτούς) ; 
and John Damascene twice cites it as ‘the Second Epistle to the 
Corinthians ’. 


Passing from the external to the internal evidence, we have to seek 
an answer to these several questions; (1) Is it truly designated an 
Epistle? (2) Was it addressed to the Corinthians? (3) What indi- 
cations of date does it give? (4) Who was the author, Clement or 
another ἢ 


2. 


Having considered the external testimony, we are now in a position” 
to interrogate the internal evidence. | 

The questions suggested by the common attribute, ‘ The Secon 
Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians,’ are threefold; (1) Was it an 
epistle? If not, what is the nature of the document? (2) Was it 
addressed to the Corinthians or to some other Church? (3) Was it 
written by Clement or by some one else? In order to answer this 
last question we have to enquire what indications we find of date and 
authorship ἢ 


(i) The answer to our first question is ready to hand. If the First 
Epistle of Clement is the earliest foreshadowing of a Christian liturg yy 


The work is plainly not a letter, but a homily, a sermon’. The speake 
addresses his hearers more than once towards the close as ‘brothers 
and sisters’ (δὲ 19, 20). Elsewhere he appeals to them in languag 
which is quite explicit on the point at issue. ‘Let us not think,’ h 
says, ‘to give heed and believe now only, while we are being admonishe 


1 Grabe (Spic. Patr. 1. p. 268, 300) 
supposed it to be a homily forged in 
Clement’s name. He referred to Anas- 
tasius (Quaest. 96), who quotes from the 
sacred and apostolic doctor Clement in 
his first discourse (λόγῳ) concerning 
‘providence and righteous judgment,’ as 
showing that such homilies were forged 






in Clement’s name. The event k 
shown his conjecture to be right as - 
the character of the document. In al 
other respects he is in error. The Cl 
ment of Anastasius is not the Rome 
but the Alexandrian; and our homi 
bears no traces of a forgery or of pr 
tending to be Clement’s. f 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


195 


by the presbyters; but likewise when we have departed home, let us 
remember the commandments of the Lord, etc.’ (δ 17). And again a 
little later he speaks still more definitely; ‘After the God of truth, 
I read to you an exhortation to the end that ye may give heed to the 
things which are written (i.e. to the scriptures which have just been 
read), so that ye may save both yourselves and him that readeth in the 
midst of you’ (§ 19). These words remind us of the language in 
which Justin, who wrote within a few years of the probable date of this 
|homily, describes the simple services of the Christians in his time. 
*On the day called Sunday,’ he says, ‘all remaining in their several cities 
and districts, they come together in one place, and the memoirs of the 
Apostles [i.e. the Gospels, as he explains himself elsewhere] or the 
writings of the Prophets are read, as long as time admits. Then, when 
the reader has ceased, the president (6 προεστώς) in a discourse (διὰ 
λόγου) gives instruction and invites (his hearers) to the imitation of these 
good things. Then we all rise in a body and offer up our prayers’ 
(Afo/. i. 67, quoted in the notes on ὃ 19). Here then is one of these 
exhortations, which is delivered after the ‘God of truth’ has been first 
heard in the scriptures’; and, this being so, the preacher was doubtless, 
as Justin describes him, ὁ προεστώς, the leading minister of the Church, 
i.e. the bishop or one of the presbyters, as the case might be. A 
different view indeed has been taken by Harnack. He supposes that 
he homily was delivered by a layman’, drawing his inference from the 
mention of the presbyters (in § 17 just quoted) as persons whom the 
@preacher and his hearers alike were bound to listen to. But this 
anguage can only be regarded, I think, as an example of a very 
ommon rhetorical figure, by which the speaker places himself on a 
Plevel with his audience, and of which several instances are furnished by 
the genuine Epistle of Clement, who again and again identifies himself 
with the factious brethren at Corinth (see the note on ὃ 17). On very rare 
asions indeed we read of laymen preaching in the early Church ; but 
such concessions were only made to persons who had an exceptionally 
rilliant reputation, like Origen®. As a rule, this function belonged to 































iy 


Ο1 Exception has been taken to this 


ΟΣ pression μετὰ τὸν Θεὸν τῆς ἀληθείας. 








Gebhardt suggests τόνων or τόνου (ΤΟΝΩΝ 
ot TONOY for ΤΟΝΘΝ). But it is difficult 
Ο see why our preacher should not have 


troduces an evangelical quotation with 
λέγει ὁ Θεός, § 13; see the note on the 
passage. We do not even know whether 
the lesson to which he here refers was 
taken from the Old or the New Testa- 
ment. 

See p. lxxii, note 11, p. 138 (ed. 2). 
So also Hilgenfeld, p. 106 (ed. 2). 

3 The objections raised in his case 


13—2 





196 THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 



















the chief ecclesiastical officer in the congregation. A presbyter did 
not preach when the bishop was present; a deacon was for the most 
part regarded as incompetent to preach on any occasion’. 

The question therefore respecting the class of writings to which this _ 
document belongs is settled beyond dispute. ‘The homiletic character 
of the work was suggested long ago by Grabe and others; and in my 
own edition I had regarded the opinion that it was a sermon or treatise 
rather than a letter as Avima facie probable, though so long as the end 
was wanting this view could not be regarded as certain*. On the other 
hand the theory propounded by Hilgenfeld, that we had here the letter 
of Soter bishop of Rome to the Corinthians, mentioned by Dionysius of 
Corinth about A.D. 170, was eagerly accepted by subsequent critics and 
editors. In a courteous review of my edition which appeared in the 
Academy (July 9, 1870) Lipsius espoused this theory as probable. And 
still later, on the very eve of the discovery of Bryennios, Harnack in 
the excellent edition of the Patres Apostolict of which he is coeditor™ 
had confidently adopted Hilgenfeld’s opinion; ‘Nullus dubito quin’ 
Hilgenfeldius verum invenerit,’ ‘mireris...neminem ante Hilgenfeldium 


——— 


verum invenisse’ (prol. pp. xci, xcii, ed. 1). This view was highly 


show that the practice was rare. Alex- 
ander of Jerusalem and Theoctistus of 
Ceesarea (Euseb. H. 2. vi. 19), writing to 
Demetrius of Alexandria, defend them- 
selves for according this privilege to 
Origen, as follows: προσέθηκε δὲ τοῖς 
γράμμασιν, ὅτι τοῦτο οὐδέ ποτε ἠκούσθη 
οὐδὲ νῦν γεγένηται, τὸ παρόντων ἐπισκόπων 
λαϊκοὺς ὁμιλεῖν, οὐκ οἵδ᾽ ὅπως προφανῶς οὐκ 
ἀληθῇ λέγων. ὅπου γοῦν εὑρίσκονται οἱ 
ἐπιτήδειοι πρὸς τὸ ὠφελεῖν τοὺς ἀδελφούς, 
καὶ παρακαλοῦνται τῷ λαῷ προσομιλεῖν 
ὑπὸ τῶν ἁγίων ἐπισκόπων, ὥσπερ ἐν Λαράν- 
dors Εὔελπις ὑπὸ Νέωνος καὶ ἐν ᾿Ικονίῳ 
Παυλῖνος ὑπὸ Κέλσου καὶ ἐν Συννάδοις 
Θεόδωρος ὑπὸ ᾿Αττικοῦ τῶν μακαρίων ἀδεὰ- 
φῶν" εἰκὸς δὲ καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις τόποις τοῦτο 
γίνεσθαι, ἡμᾶς δὲ μὴ εἰδέναι. 

1 See Bingham ἡ“. xiv. 4. 2, 45 
Augusti Christl, Archdol. Vi. p- 315 56, 
Probst Lehre u. Gebet pp. 18 sq, 222. 

2 See esp. pp- 177, 178. I cali at- 
tention to this, because my view has been 
misrepresented. Thus Lipsius (Academy, 
July 9, 1870) wrote of me, ‘He holds 


‘traces of the epistolary form, though i 




















strongly with Hilgenfeld that the docu- 
ment is really a letter, not a homily.’ 
So far from holding this view strongly, 
I have stated that we find in the docu- 
ment ‘nothing which would lead to this 
inference,’ and again that it ‘ dears 


may fossibly have been a letter’; 
I did not consider that in the existing 
condition of the work certainty on thi 
point was attainable, and I therefore 
suspended judgment. When my abl 
reviewer goes on to say of me ‘ Hez Ὁ 
agrees with Hilgenfeld in the opinion 
that the epistle was composed during 
persecution under Marcus Aurelius,’ 
imputes to me a view directly opposed t 
that which I have expressed (p. 177, 

I think also that the reader 
gather from the manner in which I a 
mentioned by Harnack (p. Ixvi, note 
p. lxxv) as ‘refuting’ Grabe, that Ih 
maintained the document to be an epist 
and not a homily; though probably t 
was not intended. 


= 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 197 


plausible and attractive; but it was open to one objection which I 
pointed out as fatal to it. It did not satisfy the primary conditions of 
the letter mentioned by Dionysius of Corinth, which was written in the 
name of the whole Roman Church, whereas our author speaks in the 
singular throughout’. 




























(ii) As regards the audience addressed by the preacher Corinth 
has highest claims. Ifthe homily were delivered in that city, we have 
an explanation of two facts which are not so easily explained on any 
other hypothesis. 

First. The allusion to the athletic games, and presumably to the 
Isthmian festival, is couched in language which is quite natural ‘if 
addressed to Corinthians, but not so if spoken elsewhere. When the 
preacher refers to the crowds that ‘land’ to take part in the games 
(εἰς τοὺς φθαρτοὺς ἀγῶνας καταπλέουσιν, ὃ 7) without any mention of the 
port, we are naturally led to suppose that the homily was delivered in 
the neighbourhood of the place where these combatants landed. Other- 
wise we should expect εἰς τὸν Ἰσθμόν, or εἰς Κόρινθον, or some explana- 
tory addition of the kind’. 

Secondly. This hypothesis alone satisfactorily explains the dissemi- 
nation and reputed authorship of the document. It was early attached 
to the Epistle of Clement in the mss and came ultimately to be attri- 
buted to the same author. How did this happen? The First Epistle 
was read from time to time in the Church of Corinth, as we know. 
This homily was first preached, if my view be correct, to these same 
Corinthians; it was not an extempore address, but was delivered from 
a manuscript’; it was considered of sufficient value to be carefully pre- 















1 Wocher (der Brief des Clemens ete. 
P- 204) suggested that the author was 
Dionysius himself. This theory had the 
advantage of connecting it with Clement’s 
genuine letter (though not very directly) ; 
and it explained the local colouring. But 
it has nothing else to commend it. 

_ * Thus in Plat. Zuthyd. 297 Ὁ νεωστί, 
μοι δοκεῖν, καταπεπλευκότι, where the word 
is used absolutely, we naturally under- 
stand the place in which the speaker is 
at the time. 

8 $19 μετὰ τὸν Θεὸν τῆς ἀληθείας dva- 
γινώσκω ὑμῖν ἔντευξιν εἰς τὸ προσέχειν 
γεγραμμένοις, ἵνα καὶ ἑαυτοὺς σώσητε 
καὶ τὸν ἀναγινώσκοντα ἐν ὑμῖν. It is 


possible however, that the homily was 
originally delivered extempore and taken 
down by short-hand writers (ταχυγράφοι, 
notarii), and that the references to the 
reader were introduced afterwards when 
it was read in the Church as a homily. 
The employment of short-hand writers 
was frequent. We read of discourses of 
Origen taken down in this way (Euseb. 
1.Ε. vi. 36): and Origen himself on one 
occasion (Comm. in [oann. vi. praef., IV. 
p. 101) excuses himself for not having 
gone on with his work by the fact that 
the ‘customary short-hand writers’ were 
not there, καὶ of συνήθεις δὲ ταχυγράφοι 
μὴ παρόντες τοῦ ἔχεσθαι τῶν ὑπαγορεύσεων 


Ne es  —_—= -_- - ᾿3ΦΩΣΩΣΣ 





198 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 















served; and (as we may venture to suppose) it was read publicly to the 
Christian congregation at Corinth from time to time, like the genuine 
Epistle of Clement. The fact that these Corinthians took for public 
reading not only the Epistle of Clement, which might be thought to” 
have acquired a peculiar sanctity by its venerable age, but also the 
much later letter of the Romans under bishop Soter, shows the practice © 
of this church in reference to uncanonical documents. In this way it” 
would be bound up with the Epistle of Clement for convenience. In~ 
such a volume as is here supposed, the Epistle of Clement would be 
numbered and entitled thus: 


a 
KAHMENTOC TIPOC KOPIN@I0YC 


with or without the addition erictoAn ; while the homily which stood 
next in the volume might have had the heading 


B 
TTPOC KOPINO10YC 


with or without the addition Aoroc or omiAta, just as Orations of Dion 
Chrysostom bear the titles tpoc adeZanApeic, Trpoc attameic; the author 
of the sermon however not being named. In the course of transcription 
the enumeration a, B, would easily be displaced, so that the two works 
would seem to be of the same kind and by the same author’. Asa 
‘matter of fact, indications are not wanting in our existing authorities, 
that after this homily had been attached to S. Clement’s Epistle it re- 
mained anonymous in the common document which contained bo 
works. In the Alexandrian ms there is no heading at all to the so- 
called Second Epistle (see above, 1. p. 117). This fact however canno 


ἐκώλυον; comp. Photius Bzb/. 121. At alternative is suggested by MHarnack: 
a later date this became acommon mode Zeitschr. f. Kirchengesch. τ. p. 268. 
of preserving pulpit oratory: see Bing- hypothesis would at all events have the 
ham Ant. xiv. 4. 11. It was not un- merit of explaining the incoherence and 
common for sermons and lectures to be looseness of expression which we find i 


taken down surreptitiously : see Gaudent. 
Praef. p. 220 (Patrol. Lat. XX. p. 831 
Migne) ‘notariis, ut comperi, latenter ap- 
positis’ (with the note). On stenography 
among the ancients see Ducange Gios- 
sarium IV. p. 642 sq (ed. Henschel) 5. v. 
Nota, together with the references col- 
lected in Mayor’s Bibl. Clue to Lat. Lit. 
p- 175 sq. See also Contemporary Re- 
view October 1875, p. 841 note. This 


this work; but in the absence of e 
dence it is safer to assume that the se 
mon was committed to writing by 
preacher himself. 4 

1 This opinion was arrived at indepen: 
dently of the remarks of Zahn (Gott. Gel. 
Anz. Nov. 8, 1876, p. 1430 sq), and I am 
the more glad to find that he accounts ἴοι 
the common heading of this sermon in: 
similar way. See also I. p. 371, note I. 






AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 199 


be pressed, for it seems not unlikely that the title has been cut off’, 
But in the case of the Syriac version the testimony is free from suspicion. 
Here the genuine letter is called in the heading not ‘ The First Epistle 
of Clement’ but ‘The Catholic Epistle of Clement,’ as if it were the 
only known letter written by this father (see above, p. 191). In both 
cases however the scribes themselves have in some other part of their 
respective Mss designated our work the Second Epistle of Clement; 
and this fact renders the survival of the older form only the more signi- 
ficant. 

For these reasons I adhere to Corinth as the place of writing. On 
the other hand Harnack has with much ability maintained the Roman 
origin of this document’; and it is due to his arguments to consider 
them. 

The external evidence seems to him to point in this direction. He 
remarks on the fact that this writing appears to have been very little 
known in the East during the earliest ages. It is first mentioned by 
Eusebius, and Eusebius himself, as Harnack argues from his language, 
only knew it from hearsay*. It is very far from certain however, that 

this is the correct inference from the historian’s words, ἰστέον δ᾽ ws καὶ 
δευτέρα tis εἶναι λέγεται τοῦ Κλήμεντος ἐπιστολή" οὐ μὴν ἔθ᾽ ὁμοίως τῇ 
προτέρᾳ καὶ ταύτην γνώριμον ἐπιστάμεθα, ὅτι μηδὲ τοὺς ἀρχαίους αὐτῇ 
κεχρημένους ἴσμεν (ZH. 25. iil. 38). The hearsay implied in λέγεται 
may refer equally well to the authorship as to the contents of the 


1 This possibility was overlooked by 
me in my first edition pp. 22, 174. My 
attention was directed to it by a remark 
of Harnack (Ζ. Καὶ X. 1. p. 275, note 1), 
who however incorrectly states that in A 
the First Epistle has ‘page-headings over 
the columns.’ There is only one such 
page-heading, which stands over the first 
column as the title to the work. Having 
omitted to inspect the Ms myself with this 
view, I requested Mr E. M. Thompson 
οὗ the British Museum to look at it and 
to give me his opinion. His report is to 
this effect : 

The title to the First Epistle has small 
ornamental flourishes beneath. Between 
the bottom of these and the text there 

_is a space of { of an inch. Over the 
_ first column of the Second Epistle (where 
the title should be, if there were any) 
ἴδε top of the leaf is cut obliquely so 





that the space left between the top of 
the leaf and the text varies from ζ to # of 
an inch. Thus the space is quite con- 
sistent with the supposition that the title 
has been cut away. Moreover there is 
a single spot at the top of the page, 
which may have been the end of an 
ornamental flourish under the title, though 
this is doubtful. 

The photograph for the most part 
represents these facts fairly well. 

2 In two careful and valuable articles 
in the Zeitschrift f. Kirchengeschichte 1. p. 
264 Sq, p. 329 sq, as well as in the prole- 
gomena to the 2nd ed. of the Fatres 
Apostolici Pt. i, p. lxiv sq. He stated 
this view first in a review of the edition 
of Bryennios in the 7heologische Literatur- 
zettung Feb. 19, 1876. 

8. Ζ. αὶ Α΄, 1. p. 269 sq; Prol. p. Ixiv, 
note 2. 


PS TT —— - 





































200 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


book. In other words, Eusebius does not throw any doubt on the 
existence of such a work, but on its genuineness; and the language 
which follows suggests that the historian was himself acquainted with it. 
If the testimony of Eusebius be set aside, the earliest reference to its 
contents is found in the Quaest. οἱ Resp. ad Orthodoxos § 74, falsely 
ascribed to Justin Martyr’. This work is supposed to have been 
written at the end of the fourth or beginning of the fifth century, and, 
as Harnack says, unless all appearances are deceptive, to have emanated 
from the Syro-Antiochene Church*. Our next direct witness in point 
of date is probably the Alexandrian Ms, about the middle of the fifth 
century. From that time forward the testimonies are neither few nor 
indistinct®. 

This evidence is somewhat slight ; but it cannot be alleged against 
the Eastern origin of the work. Such as it is, it a// emanates from the 
Last. Neither early nor late do we hear a single voice from the West | 
testifying to the existence of this Clementine writing, except such as are 
mere echoes of some Greek witness. External testimony therefore, 
though it may not be worth much, is directly opposed to Harnack’s 
theory. 

From the internal character of the work again Harnack draws the 
same inference. He remarks on the close resemblances to the 
Shepherd of Hermas, and thence infers that it must have emanated 
‘ex eadem communione ac societate*.’ Thus he makes it a product 
of the Church of Rome. 

If these resemblances had referred to any peculiarities of the Roman 
Church generally, or of the Shepherd of Hermas in particular, the 
argument would have been strong. But this is not the case. The 
most striking perhaps is the doctrine of the heavenly Church (§ 14). 
But the passage, which is quoted in my notes, from Anastasius shows — 
that this distinction of the celestial and the terrestrial Church, so far 
from being peculiar, was a common characteristic of the earliest” 
Christian writers. And the statement of Anastasius is borne out by 
extant remains, as will appear from parallel passages also cited there. 
Again the pre-incarnate Son is spoken of in both documents as ‘Spirit’; 
but here also, though such language was repugnant to the dogmatic 
precision of a later age, the writers of the second century and of the 


1 See 1. p. 178 sq, and the notes on 3 The references in my notes seem 
§ 16. show that it was known to a very early 

2 See the article by Gass in Illgen’s writer, the author of AZost. Const. i—vi. 
Leitschr. f. d. hist. Theol. 1842, IV. p. 143 4 Prol. p. Ixx sq: comp. Z. fi &. 
sq, quoted by Harnack Ζ. Δ XK. 1. p.274. ΡΡ. 340, 344 Sq, 363. 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 201 


earlier part of the third constantly use it without misgiving (see the 
note on § 9). Again both writings speak of baptism as ‘the seal,’ and 
the exhortation to purity of life takes the form of an injunction to ‘guard 
the seal.’ But in this case likewise we have an image which is common 
in Christian writers of the second century (see the note on ὃ 7). Nor 
are other coincidences wanting, though less striking than these. 

On the other hand the two writings present marked contrasts on 
points of special prominence. ‘There is a wide divergence for instance 
between the rigid, almost Encratite, view of the relations between the 
sexes which our Clementine author enunciates’, and the reasonable 
position of Hermas, which led the fierce Tertullian to denounce him as 
‘pastor moechorum’.’ And again the difference of language regarding 
the relations of the two covenants is equally great. I cannot indeed 
regard the author of the Shepherd as a Judaizer, any more than I 
could regard our Clementine writer as a Marcionite: but the tendency 
of the one is to see in the Church a development of the Synagogue, 
whereas the other delights to set them in sharp contrast. And alto- 
gether it may be said that the points of difference in the two documents 
are more fundamental than the points of coincidence. 


(iii) The third question, relating to the daze and authorship, receives 
some illustration from the newly discovered ending, though not so much 
as might have been hoped. Generally speaking the notices in this 
portion confirm the view which was indicated in my first edition, that 
it belongs to the first half of the second century, nor do they contain 
anything that is adverse to this view. Harnack, as the result of a 





















1 § 12 τοῦτο λέγει ἵνα ἀδελφὸς κ.τ.λ. 
On the other hand Hermas (Mand. iv. 1) 
writes ᾿Εντέλλομαί σοι, φησί, φυλάσσειν 
τὴν ἁγνείαν" καὶ μὴ ἀναβαινέτω σου ἐπὶ 
τὴν καρδίαν περὶ γυναικὸς ἀλλοτρίας ἢ 
περὶ πορνείας τινὸς ἢ περὶ τοιούτων τινῶν 
ὁμοιωμάτων πονηρῶν" τοῦτο γὰρ ποιῶν 
ἁμαρτίαν μεγάλην ἐργάζῃ" τῆς δὲ σῆς 
μνημονεύων πάντοτε γυναικὸς οὐδέ- 
more ἁμαρτήσεις. In this same sec- 
tion the husband is enjoined to take back 
into his society the wife who has been 
unfaithful, and just below (§ 4) second 
_ Marriages are permitted to Christians, 
though the greater honour is assigned 
to those who remain in widowhood. On 
the other hand Harnack (Z. αὶ X. τ. 
jap- 348) quotes Vis. ii. 2 τῇ συμβίῳ σου 


TH μελλούσῃ σου ἀδελφῇ, as showing 
that Hermas looked upon the single life 
as the ideal state, and he concludes that 
neither writer ‘thought of stopping mar- 
riage among Christians for the present.’ 
It is not clear what the words in Zs. ii. 2 
may mean; nor again is it certain that 
our Clementine preacher intended to en- 
force an absolute rule or to do more than 
give counsels of perfection. But the fact 
remains that the direct language of the 
one is in favour of latitude, of the other 
in favour of restraint. 

2 Tertull. de Pudic. 10 ‘scriptura Pas- 
toris quze sola moechos amat...adultera et 
ipsa et inde patrona sociorum,’ zd. 20 ‘illo 
apocrypho Pastore moechorum.’ 


202 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


































thorough examination of the whole epistle, sets the limits of date as — 
A.D. 130—160; and, if it emanated from Rome (as he supposes to 
have been the case), he thinks that it must have been written within — 
the first two decades of this period, i.e. within A.D. 130—150". 
This view is reasonable. If it were necessary to mention any limits 

of date, where so much uncertainty exists, I should name Α.Ὁ. 120—140; _ 
but, as there is nothing in the work which militates against a still 
earlier date, so again it is impossible to affirm confidently that it 
might not have been written a few years later.’ The two main points 
in which the recently recovered portion strengthens the existing data 
for determining the age of the document are these. | 
First. We are furnished with additional information respecting — 
the relations of the author to the Canon of the New Testament. He 
distinguishes between the Old and New Testament: the former he 
styles ‘the Books,’ ‘the Bible’ (ra βιβλία), while the latter (or a part 
of it) is designated ‘the Apostles’ (§ 14). This distinction separates 
him by a broad line from the age of the Muratorian writer, of Irenzeus, — 
and of Clement of Alexandria, i.e. from the last quarter of the second — 
century. The fact also that he uses at least one apocryphal Gospel, — 
which we can hardly be wrong in identifying with the Gospel of the ~ 
Egyptians (see the notes on § 12), apparently as an authoritative 
document, points in the same direction. The writers just mentioned 
are all explicit in the acceptance of our four Canonical Gospels alone, — 
as the traditional inheritance of the Church. This argument would be 
very strong in favour of an early date, if we could be quite sure that our 
homily was written by a member of the Catholic Church, and not by 
some sectarian or half-sectarian writer. On this point there is perhaps 
room for misgiving, though the former seems the more probable 
supposition. The general acceptance of this homily and its attribution 
to Clement certainly point to a Catholic origin; and in its Christology 
also it is Catholic as opposed to Gnostic or Ebionite, but its Encratite 
tendencies (not to mention other phenomena) might suggest the 
opposite conclusion. | 
On the other hand our preacher quotes as ‘scripture’ (δ 6) a saying” 
which appears in our Canonical Gospels. But this same passage is 
quoted in the same way in the Epistle of Barnabas, which can hardly 
have been written many years after A.D. 120 at the very latest, and may 
have been written much earlier ; and even Polycarp (§ 12), if the Latin 
text may be trusted, cites Ephes. iv. 26 as ‘scripture.’ Stronger in the same : 
1 2, fp 1 3633 comp. Prol. to be of Roman origin, he places it ποὶ 
p- xxiii sq (ed. 2), where, supposing it later than A.D. 135—140 (145). 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 203 


direction is the fact that in the newly recovered portion our anonymous 
author introduces a saying of our Lord in the Gospels with the words 
‘God saith’ (δ 13), having immediately before referred to ‘the Oracles of 
God’ in this same connexion, and that he elsewhere describes the 
reading of the Scriptures as the voice of ‘the God of truth’ speaking to 
the congregation (§ 19). As regards this latter passage however we do 
not know whether the scriptural lessons which had preceded the delivery 
of this homily were taken from the Old or from the New Testament. 

Secondly. The relations of the preacher to Gnosticism furnish an 
indication of date though not very precise. He attacks a certain type 
of this heresy, but it is still in an incipient form. The'doctrinal point on 
which he especially dwells is the denial of the resurrection of the body, 
or (as he states it) the ‘resurrection of this flesh’ (§§ 8, 9, 14, 16). As 
the practical consequence of this denial, the false teachers (§ 10 κακοδι- 
δασκαλοῦντες) were led to antinomian inferences. They inculcated an 
indifference (ἀδιαφορία) with regard to fleshly lusts, and they permitted 
their disciples to deny their faith in times of persecution. This anti- 
nomian teaching is denounced by the preacher. But his polemic against 
Gnosticism does not go beyond this. ‘There is no attack, direct or 
indirect, on the peculiar tenets of Valentinus and the Valentinians, of 
Marcion, or even of Basilides. And not only so, but he even uses 
language with regard to the heavenly Church which closely resembles 
the teaching of Valentinus respecting the zon Ecclesia (see the note 
on § 14), and which he would almost certainly have avoided, if he had 
written after this heresiarch began to promulgate his doctrine’. In like 
manner the language in which he sets the Church against the Synagogue 
would probably have been more guarded, if it had been uttered after 
Marcion had published his Antitheses in which the direct antagonism 
of the Mosaic and Christian dispensations was maintained. As it isa 
reasonable inference from the near approaches to Valentinian language 
in the Ignatian Epistles that they were written in the pre-Valentinian 
epoch’, seeing that the writer is a determined opponent of Gnosticism, 
and would not have compromised himself by such language after it had 
been abused, so also the same inference may be drawn here. 

These considerations seem to point to a date not later than a.D. 140: 
and altogether the topics in this homily suggest a very primitive, though 
᾿ς not apostolic, age of the Church. Whether we regard the exposition of 
᾿ς doctrine or the polemic against false teachers or the state of the Christian 


_ 1 This argument drawn from the rela- Ζ. Κὶ K.1. pp. 359, 360. 
_ tion of the writer to Gnosticism is justly 2 See Jgnat. and Polyc.1. p. 374, ed. 1; 
ie insisted upon by Harnack Pro/. p. Ixxii, ρ. 385, ed. 2. 





204 THE EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 





























society or the relation to the Scriptural Canon, we cannot but feel that 
we are confronted with a state of things separated by a wide interval 
from the epoch of Irenzeus and Clement of Alexandria. At the same 
time other arguments have been alleged in favour of an early date, which 
will not bear the stress that has been laid upon them. ‘Thus it is said 
that the preacher betrays no knowledge of the writings of S. John, or pos- 
sibly even of S. Paul’. As regards S. John, I have called attention to an 
indication that our author was not unacquainted with the Fourth Gospel 
(see the note on § 17), though the inference is not certain. ‘As regards 
S. Paul, I cannot see any probable explanation of his appeal to ‘the Apo- 
stles’ as supporting his doctrine respecting the heavenly Church, except 
that which supposes him to be referring to S. Paul, and more especially 
to the Epistle to the Ephesians—not to mention echoes of this Apostle’s 
language elsewhere in this homily*. But even if it be granted that he 
shows no knowledge of the writings of either Apostle, does it follow 
that he had none? What numbers of sermons and tracts, published in 
the name of authors living in this nineteenth century, must on these 
grounds be relegated to the first or second! And again, if he says 
nothing about episcopacy’, does it follow that he knew nothing about 
it, and therefore must have written before this institution existed? 
This argument again would, I imagine, remove to a remote antiquity 
a large portion, probably not less than half, of the theological literature 
of our own age. 


But, while criticism suggests probable or approximate results 
with regard to the locality and the date, it leaves us altogether in the 
dark as respects the authorship; for the opinions maintained by the 
three editors who have discussed this question since the recent dis- 
covery of the lost ending, must, I venture to think, be discarded. All — 
three alike agree in the retention of Clement as the author, but under- 
stand different persons bearing this name. 


(1) In the first place Bryennios (p. pv’) maintains that the homily — 
is the work of none other than the famous Clement whose name it — 
bears, the bishop of Rome*. This view however has nothing to recom- — 


1 Harnack Prol. p. Ixxiii, Z.f. K.1. taken from the Old Testament) are ano-_ 
Ρ. 361 sq. He regards it as uncertain, nymous, this fact can hardly surprise us+ 
though probable, that our author had 2 See the notes on § 14. 
read S. Paul’s Epistles. At the same 3 Harnack Prol. p. lxxii, Z. f. XK. I. p» 
time he considers it strange that S. 359. 

Paul’s name is not mentioned. As most 4 This had been the view of Cotelier, 
of our author’s quotations (even when Bull, Galland, Lumper, and others; whe 





AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 205 


mend it, and has found no favour with others. Indeed all the arguments 
which, even when we possessed it only in a mutilated form, were suf. 
ficient to deter us from ascribing it to the author of the genuine epistle 
or indeed to any contemporary, are considerably strengthened, now that 
we have it complete. 

(i) The writer delights to identify himself and his hearers with 
Gentile Christianity. He speaks of a time when he and they worshipped 
stocks and stones, gold and silver and bronze (δ 1). He and they are 
prefigured by the prophet’s image of the barren woman who bore many 
more children than she that had the husband, or, as he explains it, 
than the Jewish people ‘who seem to have God’ (ὃ 2). On the other 
hand the genuine Clement never uses such language. On the contrary 
he looks upon himself as a descendant of the patriarchs, as an heir of 
_ the glories of the Israelite race; and (what is more important) he is 
thoroughly imbued with the feelings of an Israelite, has an intimate 
knowledge of the Old Testament Scriptures (though not in the original 
tongue), and is even conversant with the apocryphal literature of the 
race and with the traditional legends and interpretations. In short 
his language and tone of thought proclaim him a Jew, though a 
Hellenist. (ii) On the difference in style I do not lay great stress ; 
because, where there is much play for fancy, there is much room 
also for self-deception, and criticism is apt to become hypercritical. 
Yet I think it will be felt by all that the language of this Second 
Epistle is more Hellenic and less Judaic, though at the same time more 
awkward and less natural, than the First. (iii) The argument from the 
theology is stronger than the argument from the style, but not very 
strong. There is a more decided dogmatic tone in the Second Epistle 
than in the First. More especially the pre-existence and divinity of 
Christ are stated with a distinctness (δὲ 1, 9) which is wanting in the 
First, and in a form which perhaps the writer of the First would have 
hesitated to adopt. (iv) The position of the writer with respect to the 
Scriptures is changed. In the First Epistle Clement draws his 
admonitions and his examples chiefly from the Old Testament. The 
direct references to the evangelical history are very few in comparison. 
On the other hand in the Second Epistle the allusions to and quotations 


from gospel narratives (whether canonical or apocryphal) very decidedly _ 


_ preponderate. This seems to indicate a somewhat later date, when 
gospel narratives were more generally circulated and when appeal could 


wrote without the light which the dis- the question, and still regarded it as an 


covery of the lost ending has thrown on _epistle. 





206 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 



































safely be made to a written Christian literature. This last argument Ὶ 
more especially has received a large accession of strength by the re- ~ 
covery of the lost ending, and would be conclusive in itself. The gulf — 
which separates our preacher from the genuine Clement in their respective 
relations to the New Testament Scriptures (see above, p. 202) has been — 
widened by the additional evidence. 


(2) On the other hand Hilgenfeld (p. xlix, ed. 2) surmises that the 
author was not the Roman Clement but the Alexandrian. He argues 
that our preacher was not a presbyter, but a catechist’. He points to 
the passage (§ 19) in which (as he reads it) the duty of studying 
‘philosophy’ is inculcated*. And, as Dodwell had done before him’*, 
he imagines that he sees resemblances in this sermon to the style and 
thought of the Alexandrian Clement. He therefore suggests that this 
was an early production of the Alexandrian father. 

The inference however with regard to the preacher’s office is 
highly precarious, as we have seen already (p. 195); nor does it © 
materially affect the question. The mention of ‘philosophy’ again — 
disappears, when the passage is correctly read. The Syriac Version ~ 
shows clearly that φιλοπονεῖν is the true reading, and that φιλοσοφεῖν, 
as a much commoner word, was written down first from mere inadvert- — 
ence by the scribe of C and afterwards corrected by him*. Nor again 
is it possible to see any closer resemblance to the Alexandrian Clement — 
in the diction and thoughts, than will often appear between one early — 
Christian writer and another; while on the other hand the difference Ὶ 
is most marked. The wide learning, the extensive vocabulary, the — 
speculative power, the vigorous and epigrammatic expression, of the — 
Alexandrian Clement are all wanting to this sermon, which is con- — 
fused in thought and slipshod in expression, and is only redeemed from ~ 
common-place by its moral earnestness and by some peculiarities 
of doctrinal exposition. Where there is want of arrangement in the 
Alexandrian Clement, it is due to his wealth of learning and of thought. ~ 


1 See pp. xlix, 106. He explains 
§ 17 εἰ γὰρ ἐντολὰς ἔχομεν... ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώ- 
λων ἀποσπᾶν καὶ κατηχεῖν as referring 
to the official position of the preacher ; 
but compare e.g. 1 Cor. xiv. 19, Gal. 
vi. 6. 

2 See pp. xlix, 84, 106. 

3 Dissert. in Iren. i. § xxix p. 53- 

4 Compare the note on this word 
φιλοπονεῖν § 19 with that on μεταλήψεται 











§ 14. In both cases the scribe has cor- 
rected the word which he first wrote 
down, and in both the correction is sup- 
ported by the Syriac Version. Hilgen- — 
feld has consistently adopted the scribe’s 
first writing in both cases. On p. 84 ne 
has incorrectly given φιλοποιεῖν as the 
correction in C. It should be ¢ 
νεῖν. 





AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 207 


In our author on the other hand the confusion is the result of in- 
tellectual poverty. Nor again is the difference between the two writers 
less wide as regards their relation to the Canon of the New Testament. 
It is true that both alike quote the Gospel of the Egyptians, and (as 
it so happens) the same passage from this Gospel. But this very fact 
enables us to realize the gulf which separates the two. Our author 
uses this apocryphal work as authoritative, and apparently as his chief 
evangelical narrative ; Clement on the other hand depreciates its value 
on the ground that it is not one of the four traditionally received by 
the Church, Our author interprets the passage in question as favouring 
ascetic views respecting the relation of the sexes: Clement on the other 
hand refutes this interpretation, and explains it in a mystical sense’. 


(3) Lastly ; Harnack is disposed to assign this homily neither to 
the Roman bishop nor to the Alexandrian father, but to a third person 
bearing the name of Clement, intermediate in date between the two. 

In the Shepherd of Hermas (Vs. ii. 4) the writer relates how he 
was directed in a vision to send a copy of his book to ‘Clement,’ and 
it is added, ‘Clement shall send it to the cities abroad, for he is charged 
with this business’ (πέμψει οὖν Κλήμης εἰς τὰς ἔξω πόλεις" ἐκείνῳ γὰρ 
ἐπιτέτραπται). As Hermas is stated to have written this work during 
the episcopate of his brother Pius (c. A.D. 140—155), it is urged that 
the Clement here mentioned cannot have been the same with the illus- 
trious bishop of Rome (see above, 1. p. 359 sq). Thus the notice in the 
Shepherd gives us another Roman Clement, who flourished about the 
time when our homily must have been written. Here, argues Harnack, 
we have an explanation of the phenomena of the so-called Second Epistle 
of Clement. If we suppose that towards the end of the third century a 
homily known to have emanated from the early Church of Rome and 
bearing the name of Clement was carried to the East, it would not 
unnaturally be attributed to the famous bishop, and thus, being attached 


1 Strom. iii. 13, Ὁ. 553 (quoted below, The discovery of the conclusion of the 
p- 236 sq). Julius Cassianus, like our passage however decides in favour of the 
preacher, had interpreted the passage as _ former. ; ; 
discountenancing marriage; and Clement It is in reference to this very passage 





of Alexandria controverts him, substitut- 
ing another interpretation. While the 
passage was still mutilated, the opinion 
was tenable that it was doubtful whether 
our author’s explanation was more closely 
allied to the interpretation of Cassianus 
or to that of Clement of Alexandria, 
_ though I inclined to the latter supposition. 


from the Gospel of the Egyptians, that 
Clement of Alexandria urges in answer 
to Cassianus, ἐν τοῖς παραδεδομένοις ἡμῖν 
τέτταρσιν εὐαγγελίοις οὐκ ἔχομεν τὸ ῥητόν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ κατ᾽ Αἰγυπτίους. Thus he is 
diametrically opposed to our preacher on 
the one point where we are able to com- 
pare their opinions. 





208 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 
























to his genuine epistle, might easily before the close of the fourth cen- 
tury be furnished with the incorrect title Κλήμεντος πρὸς Κορινθίους 
ἐπιστολὴ β΄. ' 

This view has much more to recommend it, than the two which 
have been considered already. But the foundation on which it rests is 
inadequate. The existence of this second Roman Clement is un- 
supported ; and as I have shown above (1. p. 359 sq), the reference in 
Hermas must be explained in another way’. 


As all these hypotheses fail us, we must be content to remain still 
in ignorance of the author; nor is it likely now that the veil will ever 
be withdrawn. The homily itself, as a literary work, is almost worth- 
less. As the earliest example of its kind however, and as the product 
of an important age of which we possess only the scantiest remains, 
it has the highest value. Nor will its intellectual poverty blind us 
to its true grandeur, as an example of the lofty moral earnestness and 
the triumphant faith which subdued a reluctant world and laid it pros- 
trate at the foot of the Cross. 


3. 
The following is an analysis of the fragment : 


‘My brethren, we must look on Christ as God. We must not think 
mean things of Him who has been so merciful to us, who has given us 
life and all things (δ 1). In ws is fulfilled the saying that the barren 
woman hath many children. The Gentile Church was once unfruitful, 
but now has a numerous offspring. We are those sinners whom Christ 
came especially to save (§ 2). Therefore we owe all recompense to 
Him. And the return which He asks is that we should confess Him in 
our deeds. The worship, not of the lips only, but of the heart, must be — 
yielded to Him (ὃ 3). He has denounced those who, while they obey 
Him not, yet call Him Lord. He has declared that, though they be 
gathered into His bosom, He will reject them (δ 4). Let us therefore 
remember that we are sojourners here, and let us not fear to quit this 
world. Rather let us call to mind His warning, and fear not those who 
kill the body, but Him who can destroy body and soul together. All 


1 Hagemann (Ueber den zweiten Brief the fiction, being the letter of recom- 
des Clemens, etc. in the Theolog. Quartal- mendation written in the name of the 
schr. XLII. p. 509 sq, 1861) supposed great Roman Clement. So far he antici- 
that this is the letter mentioned by Hermas _ pated the theory of Harnack. 
(Vis. ii. 4). He regarded it as part of 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 209 

































things earthly we must hold foreign to us (§ 5). On this there must be 
no wavering. We cannot serve two masters. This world and the 
other are deadly foes. It must be our choice to do Christ’s will. 
Even Noah, Job, and Daniel, could not have rescued their own children 
from destruction. How shall we then, if we keep not the baptismal 
seal intact, present ourselves in God’s kingdom? (§ 6). The lists are 
open; the struggle approaches. Let us crowd thither to take our 
part. Let us fight to win the immortal chaplet. But, so doing, we 
must observe the laws of the contest, if we would escape chastisement. 
A horrible fate awaits those who break the seal (§ 7). Now is the 
time for repentance. Now we can be moulded like clay in the hands 
of the potter. After death it will be too late. If we keep not small 
ings, how shall we be trusted with great? If we guard not the seal 
intact, how shall we inherit eternal life? (δ 8).’ 

‘Deny not, that men shall rise in their bodies. As Christ came in 
he flesh, so also shall we be judged in the flesh. Let us give ourselves 
to God betimes. He reads our very inmost thoughts. To those who 
do His will Christ has given the name of brothers (§ 9). This will let 
s ever obey. If we fear men and choose present comfort, we shall 
purchase brief pleasure at the price of eternal joy. They who lead 
Jothers astray herein are doubly guilty (δ 10). We must not falter. The 
Jprophetic word denounces the double-minded; it foretells how the 
ourse of things is maturing to its consummation, as the vine grows 
and ripens. God is faithful; and, as He has promised, so will He give 
Hjoys unspeakable to the righteous (δ 11). The signs, which shall herald 
he approach of His kingdom, Christ has foretold. Zhe two shall be 
ein universal peace. Zhe outside shall be as the inside in strict sin- 
erity. Zhe male shall be as the female in the cessation of all sexual 
Pongings (ὃ 12).’ 

‘Let us repent forthwith, that we may be forgiven, and God’s name 
may not be blasphemed by our inconsistency. When God’s oracles 
say one thing and we do another, they regard them as an idle tale— 
when God’s precepts tell us to love our enemies and we hate one 
Panother (ὃ 13). Fulfilling God’s command, we shall be members of the 
eternal, spiritual Church, which is Christ’s body. This is the meaning 
bf the words Male and female created He them. The Church, like Christ, 
was spiritual, and became flesh. This flesh we must keep pure, that we 
may attain to the spiritual, the immortal (§ 14).’ 

‘Whosoever obeys this precept of chastity saves both himself and 
the preacher. This is the only return which speaker and hearer alike 
san make to their Creator. God promises an immediate answer. We 


CLEM. II. 14 





| 















210 _ THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 


must close with it and escape condemnation (§ 15). Therefore let us 
repent, while there is time, and obtain the mercy of Jesus. The Day 
cometh as a heated furnace. Heaven and earth shall melt away. 
Almsgiving and love are best ; for they cover a multitude of sins (δ 16). 
We are commanded to convert others; how much more to save our 
own souls. Let us not forget the preacher’s lesson, when we go to our 
homes. Let us meet more frequently together. The Lord will come 
and gather all nations, rewarding them after their works. The worm 
of the unbeliever shall never die, but the righteous shall give glory to. 
Him, seeing His judgments on the wicked and His faithfulness to His” 
servants (δ 17). Let us be found among His thankful servants. In the 
midst of temptations, I strive after righteousness (δ 18). _Give heed to. 
these exhortations from the Scriptures. Set an example to the young 
by your obedience. Be not offended by exhortation; nor deterred by 
present suffering. It is the price of future glory (§ 19). This life is 
only the arena; the crown shall be awarded hereafter. Else, it were a 
matter of mere traffic.’ 

‘To the one invisible God, who manifested truth and life to 
through the Saviour, be glory for ever (§ 20).’ 























νεκρῶν. 


117, 122, 131 sq. 
I ἡμᾶς] 5; ὑμᾶς C. 


I. ‘My brethren, we must think of 
Christ as God, as judge of all men. 
Plt is no light crime to have mean 
@views of Him by whom we were 
called and who suffered for us. What 
worthy recompense can we pay to 
Him, who has given us light and 
life, who has rescued us from the 
Worship of stocks and stones, has 
Scattered the dark cloud that hung 
over us, has brought back our stray- 
ing footsteps, and thus has called us 
nto being?’ 

I. ᾿Αδελφοί κιτ.λ.] The opening of 
the epistle, as far as παθεῖν ἕνεκα 
v, is quoted by Timotheus of 
Alexandria (A.D. 457) as ‘from the 
beginning of the Third Epistle,’ 
immediately after a quotation ‘from 
the First Epistle on Virginity’ (see 
Dove, I. p. 181); and by Severus of 
Antioch (c. A.D. 513—518) as ‘from 
the Second Epistle to the Corinthians’ 
I. p. 183). It is also found in 
lore than one anonymous Syriac 
collection of excerpts (see I. p. 185), 
_ Photius (277. 126) remarks on the 
opening of this epistle, contrasting 


[TPOC KOPINOIOYC B] 


I. ᾿λδελφοί, οὕτως δεῖ ἡμᾶς φρονεῖν περὲ ᾿Ιησοῦ 

~~ ~ ΄ lA A 
Χριστοῦ, ws περὶ Θεοῦ, ws περὶ κριτοῦ ζώντων καὶ 
καὶ οὐ δεῖ ἡμᾶς μικρὰ φρονεῖν περὶ τῆς σωτη- 


[προς κορινθιογε B.] The authorities for this title will be found on t. pp. 


3 huas]S; ὑμᾶς C. 


it with the First as respects its 
Christology, ἡ δὲ δευτέρα καὶ αὐτὴ vov- 
θεσίαν καὶ παραίνεσιν κρείττονος εἰσάγει 
βίου καὶ ἐν ἀρχῇ Θεὸν τὸν Χριστὸν 
κηρύσσει: see the notes on §§ 2, 36, 
58, of the First Epistle, and the re- 
marks in 1, p. 398 sq. 

2. κριτοῦ «.r.A.] The expression 
occurs in Acts x. 42 (in a speech of 
S. Peter): comp. 2 Tim. iv. 1, 1 Pet. 
iv. 5. See also Barnab. § 7, Polyc. 
Phil. 2. 

3. μικρὰ φρονεῖν] ‘to have mean 
views.’ The Ebionites, whom the 
writer of this epistle attacks, were 
said to have earned the title of ‘poor’ 
by their mean and beggarly concep- 
tion of the Person of Christ; see 
esp. Origen de Princ. iv. 22 (I. p. 183) 
of πτωχοὶ τῇ διανοίᾳ ᾿Εβιωναῖοι τῆς 
πτωχείας τῆς διανοίας ἐπώνυμοι, ἐβιὼν 
[8] γὰρ ὁ πτωχὸς παρὰ Ἑβραίοις 
ὀνομάζεται, c. Cels. ii. τ (I. p. 385), 2 
Matth, t. xvi. § 12 (IIL p. 734) τῷ 
᾿Εβιωναίῳ καὶ πτωχεύοντι περὶ τὴν εἰς 
Ἰησοῦν πίστιν, and again 77: Gen. tii 
Flom. § 5 (11. p. 68); Euseb. 27. 5. 


ili. 27 ᾿Εβιωναίους τούτους οἰκείως. ἐπε- 


14—2 








| 
| 
| 
| 


212 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. fr 


~~ lal \ μὰς ΄“-᾿ A A n 

plas ἡμῶν" ἐν τῷ yap φρονεῖν ἡμᾶς puKpa περὶ αὐτοῦ, 

σ- \ / 4 

μικρὰ καὶ ἐλπίζομεν λαβεῖν. Καὶ οἱ ἀκούοντες ws 

a / \ a 4 

περὶ μικρῶν [ἁμαρτανουσιν, καὶ ἡμεῖς] ἁμαρτάνομεν, οὐκ 

> , ’ > / RS ΩΣ \ , \ > ma / 1 

εἰδότες πόθεν ἐκλήθημεν Kal ὑπο Tivos Kal Els OV τόπον, 
ε “ \ qt / ω 

καὶ ὅσα ὑπέμεινεν ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστὸς παθεῖν ἕνεκα ἡμῶν. 
3" ὅς ΄ / > / \ / 

τίνα οὖν ἡμεῖς αὐτῷ δώσομεν ἀντιμισθίαν; ἢ τίνα, 

» 4 ~ \ If / \ ~ 

καρπὸν ἄξιον οὗ ἡμῖν αὐτὸς ἔδωκεν; πόσα δὲ αὐτῷ 


2 λαβεῖν] A; ἀπολαβεῖν C. The reading of S is uncertain, for ap (the word — 
used here) occurs elsewhere indifferently as a rendering of both λαμβάνειν and daro- 


λαμβάνειν, e.g. below 88 8, 9, 11. 


3 ἁμαρτάνουσιν, καὶ ἡμεῖς] S; om. AC: see the lower note. 
add. offeremus illi S. This however does not perhaps imply any additional words” 


φήμιζον of πρῶτοι πτωχῶς καὶ ταπεινῶς 
τὰ περὶ τοῦ Χριστοῦ δοξάζοντας, Eccl. 
Theol. i. 14 οἵπρωτοκήρυκες ᾿Ἐβιωναίους 
ὠνόμαζον Ἕβραϊκῇ φωνῇ πτωχοὺς τὴν 
διάνοιαν ἀποκαλοῦντες τοὺς ἕνα μὲν Θεὸν 
λέγοντας εἰδέναι καὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος τὸ 
σῶμα μὴ ἀρνουμένους τὴν δὲ τοῦ υἱοῦ 
θεότητα μὴ εἰδότας, with other pas- 
sages collected in Schliemann C7e- 
meni. Ὁ. 471 sq. Origen’s language 
perhaps does not necessarily imply 
that he gives this as a serious account 
of the term, but only that they were 
fitly called ‘poor.’ Eusebius how- 
ever, mistaking his drift, supposes 
this name to have been a term of 
reproach imposed upon these here- 
tics by the orthodox; instead of 
being, as doubtless it was and as 
perhaps Origen knew it to be, self-as- 
sumed in allusion to their voluntary 
poverty. The idea of a heresiarch 
named Ebion, which is found first in 
Tertullian (de Praescr. 33, and else- 
where), is now generally allowed to 
be a mistake. 

2. οἱ ἀκούοντες] ‘we who hear, 
according to the text of the Greek 
Mss. For the article compare Clem. 
Rom. ὃ 6 ai ἀσθενεῖς τῷ σώματι, and 
see below ὃ 19 μὴ ἀγανακτῶμεν οἱ 
ἄσοφοι; but the expression is awk- 






















ὡς περὶ] CS Sever Timoth; womep A. 
ἡ καρπὸν] AC; 


ward and misplaced. Young sug- 
gested καίτοι which others have 
adopted, but this is not the particle 
required. The Syriac quotations of 
Timotheus and Severus have ‘and 
when we hear, as though the article 
were absent from their text; but, 
allowance being made for the license” 
of translation, no stress can be laid 
on this fact. Photius (2261. 126 
remarks on the looseness and in- 
consequence of expression in this 
Second Epistle (or rather in the t 
epistles, but he must be referring 
especially to the Second), ra 
αὐταῖς νοήματα ἐρριμμένα πως καὶ ¢ 
συνεχῆ τὴν ἀκολουθίαν ὑπῆρχε φυλά 
τοντα. Several instances of this will 
be noted below, and this passage 
if the Greek text be correct, furnishe 
another illustration; but the Syriac 
comes to the rescue by inserting th 
words which I have placed in brackets 
and removes the difficulty. 

6. ἀντιμισθίαν] The word oc 
Rom. i. 27, 2 Cor. vi. 13, Theoph. 
Autol. ii. 9. Though apparently ne 
common, it is a favourite word wit 
our author ; see just below and S$ 
11. The sentiment is taken from P 
cxvi. 12 ri ἀνταποδώσω τῷ Κυρίῳ κιτ.λ 

8. ὅσια] ‘ mercies, kindnesses, as 






































7 
Oava TOS. 
in the Greek text. 


A; δώσομεν αὐτῷ C. 

A; χρυσὸν (om. καὶ) CS. 
οὐδὲν ἄλλο C; and so apparently S. 
ritatem S. 


is used in the Lxx Is. lv. 3 (quoted in 
Acts xiii. 34 δώσω ὑμῖν τὰ ὅσια Δαυεὶδ 
τὰ πιστά) for DIDN: see Wolf Cur. 
Phitlol. p. 1197. Ina parallel passage 
2 Chron. vi. 42 the LXx has ra ἐλέη. 
In this case ὀφείλομεν will have a 
pregnant sense, ‘we have received 
and should repay’ Perhaps how- 
ever it is simpler to take ὅσια as 
‘religious duties’ (e.g. Eur. Suppl. 
368 ὅσια περὶ θεούς). The distinction 
between ὅσια ‘what is due to God’ 
and δίκαια ‘ what is due to men’ is as 
old as Plato (Gorg. p. 507 B) and 
runs through Greek literature: comp. 
Trench J. 7. Syz. 2nd ser. ὃ xxxviii, 
and Steph. Zhes. 5. vv. δίκαιος and 
ὅσιος. See also below, §§ 5, 6. 

ὡς πατὴρ κιτ.λ.} The reference 
is perhaps to Hosea ii. 1 καὶ ἔσται 
ἐν τῷ τόπῳ οὗ ἐρρέθη αὐτοῖς Οὐ λαός 
μου ὑμεῖς, ἐκεῖ κληθήσονται υἱοὶ Θεοῦ 
ζῶντος, more especially as applied 
by S. Paul Rom. ix. 26. See also 
the quotation in 2 Cor. vi. 18 καὶ 

μαι ὑμῖν eis πατέρα καὶ ὑμεῖς ἔσεσθέ 
μοι εἰς υἱοὺς καὶ θυγατέρας (a combina- 
tion of 2 Sam. vii. 14 and Is. xliii. 6), 
and 1 Joh. iii. 1 ἴδετε ποταπὴν ἀγάπην 
“δέδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ πατὴρ ἵνα τέκνα Θεοῦ 


1] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


δὲ] A; yap 5; om. C. 

10 ποῖον οὖν] C; ποιουν A; ποῖον S: see above, I. p. 144. 

11 wnpol] A; caect S; πονηροὶ C. 
ἔργα] AC; ἔργον S. 


213 


3 ,ὔ J \ a \ eon 2 / ε \ 
ὀφείλομεν ὅσια; TO φῶς yap ἡμῖν ἐχαρίσατο, ὡς πατὴρ 
΄. > / “ 7 

υἱοὺς ἡμᾶς προσηγόρευσεν, ἀπολλυμένους ἡμᾶς ἔσωσεν. 

΄- 3 - ἡ > ΄σ y \ \ , - 

ποῖον οὖν αἶνον αὐτῷ δώσωμεν ἢ μισθὸν ἀντιμισθίας ὧν 
4 \ of - / ~ / 

ἐλάβομεν; πηροὶ ὄντες τῇ διανοίᾳ, προσκυνοῦντες λίθους 
\ / \ \ \ yA \ / ᾽ 

καὶ ξύλα καὶ χρυσὸν καὶ ἄργυρον καὶ χαλκόν, ἔργα 

7 ΄ « \ i > \ 

ἀνθρώπων" καὶ ὁ Bios ἡμῶν ὅλος ἄλλο οὐδὲν HY εἰ μὴ 
> / \ , 

ἀμαύρωσιν οὖν περικείμενοι καὶ τοιαύτης 


8 ὀφείλομεν] οφιλομεν A. 
αὐτῷ δώσωμεν 
12 καὶ χρυσὸν] 

13 ἄλλο οὐδὲν] A; 

14 ἀμαύρωσω] AC; tantam obscu- 


10. δώσωμεν] ‘can we give?’ The 
reading of C disposes of the gram- 
matical difficulty presented by a 
future conjunctive, δώσωμεν ; see 
Winer Gramm. § xiii. p. 89 and is 
perhaps correct. Of all such future 
conjunctives however δώσω is perhaps 
the best supported; see 2d. ὃ xiv. 
P- 95: 

11. πηροὶ ὄντες κιτ.λ.] Arist. Eth. 
Nic. i, 10 τοῖς μὴ πεπηρωμένοις πρὸς ἀρε- 
τήν, Ptolemzus ad Flor. (in Epiphan. 
Haer. xxxiii. 3, p. 217) μὴ μόνον τὸ τῆς 
ψυχῆς ὄμμα ἀλλὰ καὶ Td Tod σώματος 
πεπηρωμένων. Inthe New Testament 
πηροῦν, πήρωσις, occur occasionally 
as various readings for πωροῦν, πώρω- 
σις, but are not well supported: see 
Fritzsche Rom. 11. p. 451 sq. 

προσκυνοῦντες «.t-A.] The writer 
of this epistle therefore is plainly 
a Gentile Christian: comp. ὃ 2 ἡ 
ἐκκλησία ἡμῶν, and the introduction 
p. 205. 

13. ὁ βίος] Their Bios was not ζωὴ 
but θάνατος: see the note on Ign. Rom. 
7- Comp. 1 Tim. v. 6 ζῶσα τέθνηκεν. 
See also the passage of S. Augustine 
quoted by Harnack, Conf i. 6 ‘in is- 
tam dico vitam mortalem an mortem 
vitalem nescio,’ 





214 


ἀχλύος γέμοντες ἐν TH ὁράσει, ἀνεβλέψαμεν ἀποθέμενοι. 
ἐκεῖνο ὃ περικείμεθα νέφος τῇ αὐτοῦ θελήσει. 
γὰρ ἡμᾶς καὶ σπλαγχνισθεὶς ἔσωσεν, θεασάμενος ἐν 
ἡμῖν πολλὴν πλάνην καὶ ἀπώλειαν, καὶ μηδεμίαν ἐλπίδα ᾿ 
ἔχοντας σωτηρίας, εἰ μὴ τὴν παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 
γὰρ ἡμᾶς οὐκ ὄντας καὶ ἠθέλησεν ἐκ μὴ ὄντος εἶναι, 


ἡμάς. 
11. Εὐφράνθητι, 


BOHCON, ἢ 


μᾶλλον ἢ τῆς 


2 τῇ αὐτοῦ θελήσει] A; τῇ θελήσει αὐτοῦ C; voluntate nostra S, as if αὑτῶν. 
4 πολλὴν πλάνην] AC; hunc omnem (=tantum=rocabrtnv) errorem multum ὃ. 
ἐλπίδα ἔχοντας] C; ελπιδανεχοντεσ A. S evidently read as C, though it trans- 
lates by a finite verb, e¢ guod ne una quidem spes salutis sit nobis. 
ἐκ μὴ] A; ἐκ τοῦ μὴ C. 


AC; δὲ S. 


I. ἀνεβλέψαμεν) Comp. ὃ 9. 

ἀποθέμενοι κιτ.λ.}] The language 
here, though not the thought, is 
coloured by Heb. xii. 1 τοσοῦτον 
ἔχοντες περικείμενον ἡμῖν νέφος 
μαρτύρων, ὄγκον ἀποθέμενοι πάντα 
κιτιλ. For the construction περικεῖσθαί 
τι ‘to be enveloped in or surrounded 
by a thing, see Acts xxviii. 20, Heb. 
ν, 2. 

5. ἔχοντας] sc. ἡμᾶς. If this read- 
ing be correct it is perhaps go- 
verned by θεασάμενος rather than 
by ἔσωσε, ‘and this though we 
had no hope’ But ἔχοντες may be 
the right reading after all: in which 
case a word or words may have fallen 
out from the text; or this may be one 
of the awkward expressions to which 
allusion has been already made (on 
οἱ ἀκούοντες). 

ἐκάλεσεν γὰρ κιτ.λ.} Rom. iv. 17 
καλοῦντος τὰ μὴ ὄντα ὡς ὄντα, Philo 
de Creat. Princ. 7 (11. p. 367) τὰ γὰρ 
μὴ ὄντα ἐκάλεσεν εἰς τὸ εἶναι : Comp. 
Hermas Κ25. I. 1 κτίσας ἐκ τοῦ μὴ 
ὄντος τὰ ὄντα, Mand. 1 ποιήσας ἐκ 


THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. (ea 


cteipa ἢ οὐ τίἰκτογοὰ᾽ PAZON Kal 
OYK Q@AINOYCAa, ὅτι πολλὰ TA TEKNA TAC ἐρήμου. 


, ‘ 3:᾽ 
EXOYCHC TON ANAPA. 














ἠλέησεν 


ἐκάλεσεν 


ra 4 > J " 
O εἴπὲν εὐφράνθητι; 


6 γὰρ]. 
8 εὐφράνθητι] AC; add, 


τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ εἶναι τὰ πάντα, 
Clem. Hom. iii. 32 τῷ τὰ μὴ ὄντα εἰς τὸ 
εἶναι συστησαμένῳ. ἥ 

II. ‘For what is the meaning of 
the scripture, Rejoice thou barren 
that bearest not? It has been ful- 
filled in us—the Gentile Church, 
which is even now more numerous 
than the Jewish. In like manner also” 
it is written elsewhere, J came not to 
call just men but sinners. Such 
sinners were we.’ Ἵ 

8. Εὐφράνθητι κιτ.λ.] From the 
Lxx Is. liv. 1, word for word. See 
the notes on Galatians iv. 27. he 
same application is also made im 
Justin Aol. i. 53, p. 88 6. Philo also 
allegorizes this text (guod Omn. Prob, 
lib. 2, 11. p. 449), but in a wholly dif 
ferent way. 4 

11. ἡ ἐκκλησία ἡμῶν] i.e. the Gen 
tile Church, called ὁ λαὸς ἡμῶν belov 
Our author’s application seems 
far to differ from S. Paul’s, that h 
makes the contrast between Genti 
and Judaic Christendom, whereas 
the Apostle it is between the new δὶ 



































c 


cTeipa ἡ 


ὠδίνουσαι, ἐγκακῶμεν. 


[4 
Θεόν. 
γάρ, λέγει, 8. 


by Bensly) S. See above, I. p. 141. 
15 ἐγκακῶμεν] A; ἐκκακῶμεν C. 
om. C, 


the old dispensation. Justin uses the 
text in the same way as our Pseudo- 
Clement. 

14. μή, ὡς «7.A.] If the order of 
the words be correct they can only 
mean ‘let us not grow weary, as women 
in travail grow weary’; but it is 
strange that the writer should have 
confused his application of the text 
by this fanciful account of ἡ οὐκ ὠδί- 
vovoa, of which the natural explana- 
tion is so obvious. For ἐγκακῶμεν 
Cotelier and other editors would sub- 
Stitute ἐκκακῶμεν; but this is a mis- 
take, as authority is against ἐκκα- 
κεῖν and for ἐγκακεῖν : see the note on 
Galatians vi. 9. 

17. ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ] For the pre- 
position after ἔρημος comp. Jer. xxxili 
(xl). το (ἀπὸ ἀνθρώπων καὶ κτηνῶν), 
Χχχὶν (xli). 22 (ἀπὸ τῶν κατοικούντων), 
xliv (li). 2 (ἀπὸ ἐνοίκων.. The word 
involves asecondary idea of severance, 
and so takes ἀπό. 

_ 18. πλείονες] Writing about this 
same time, Justin Martyr gives a si- 
milar account of the greater numbers 
of the Gentile Christians: AZo/.i. 53 
(p. 88 B) πλείονάς τε καὶ ἀληθεστέρους 


πΊ AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


ῥῆξον] AC; καὶ ῥῆξον 5. 
13 τὰς mpocevxas] AC; τὰ πρὸς τὰς προσευχὰς (or τὰ πρὸς εὐχὰς, as suggested 


218 


> ' ~ τὰ ΄ \ ἜΝ. ε 
ΟΥ̓ τίκτογοὰ, ἡμᾶς εἰπεν᾽ στεῖρα yap ἣν H 
2 , Gms. sag YEN a Σ “- 2A ’ ἃ δὲ > 
ἐκκλησία ἡμῶν πρὸ τοῦ δοθῆναι αὐτῆ τέκνα. ὃ δὲ εἶπεν 
, ς > > ' “ ‘ ‘ 
BOHCON H οὐκ AiNoyca, τοῦτο λέγει: Tas προσευχὰς 
c ~ ε ΄“ 3 / \ \ \ / ε ε 
ἡμών ἁπλώς ἀναφέρειν πρὸς τὸν Θεὸν μή, ὡς αἱ 
ὃ δὲ εἶπεν ὅτι πολλὰ τὰ τέκνὰ 
TAc ἐρήμου μᾶλλον ἢ τῆς εχούήοης τὸν ANAPA, ἐπεὶ ἔρημος 
Ὁ / 3 > \ “ mn ἃ \ ε ἱρὰ \ \ 
ἐδόκει εἶναι ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ ὁ λαὸς ἡμῶν, νυνὶ δὲ πισ- 
/ ’ - / af 
τεύσαντες πλείονες ἐγενόμεθα τῶν δοκούντων ἔχειν 
\ / « > 
καὶ ἑτέρα δὲ γραφὴ λέγει ὅτι Οὐκ ἦλθον Ka- 


12 ἡμῶν] AC; om. 5. 


14 αἱ ὠδίνουσαι)] AC; ἡ ὠδίνουσα 8. 
17 τοῦ] A; om. C. 19 δὲ] AS; 


τοὺς ἐξ ἐθνῶν τῶν ἀπὸ ᾿Ιουδαίων καὶ 
Σαμαρέων Χριστιανοὺς εἰδότες. 

τῶν δοκούντων ἔχειν Θεόν]  ΗἸ]- 
genfeld quotes from the Praedicatio 
Petrt in Clem. Alex. Strom. vi.- 5 
(p. 760) μηδὲ κατὰ "Iovdaious σέβεσθε" 
καὶ yap ἐκεῖνοι, μόνοι οἰόμενοι τὸν 
Θεὸν γινώσκειν, οὐκ ἐπίστανται 
(comp. Orig. zw Foann. xiii. § 17, Iv. 
p. 226). 

19. ἑτέρα δὲ γραφὴ] Thus the 
Gospel, treated as a written docu- 
ment, is regarded as Scripture like 
the Old Testament. Comp. Barnab. 
§ 4, and possibly 1 Tim. v. 18. See 
above, the introduction p. 202. 

οὐκ ἦλθον x.t.d.] The quota- 
tion agrees exactly with S. Mark ii. 
17, but might also be taken from S. 
Matthew ix. 13 οὐ yap ἦλθον κ.τ.λ. 
On the other hand in 5. Luke (v. 32) 
the form is different, οὐκ ἐλήλυθα κα- 
λέσαι δικαίους ἀλλὰ ἁμαρτωλοὺς εἰς 
μετάνοιαν. Comp. also Barnab. ὃ 5 οὐκ 
ἦλθεν καλέσαι δικαίους ἀλλὰ ἁμαρτω- 
λούς (where the words εἰς μετάνοιαν, 
added in the late Mss, are wanting in 
&), and Justin AZo/. i. p. 62 C οὐκ ἦλ- 
ov k. ὃ. d. ἅμ. εἰς μετάνοιαν. 





216 


Aécat Aikaioyc, ἀλλὰ AMapT@AOYC. τοῦτο λέγει, ὅτι δεῖ 
\ > / S, > - / > , A 
Tous ἀπολλυμένους σώζειν" ἐκεῖνο yap ἐστιν μέγα Kal 
/ 3 A ε ΄“ / 3 \ \ , t 
θαυμαστόν, οὐ Ta ἑστῶτα στηρίζειν ἀλλὰ τὰ πίπ- 


τοντα. 


, + , \ / 51 
ἀπολλύμενα, καὶ ἔσωσεν πολλούς, ἐλθὼν Kal καλέσας 5 


ἡμᾶς ἤδη ἀπολλυμένους. 
ITI. 


΄σ ΄σ΄ / / ΄ ΄σ ~ a 
ἡμάς: πρῶτον μέν, OTL ἡμεῖς οἱ ζώντες τοῖς νεκροῖς 
΄ / Cn ~ \ 
θεοῖς οὐ θύομεν Kai οὐ προσκυνοῦμεν αὐτοῖς, ἀλλα 
᾽, > > ~ \ Ul ΄“ > 7 / « 
ἔγνωμεν δ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὸν πατέρα τῆς ἀληθείας: Tis ἡ τ 
΄σ \ / ) A \ ΄ -τ of Γ 
γνῶσις τ πρὸς αὐτὸν, n TO μη ἀρνεῖσθαι δι’ οὗ ἔγνωμεν — 
3 ᾿ς / A A > / ᾿ ε ͵ > , 
αὐτον; λέγει δὲ καὶ αὐτός: Τὸν GMOAorHcaNTé Με [ἐνώ- 


4 οὕτως] οὕτω C. 
ἔλεος] ελαιοσ A. 


ΑΟ; τίς δὲ 8. 
θείας C: see above, I. p. 127. 


ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀνθρώπων] AC; om. 8. 


4. σῶσαι κ-τ.λ.] Luke xix. 10 ἦλθεν 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ζητῆσαι καὶ σῶσαι 
τὸ ἀπολωλός (compare the interpola- 
tion in Matt. xviii. 11), 1 Tim. i. 15 
"I. X. ἦλθεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἁμαρτωλοὺς 
σῶσαι. 

III. ‘Seeing then that He has been 
so merciful and has brought us to 
know God, wherein does this know- 
ledge consist but in not denying Him 
by whom we were brought? If we 
confess Him, He will confess us be- 
fore the Father. This we must do, 
not with lips only but in our lives.’ 

8. τοῖς νεκροῖς θεοῖς) Wisd. xv. 17 
θνητὸς δὲ ὧν νεκρὸν ἐργάζεται χερσὶν 
ἀνόμοις" κρείττων γάρ ἐστι τῶν σεβασ- 
μάτων αὐτοῦ, ὧν αὐτὸς μὲν ἔζησεν ἐκεῖνα 
δὲ οὐδέποτε. 

12. λέγει δὲ καὶ αὐτός κιτ.λ.] Nicon 
(see above on the First Epistle §§ 14, 
15) quotes this passage from the 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


« \ e ν᾿ 347 ΄ A 
οὕτως καὶ ὁ Χριστὸς ἠθέλησεν σῶσαι τὰ 


ll 53 / ~ ἢ 
Τοσοῦτον οὖν ἔλεος ποιήσαντος αὐτοῦ εἰς 


Χριστὸς] AS; Κύριος C. 
9 καὶ οὐ προσκυνοῦμεν αὐτοῖς] AS; om. C. 
AC; S translates as if it had read ἔπειτα δὲ ὅτι ; see above, I. p. 142. 
11 yrOous] γνωσεισ A. 

ἢ] AC; om. 8. 
The testimony of S cannot be alleged in such a case. 





























7 οὖν) AC; om. ὃ. 
ἀλλὰ] 
10 tis] 
ἡ πρὸς αὐτόν] AS; τῆς ἀλη- 
ἀρνεῖσθαι] add. αὐτὸν C. 

12 αὐτόν] AS; om. C. 

13 αὐτὸν] AC. S adds etiam — 


Second Epistle; καὶ ὁ Κύριος λέγει 
Τὸν ὁμολογήσαντα... τοῦ πατρός μου" ἐν 
τίνι δέ...τῶν ἐντολῶν. Cotelier (on 
Clem. Rom. § 14) mentions the ἔαοί,, 
but does not give the quotation in 
full. 
Tov ὁμολογήσαντα κιτ.λ.} A free 
quotation of Matt. x. 32 (comp. Luke 
xii. 8). 
ἐνώπιον κιτ.λ.] The omission in 5. 
is probably correct, the words having — 
been inserted by scribes from a well- - 
known evangelical passage, Luke 
xii.9. For a similar instance, where 
S preserves the true reading, see 
Clem. Rom. 46. Our preacher is in 
the habit of dropping out words in 
his quotations, and presenting them 
in skeleton. 4 
14. ἐὰν οὖν] ‘tf after all, if onl 
For similar instances of the use of οὖν 
see Hartung Partzkel. 11. 11. " 


1v] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 217 


TION TON ἀνθρώπων], ὁμολογήσω AYTON ἐνώπιον TOY πὰτρός 






e 3 > \ ε \ € ω ΓᾺΡ, Ὃ ε 
ΜΟΥ. OUTOS OUV εστιν O μισθὸς μων, εαν ουν οΟμο- 


5 λογήσωμεν δι’ οὗ ἐσώθημεν. ἐν τίνι δὲ αὐτὸν ὁμολο- 
γοῦμεν; ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν ἃ λέγει καὶ μὴ παρακούειν αὐτοῦ 
τῶν ἐντολῶν, καὶ μὴ μόνον χείλεοιν ayTON τιμᾶν ἀλλὰ 
ἐξ ὅλης KapAiac καὶ ἐξ ὅλης τῆς διὰνοίδο. λέγει δὲ Kal 
ἐν τῷ ᾿Ησαΐᾳ" ‘0 λδὸς οὗτος τοῖς χείλεοίν με τιμᾷ, ἡ δὲ 
OKAPAIA AYT@N πόρρω ἄπεοτιν ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ. 

; IV. Μὴ μόνον οὖν αὐτὸν καλῶμεν Κύριον, οὐ 
γὰρ τοῦτο σώσει ἡμᾶς. λέγει γάρ" Οὐ πᾶς ὁ λέγων 
μοι, Κύριε, Κύριε, cwOHceTal, ἀλλ᾿ ὁ ποιῶν τὴν AIKAIOCYNHN. 


/ > ΄ ᾽ \ ad 
ὥστε οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις αὐτὸν ὁμολογῶμεν, 


ego (κἀγώ) as in Matt. x. 32. 
AC; merces magna S. 


14 μου] AC; om. 5. 
οὖν] A; om. CS. 


ὁ μισθὸς ἡμῶν] 
17 αὐτὸν τιμᾶν] AC; debe- 


mus invocare (vocare) eum S, as if ὀφείλομεν αὐτὸν ἐπικαλεῖσθαι (καλεῖν). 18 ris] 
A; om. C. diavolas] AC; δυνάμεως 8. δὲ] yap AS; om. C. 19 ὁ] 
ὃ (i.e. ov) A. 20 αὐτῶν] AS; αὐτοῦ C. ἄπεστιν] A; ἄπεστιν (or ἐστιν) 


5; ἀπέστην C. 
24 αὐτὸν] avrwy A, 


18. ἐξ ὅλης κιτ.λ.] A reference 
ultimately to Deut. vi. 5 ; but as both 
words διανοίας and καρδίας do not 
seem to occur in that passage in any 
one text of the LXx, we must suppose 
that the writer had in his mind the 
Saying rather as it is quoted in the 
Gospels, esp. Mark xii. 30 ἐξ ὅλης 
τῆς καρδίας σου καὶ ἐξ ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς 
σου καὶ ἐξ ὅλης τῆς διανοίας σου καὶ ἐξ 
ὅλης τῆς ἰσχύος σου (comp. Matt. xxii. 
37, Luke x. 27). 

19. ‘O λαὸς οὗτος κιτ.λ.] From Is. 
xxix. 13, modified by the form in 
which it is quoted in the Gospels; 
see the note on the genuine Epistle 
of Clement § 15, where again it is 
quoted in almost exactly the same 
form as here. 

IV. ‘It is not enough to call Him 
Lord. We must confess Him by our 
works, by love and purity and guile- 


21 οὖν] AS(?); om. (, 
ὁμολογῶμεν] A; ὁμολογήσωμεν Ὁ. 


22 σώσει) AC; σώζει 8. 


lessness. We must not fear men 
but God. For Christ Himself has 
warned us that, though we be His 
most familiar friends, yet if we do 
not His commandments, He will re- 
ject us.’ 

22. Οὐ πᾶς ὁ λέγων κ-τ.λ.] From 
Matt. vii. 21 οὐ πᾶς ὁ λέγων μοι, Κύ- 
ριε, Κύριε, εἰσελεύσεται εἰς τὴν βασί- 
λειαν τῶν οὐρανῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ ποιῶν τὸ 
θέλημα τοῦ πατρός μου τοῦ ἐν τοῖς 
οὐρανοῖς (comp. Luke vi. 46 quoted 
below). Justin (AZol. i. 16, p. 64 A) 
gives the exact words of S. Matthew 
(except οὐχὶ for οὐ). Clem. Hom. viii. 
7 has ri pe λέγεις Κύριε, Κύριε, καὶ οὐ 
ποιεῖς ἃ λέγω ; which closely resembles 
Luke vi. 46 τί δέ με καλεῖτε, Κύριε, 
Κύριε, καὶ οὐ ποιεῖτε ἃ λέγω; Comp. 
Clem. Hom. viii. 5 οὐδὲ ἐν τῷ πιστεύειν 
διδασκάλοις καὶ κυρίους αὐτοὺς λέγειν 
ἡ σωτηρία γίνεται. 


218 


a > ΄ co ΄΄ ΄“ Vw 

ἐν τῷ ἀγαπάν ἑαυτούς, ἐν τῷ μὴ μοιχᾶσθαι μηδὲ 
~ > \ ~ 3 ~ » 
καταλαλεῖν ἀλλήλων μηδὲ ζηλοῦν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγκρατεῖς 
> 2 ΄ ᾽ ΄ \ / ? , a 
εἶναι, ἐλεήμονας, ἀγαθούς" Kal συμπάσχειν ἀλλήλοις 
\ -~ 

ὀφείλομεν, καὶ μὴ φιλαργυρεῖν. 
ε ta \ > “ > a 
ὁμολογῶμεν αὐτὸν καὶ μὴ ἐν τοῖς ἐναντίοις" Kal οὐ 5 
pene ΄ ~~ > / ged δ. 
δεῖ ἡμᾶς φοβεῖσθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους μᾶλλον, ἀλλὰ TOV 


Θεόν. 


, > a a Ἵ 
Κύριος" Ἐὰν Hite met ἐμοῦ ογνηγμένοι ἐν τῷ κόλπῳ μοῦ. 
καὶ μὴ ποιῆτε τὰς ENTOAAC MOY, ἀποβάλῶ ὑμᾶς Kal ἐρῶ 


1 ἀγαπᾶν AC; add. τοὺς πλησίον ἡμῶν ὡς S: see above. 
7 ὑμῶν] A; ἡμῶν CS. 


οφιλομεν A. 
ἐν τῷ κόλπῳ μου] AC; iz uno sinu S. 


I. μηδὲ καταλαλεῖν x.r.A.] James 
iv. 11 μὴ καταλαλεῖτε aGdAnAov.. See 
also Hermas Mand. 2 πρῶτον μὲν 
μηδενὸς καταλάλει, with the whole 
section. 

3. ἀγαθούς) ‘kindly, beneficent, 
as Tit. ii. 5, 1 Pet. ii. 18; and so pro- 
bably 1 Thess. iii. 6. 

5. ov δεῖ ἡμᾶς κιτ.λ.] Comp. Acts 
iv. 19, V- 29. 

8. ᾿Εὰν ἦτε κιτ.λ.] Not found in 
the canonical Gospels, and perhaps 
taken from the Gospel of the Egyp- 
tians, which is quoted below; see 
§§ 5,8,12. The image and expressions 
are derived from Is. xl. 11 τῷ βραχίονι 
αὐτοῦ συνά ξει ἄρνας καὶ ἐν τῷ κόλπῳ 
αὐτοῦ βαστάσει. The latter clause, 
though absent in BSA, is found in 
several MSS (see Holmes and Par- 
sons), in other Greek Versions, and 
in the original; and must be sup- 
posed to have been known to the 
writer of the Gospel in question. For 
the expression συνάγειν ἐν κόλπῳ, ‘ 20 
gather in the lap, see τιχχ Prov. 
xxx. 4 (xxiv. 27). The image is car- 
ried out in the language of the next 
chapter, ἔσεσθε ὡς ἀρνία k.T.A. 

10. ὑπάγετε κιτ.λ.}1 The parallel 
passage in S. Luke xiii. 27 runs καὶ ἐρεῖ, 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


\ la ~ ΄σ , > 4 
διὰ τοῦτο, ταῦτα ὑμῶν πρασσόντων, εἶπεν ὃ 




























/ ΄ 4 ‘ 
ἐν τούτοις τοῖς ἔργοις 


4 ὀφείλομεν] 
8 Κύριο:] AC; ἰησοῦς 8... 
9 ποιῆτε] A; ποιήσητε C. 12 Wap- 


Λέγω ὑμῖν; οὐκ οἶδα [ὑμᾶς] πόθεν ἐστέ — 
ἀπόστητε am ἐμοῦ πάντες ἐργάται ἀδι- — 
κίας. This is much closer than Matt, — 
vii. 23. The denunciation is taken 
from Ps. vi. 9 ἀπόστητε ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ πάν- — 
Tes οἱ ἐργαζόμενοι τὴν ἀνομίαν. Com- — 
pare the quotations in Justin “4201. 
i. 16 (p. 64 B) καὶ τότε ἐρῶ αὐτοῖς" 
᾿Αποχωρεῖτε ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ἐργάται τῆς ἀνο- 
μίας, Dial. 76 (p. 301 D) καὶ ἐρῶ αὐτοῖς" 
᾿Αναχωρεῖτε ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ. See Westcott — 
Canon p. 125 sq (2nd ed.). ᾿ 
V. ‘We must break loose from 
the ties of this world. The Lord has 
warned us, that here we shall be as ~ 
lambs among wolves; that we have 
cause to fear the perdition of our souls” 
rather than the murder of our bo- 
dies. Our life here is brief and 
transitory; our life in heaven is eter- 
nal rest. Therefore should we look 
upon ourselves as aliens to the 
world.’ | 
12. τὴν παροικίαν] ‘our sojou 
ing in,’ i.e. ‘our dalliance with’; see 
the note on παροικοῦντες in the open 
ing of the First Epistle. r 
15. Ἔσεσθε x.t.A.] This is a close 
parallel to Luke x. 3 ἀποστέλλω vpas 
ὡς ἄρνας ἐν μέσῳ λύκων (comp. Matt 
x. 16). As however Peter is not men 


ANOMIAC. 


V. Ὅθεν, ἀδελφοί, 





οἰκίαν] AC; παροιμίαν 8. 
A; ἀποκτέντας C. 


































tioned in the context, and as the con- 
tinuation of the quotation is not 
found in the canonical Gospels, the 
whole passage was probably taken 
from some apocryphal source, per- 
haps the Gospel of the Egyptians: 
see the note on δὲ 4, 8,12. As the 
same metaphor of the lambs occurs 
in the apocryphal quotation just above 
(§ 4), they were probably taken from 
the same context. Photius (A767. 
126) remarks on the number of apo- 
cryphal quotations in this Second 
Epistle, πλὴν ὅτι ῥητά τινα ὡς ἀπὸ τῆς 
θείας γραφῆς ξενίζοντα παρεισάγει, ὧν 
οὐδ᾽ ἡ πρώτη ἀπήλλακτο παντελῶς. 
(For apocryphal quotations in the 
First, which however are chiefly from 
the Old Testament and therefore not 
so prominent, see the notes §§ 8, 13, 
17, 23, 29, 46.) 

19. καὶ ὑμεῖς κιτ.λ.] The apocry- 
phal citation again runs parallel to 
the canonical Gospels, Matt. x. 28 
καὶ μὴ φοβεῖσθε ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποκτεννόντων 
τὸ σῶμα, τὴν δὲ ψυχὴν μὴ δυναμένων 
ἀποκτεῖναι᾽ φοβήθητε δὲ μᾶλλον τὸν 
δυνάμενον [καὶ] ψυχὴν καὶ σῶμα ἀπολέ- 
σαι ἐν γεέννῃ, Luke xil. 4, 5 μὴ φοβη- 
᾿θῆτε ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποκτεννόντων τὸ σῶμα 
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα μὴ ἐχόντων περισσότερόν 


19 φοβεῖσθε] φοβεισθαι A. 


ν] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 219 


ὑμῖν. ὕπαγετε ἀπ᾿ ἐμοῦ, οὐκ οἶδὰ ὑμᾶς πόθεν ἐοτέ, épratat 


καταλείψαντες τὴν παρ- 
οἰκίαν τοῦ κόσμου τούτου ποιήσωμεν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
καλέσαντος ἡμᾶς, καὶ μὴ φοβηθῶμεν ἐξελθεῖν ἐκ τοῦ 
κόσμου τούτου. λέγει γὰρ ὁ Κύριος Ἔςεοθε ὡς ἀρνίδ ἐν 
mécw λύκων ἀποκριθεὶς δὲ ὁ Πέτρος αὐτῷ λέγει" Edn 
OYN AlacTIAPAZ@CIN οἱ λύκοι τὰ δρνίδ; εἶπεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς τῴ 
Πέτρῳ" Mt φοβεϊίοθωσὰν τὸ APNIA TOYC λύκογο μετὰ τὸ 


ATIOOANEIN AYTA. κὰἂὶ YMEIC μὲ φοβεῖοθε TOYC ἀποκτέννον- 


> 
ἀποκτέννοντας] 


τι ποιῆσαι" ὑποδείξω δὲ ὑμῖν τίνα φοβη- 
θῆτε. φοβήθητε τὸν μετὰ τὸ ἀποκτεῖναι 
ἔχοντα ἐξουσίαν ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν γέεν- 
ναν" ναί, λέγω ὑμῖν, τοῦτον φοβήθητε. 
The saying is quoted also in Clem. 
Hom. xvii. 4 μὴ φοβηθῆτε ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ἀποκτέννοντος τὸ σῶμα τῇ δὲ Ψυχῇ μὴ 
δυναμένου τι ποιῆσαι᾽ φοβήθητε δὲ τὸν 
δυνάμενον καὶ σῶμα καὶ ψυχὴν εἰς τὴν 
γέενναν τοῦ πυρὸς βαλεῖν, and in Justin 
Afol. i. 19 (p. 66 Β) μὴ φοβεῖσθε τοὺς 
ἀναιροῦντας ὑμᾶς καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα μὴ 
δυναμένους τι ποιῆσαι, εἶπε, φοβήθητε 
δὲ τὸν μετὰ τὸ ἀποθανεῖν δυνάμενον καὶ 
Ψυχὴν καὶ σῶμα εἰς γέενναν ἐμβαλεῖν. 
The points of coincidence in the 
quotations of the Clementine Homi- 
lies and Justin with our pseudo-Cle- 
ment are worthy of notice, but they 
seem to be accidental. The expres- 
sion eis τὴν γέενναν τοῦ πυρὸς (in the 
quotation of the Homilies) might 
have come from Matt. xviii. 9 (inter- 
polated in the parallel passage Mark 
ix. 47). For the amount of variation 
which may arise accidentally, see a 
parallel instance given by Westcott 
Canon p. 116; and it is instructive 
to observe the variations in two quo- 
tations of this very saying in Clem. 
Alex. Exc. Theod. p. 972 φοβήθητε 


a ee 


a a egg  - 














220 


TAC ὑμᾶς KAl μηδὲν ὑμῖν AYNAMENOYC ποιεῖν, ἀλλὰ oBeicbe 
τὸν μετὰ τὸ ἀποθὰνεῖν ὑμᾶς ἔχοντὰ EZOYCIAN ψυχῆς Kal 
CWMATOC, TOY BAAEIN εἶς γέεννὰν πγρόο. 
> / J ς > / ε 3 ΄σ / ~ 
ἀδελφοί, ὅτι ἡ ἐπιδημία ἡ ἐν τῷ κοσμῳ τούτῳ τῆς 
\ , Εν ἐν , . 
σαρκὸς ταύτης μικρά ἐστιν καὶ ὀλιγοχρόνιος" ἡ δὲδ 
΄ “σι 7 M4 y 
ἐπαγγελία τοῦ Χριστοῦ μεγάλη καὶ θαυμαστή ἐστιν, 
\ ony a ͵ ,ὔ \ 38 
καὶ ἀνάπαυσις τῆς μελλούσης βασιλείας Kal ζωῆς 


Te 4 
QALWYLOU. 


> \ \ ΓᾺΡ: \ 4 > / \ Va 

εἰ μή TO ὁσίως καὶ δικαίως ἀναστρέφεσθαι, καὶ τὰ 
\ ~ a \ ΄“΄ 

κοσμικὰ ταῦτα ὡς ἀλλότρια ἡγεῖσθαι καὶ μὴ ἐπιθυμεῖν τ΄ 


1 φοβεῖσθε] φοβεισθαι A. 
επαγγελεια A. 


it. 11 yap τῷ] A; τῷ yap Ὁ. 
αὐτὰ C. 


γοῦν, λέγει, τὸν μετὰ θάνατον δυνάμενον 
καὶ Ψυχὴν καὶ σῶμα εἰς γέενναν βαλεῖν, 
and p. 981 ὁ σωτὴρ λέγει φοβεῖσθαι 
δεῖν τὸν δυνάμενον ταύτην τὴν Ψυχὴν 
καὶ τοῦτο τὸ σῶμα τὸ ψυχικὸν ἐν γεέννῃ 
ἀπολέσαι : comp. also Iren. iii. 18. 5 
‘Nolite timere eos qui occidunt cor- 
pus, animam autem non possunt 
occidere ; timete autem magis*eum 
qui habet potestatem et corpus et 
animam mittere in gehennam.’ 

ἀποκτέννοντας] The passages quot- 
ed in the last note show that the 
substitution of ἀποκτείνοντας is quite 
unnecessary. For the form ἀποκτέν- 
vew see Winer § xv. p. 95 (note), A. 
Buttmann p. 54. 

4. ἡ ἐπιδημία] ‘sojourn’: comp. 
παρεπίδημοι Heb. xi. 13, 1 Pet. i. 1, 
ii. 11, See the note on παροικίαν 
above, which contains the same idea. 

7. καὶ ἀνάπαυσις] ‘namely, rest 
For this use of καὶ see the notes on 
Galatians vi. τό. 

8. τί οὖν κιτ.λ.] ‘ What then ἐς it 


, Φ \ A ~ “ἮΝ ἱ 
τι οὖν ἐστὶν ποιήσαντας ἐπιτυχεῖν αὐτῶν, 


3 πυρός] AC; om. 8. 
Χριστοῦ] C; Κυρίου 8. 
5. 7 ἀνάπαυσις] A; ἡ ἀνάπαυσις (. 
igitur est id quod facit ut attingatis S. The translator seems to have had ποιῆσαν 
for ποιήσαντας in his text, and to have wrested the grammar to make sense of 


13 λέγει δὲ] AC; λέγει yap καὶ S. 






















THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [ν᾿ 


’ a 
Kai γινώσκετε, 


6 ἐπαγγελία] 
éorw] AC; om. (apparently) 
8 τί... ἐπιτυχεῖν] AC; guid © 


ἐπιθυμεῖν] επιθυμει A. ταῦτα] AS; — 
14 ἐὰν] C; add. οὖν. 


possible for us to do that we may ob- 
tain them, but to walk holily and 
righteously? Thus τῷ, which some 
would substitute for ro, interferes with 
the construction. For ὁσίως καὶ δικαίως, 
implying duties to God and to man ~ 
respectively, see the note on ὅσια, 
§ 1: comp. ὃ 6 ἔχοντες ὅσια καὶ δίκαια. 

VI. ‘Our Lord has told us that 
no man can serve two masters. There 
is a direct antagonism between the 
world present and the world to come. 
We cannot keep the friendship of 
both. Let us then, if we would de- 
liver ourselves from eternal mise 
obey the command of Christ and 
follow after the heavenly life. Even 
Noah, Job, and Daniel, it is written, 


13. Οὐδεὶς κιτιλ.] Luke xvi. I, 
οὐδεὶς οἰκέτης δύναται δυσὶ κυρίς 


δουλεύειν...οὐ δύνασθε Θεῷ δου 








vi] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 221 


΄ ΄σ ~ ΄-΄ ’ ~ 
αὐτῶν; ἐν yap τῷ ἐπιθυμεῖν ἡμᾶς κτήσασθαι ταῦτα 
ϊ ~ ε ΄σ ΄σ / 
ἀποπίπτομεν τῆς ὁδοῦ τῆς δικαίας. 
/ \ ε , > \ δι 6 , ‘ 
VI. λέγει δὲ ὁ Κύριος" Οὐδεὶς οἰκέτης AYNATAI δυοὶ 
’ Pet A e ΄ / \ ΄σ 
κυρίοις δογλεύήειν. ἐὰν ἡμεῖς θέλωμεν καὶ Θεῷ δουλ- 
7 - , con / ' \ ‘ 
evew Kal μαμωνᾷ, ἀσύμφορον ἡμῖν ἐστίν. τί γὰρ τὸ 
ὄφελος, EAN TIC τὸν KOCMON ὅλον κερδήσῃ τὴν δὲ ψυχὴν 
a af \ ΗΝ ες 4.0 \ ε / / 
ZHMIMOH; ἔστιν δὲ οὗτος ὁ αἰὼν καὶ ὁ μέλλων δύο 
oe / / \ \ 
ἐχθροί: οὗτος λέγει μοιχείαν καὶ φθορὰν καὶ φιλαρ- 
/ “ 3 ΄- A , , 
yuplav καὶ ἀπάτην, ἐκεῖνος δὲ τούτοις ἀποτάσσεται. 
/ = an / / 53 a \ -~ / 
ov δυνάμεθα οὖν τῶν δύο φίλοι εἶναι" δεῖ δὲ ἡμᾶς τούτῳ 
ἀποταξαμένους ἐκεί 10°60 ἰώμεθα ὅτι βέλτιόν 
ποταξαμένους ἐκείνῳ χρᾶσθαι. οἰώμεθα ort 


Ξ΄. τό τὸν κόσμον ὅλον] τὸν κόσμον (om. ὅλον) C; omnem hunc mundum S, 
but the insertion of Aunc probably does not imply any different reading from A: 
see above, I. p. 141, and comp. below § 19. 17 ζημιωθῇ] AC; perdat 

























(perhaps ἀπολέσῃ) 8. 


χρῆσθαι. 


καὶ μαμωνᾷ. The words are the same 
in Matt. vi. 24, excepting the omis- 
sion of οἰκέτης. 

15. τί yap τὸ ὄφελος xK.r.r.] See 
Matt. xvi. 26, Mark viii. 36, Luke ix. 
25. The quotation here may have 
been derived from either S. Matthew 
or S. Mark, though it differs slightly 
from both. The divergence from S. 
Luke is greater. The saying is quoted 
also by Justin Aol. i. 15; but Jus- 
tin’s quotation, while combining dif- 
ferent features of the three canonical 
Gospels, does not reproduce the 
special peculiarity (ri τὸ ὄφελος ;) of 
our pseudo-Clement. 

17. ἔστιν δὲ οὗτος ὁ αἰὼν x.r.d.] 
See the notes on Galatians i. 4. Com- 
pare also Clem. Hom. viii. 21, xx. 2. 

18. φθορὰν] Either (1) corrupt- 
ness, profligacy generally, as in 2 Pet. 
i. 4, ii. 12, 19; or (2) in a more special 
sense, as Plut. Crass. 1 τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς 
φθορᾶς ἀπολυσάμενος, Mor. p. 89 B 
κριθῆναι φθορᾶς. The connexion with 


18 καὶ φθορὰν] AC; om. 8. 
τοῖς τοιούτοις S. See conversely below on p. 222 1. 8. 
οἰώμεθα] οἰόμεθα ACS. S also adds δὲ ἀδελφοί. 


19 Tovras] AC; 
21 χρᾶσθαι] A; 


μοιχεία here points to this latter sense; 
comp. Barnab. 10 οὐ μὴ γένῃ μοῖχος 
οὐδὲ φθορεύς, Philo de Spec. Leg. τὶ 
(II. p. 310 M) ἀδελφὸν μὲν καὶ συγγενὲς 
ἀδίκημα μοιχείας φθορά, Epictet. Diss. 
ii. 22. 28 ἀκρατεῖς καὶ μοιχοὺς καὶ 
φθορεῖς, Iren. Haer. i. 28. 1, Clem. 
Flom. iv. 16, 24. 

20. τούτῳ ἀποταξαμένους] ‘bidding 
Sarewell to this? Act. Paul. et Thecl. 
5 of ἀποταξάμενοι τῷ κόσμῳ τούτῳ, Ign. 
Philad. 11 ἀποταξάμενος τῷ βίῳ. The 
word is fairly common in the New 
Testament; see Lobeck Phryn. p. 23. 

χρᾶσθαι] ‘consort with as a friend, 
according to a common sense of the 
word. The editors have substituted 
χρῆσθαι for the reading of the older 
MS; but there is sufficient authority 
for χρᾶσθαι in later writers: see Lo- 
beck Phryn. p. 61, Buttmann Azs/. 
Sprachl. ὃ τος (1. p. 487), Veitch Zr- 
regular Verbs s.v. xpdoua. For the 
form in a comp. συγχρᾶσθαι Ign. Magn. 
3, παραχρᾶσθαι Afpost. Const. vi. το. 

















222 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [vi 


2 . » θ ἊΝ a “ \ Riis , wu 
ἐστιν τὰ ἐνθάδε μισῆσαι, ὅτι μικρὰ Kal ὀλιγοχρόνια Kal 
7 weer \ ? “ \ > \ ae a 
φθαρτά: ἐκεῖνα δὲ ἀγαπῆσαι, τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ ἄφθαρτα. 
“ A \ ͵ lol a Ni 
ποιοῦντες yap TO θέλημα τοῦ Χριστοῦ εὑρήσομεν ἀνά- 
A , \ ~ / ΄ ΟΝ 

παυσιν" εἰ δὲ μήγε, οὐδὲν ἡμᾶς ῥύσεται ἐκ τῆς αἰωνίου — 


/ \ / ΄ rf a 
κολάσεως, ἐᾶν παρακούσωμεν τῶν ἐντολῶν αὐτοῦ. 5 


͵ \ \ ~ μ .«“ > ‘ 2 a 
λέγει δὲ καὶ ἡ γραφὴ ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιεζεκιήλ, ὅτι ᾽Εὰν ἀνδοτῇ 
Νῶε καὶ Ἰὼβ Kal δΔδνιήλ, οὐ PYCONTAI τὰ TEKNA AYTON ἐν 


lal 3 / 3 A \ ε ΄- , 3 
TN αἰχμαλωσίᾳ. εἰ δὲ καὶ οἱ τοιοῦτοι δίκαιοι ου 

2 ἀγαθὰ καὶ] ἀγαθὰ τὰ AC; om. 5. Here probably the reading of C is to be 
preferred: for (1) It is more forcible in itself: (2) It explains the omission in 8. 
3 yap] AS; om. C. ἀνάπαυσιν] AC; add. guae tlic S, as if it had read τὴν 
ἐκεῖ, but this may be only a translator’s gloss. 4 ἡμᾶς] AC; om. 8. 
6 δὲ] AC; γὰρ S. ἐν τῷ] AC; τοῦ S. 8 αἰχμαλωσίᾳ] C3 αιχμαλωσιᾷ 
Α. οἱ τοιοῦτοι] AC; οὗτοι S: see conversely above on p. 221 I. 19. δίκαιοι] 
AC; om. 5. οὐ δύνανται] here, A; after δικαιοσύναις in C; but S has appa- 


4. αἰωνίου κολάσεως) The ex- 
pression occurs Matt. xxv. 46. 

6. ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιεζεκιήλ] Abridged from 
Ezek. xiv. 14—20, being taken es- 
pecially from ver. 14 ἐὰν ὦσιν οἱ τρεῖς 
ἄνδρες οὗτοι ἐν μέσῳ αὐτῆς Noe καὶ 
Δανιὴλ καὶ Ἰώβ, and ver. 18 οὐ μὴ ῥύ- 
σονται υἱοὺς καὶ θυγατέρας. The words 
ἐν τῇ αἰχμαλωσίᾳ are the writer’s own 
addition and should not be treated 
as part of the quotation. It is worth 
noticing also that the order of the 
three names, which has given rise to 
so much speculation among modern 
critics, is changed by the pseudo- 
Clement, and a chronological se- 
quence is produced. The same order 
of the names appears in AZost. Const. 
ii. 14. Chrysostom also makes the 
same change in two passages quoted 
by Cotelier, Hom. xlitd in Gen. (IV. 
p. 436) and L£xf. in Ps. xviii (V. p. 
210). 

9. δικαιοσύναι] The plural, as 
in Deut. ix. 4 (ν.1.), 6, 1 Sam. xxvi. 
23, Ezek. iii. 20, xxxiii. 13, Ecclus. 
xliv. 10. 

11. τὸ βασίλειον] ‘the kingdom, 


as in Zest. χίξ Patr. Jud. 17, 22, 23, — 
Orac. Sib. iii. 159, Gaius (Hippoly- — 
tus?) in Euseb. H. £. iii. 28, Hip- 
pol. Fragm. 59, 103, 105 (pp. 162, — 
181, 182, Lagarde), Euseb. 1. £. viii. — 
17, Epiphan. Haer. li. 9 (p. 432). 
Thus there is ample authority for — 
this sense of βασίλειον. Galland, — 
desirous of retaining the more usual — 
meaning ‘a palace,’ supposes the — 
writer to refer to the parable of the — 
marriage feast given by the king, — 
Matt. xxii. 11, 12. If so, we might — 
suppose that he explained the wed- Ὁ 
ding garment of baptism, which is — 
mentioned just before. But the refer- 
ence seems improbable. This more 
usual meaning of βασίλειον would 
have a parallel in S. Anselm Cur — 
Deus homo ii. 16 ‘ut nullus palatium 
ejus ingrediatur.’ 

12. παράκλητος] ‘advocate, as it 
should always be translated in the 
New Testament. This is one coin- 
cidence of language in our pseudo- 
Clement with S. : eae see esp. F 
Joh. ii. 1 παράκλητον ἔχομεν πρὸς TO 
πατέρα, So above § 3 τὸν πατέρα 






























rently the same order as A. 
το αὐτῶν] A; om. CS. 
As; om. CS. 


here: see above § 6. 


ἀληθείας, and see on this subject 
Westcott Canon p. 157 sq. 

13. ὅσια καὶ δίκαια] See the notes 
on §§ 1, 5. 

VII. ‘Therefore let us prepare for 
the struggle. Inthe Isthmian games 
many enter the lists, but not many 
are crowned. In this our immortal 
race we should all strive to win. In 
the earthly contests he who breaks 
the rules is scourged. What then 
shall befall those who in their heaven- 
ly course swerve from the right path? 
Their worm, it is written, dieth not, 
and their fire is not quenched.’ 

15. ἐν χερσὶν ὁ ἀγων] ‘ The contest 
zs at hand, as Xen. Cyr. ii. 3. 2”Av- 
ὃρες φίλοι, ὁ μὲν ἀγὼν ἐγγὺς ἡμῖν: 
comp. Clem. Rom. 7 ὁ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν 
ἀγὼν ἐπίκειται. The reading arwn 
for aiwn is doubtless correct, and 
this is not the only instance of the 
confusion of the two words: see Hase 
and Dindorf Steph. Thes. p. 593 s.v. 
ἀγών, and to the references there 
given add Asch. Agam. 495, and 
see 4 Macc. ix. 23, xi. 19. For ἐν 
χερσίν, ‘at hand, see Plut. Vit. Cleom., 


vit} AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 223 


7 ΄- ε ΄σ / e7 \ / 
δύνανται ταῖς ἑαυτῶν δικαιοσύναις ῥύσασθαι τὰ τέκνα 
΄σ - \ A \ / \ 
> αὐτῶν" ἡμεῖς, ἐὰν μὴ τηρήσωμεν TO βάπτισμα ἁγνὸν 
’ / 7 3 / \ 
καὶ ἀμίαντον, ποίᾳ πεποιθήσει εἰσελευσόμεθα εἰς TO 
, ~ “ \ ς ~ / 7 
βασίλειον τοῦ Θεοῦ; ἢ Tis ἡμῶν παράκλητος ἔσται, 
\ \ ε ~ / ν᾽ / ’ 
ἐαν μή εὑρεθῶμεν ἔργα ἔχοντες ὅσια καὶ δίκαια: 
/ 3 > V4 
VII. “Wore οὖν, ἀδελφοί pov, ἀγωνισώμεθα, 
35 7 «“ 3 \ ε > , ae > \ 
εἰδότες ὅτι ἐν χερσὶν ὁ ἀγών, καὶ ὅτι εἰς τοὺς φθαρ- 
\ 3 ~ / , 3 3 3 / 
τοὺς aywvas καταπλέουσιν πολλοὶ, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πάντες 
9 ῥύσασθαι τὰ τέκνα] A; τὰ τέκνα ῥύσασθαι C. 
βάπτισμα] AC; add. guod accepimus 8. 14 οὖν] 
μου] A; om. C. As S always adds the possessive pronoun 
where the vocative ἀδελφοί stands alone in the Greek, its testimony is of no value 
τό καταπλέουσιν] AC; certant (Ξε: ἀγωνίζονται) 8, but 


it probably does not represent a different reading in the Greek. Lower down 
S translates καταπλεύσωμεν descendamus in certamen. 


22 οὐκ ἐλάττονα τῆς ἐν χερσὶ δυστυχίαν, 
Vit. Brut. 36 ἐν χερσὶν ἔχων τὰς ὑπὲρ 
τῶν ὅλων πράξεις, etc.: Compare ὑπὸ 
χεῖρα, Hermas V7s, iii. 10 (with the 
note). 

ὅτι eis τοὺς Oaprovs κιτ.λ.] An 
echo of 1 Cor. ix. 24, 25 πάντες μὲν 
τρέχουσιν, εἷς δὲ λαμβάνει τὸ βραβεῖ- 
ov and ἐκεῖνοι μὲν οὖν ἵνα φθαρτὸν 
στέφανον λάβωσιν, ἡμεῖς δὲ ἄφθαρτον. 
Comp. Lucian Amachars. 13 εἶπέ μοι, 
πάντες αὐτὰ λαμβάνουσιν οἱ ἀγωνισταί; 
Σ. οὐδαμῶς ἀλλὰ εἷς ἐξ ἁπάντων ὁ κρα- 
τήσας αὐτῶν (a passage of which the 
context presents several coincidences 
with S. Paul; see Clark’s Pelopon- 
nesus p. 50), Seneca Zp. Ixxviii. § 16 
‘Athletae quantum plagarum ore, 
quantum toto corpore excipiunt? 
ferunt tamen omne tormentum glori- 
ae cupiditate; nec tantum, quia pug- 
nant, ista patiuntur, sed ut pugnent... 
nos quoque evincamus omnia, quorum 
praemium non corona nec palma est 
etc.’ 

16. καταπλέουσιν ‘resort’; comp. 
Plut. Mor. p. 81 E καταπλεῖν yap ἔφη 
τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐπὶ σχολὴν ᾿Αθήναζε. 


‘ 


ee τῶν ἐδ... 


224 


΄ > \ ε \ / \ y 
στεφανοῦνται, εἰ μή οἱ πολλα κοπιάσαντες καὶ και 


lal / 
Aws aywvicapevot. 
στεφανωθώμεν. 


“- , \ \ \ ia 
ἀγῶνα τὸν ἄφθαρτον, καὶ πολλοὶ εἰς αὐτὸν καταπλεύ- 
΄ / \ “ ἫΝ 

σωμεν καὶ ἀγωνισώμεθα, ἵνα καὶ στεφανωθώμεν" καὶ 5 


1 εἰ μὴ] AC; (θιμη A) add. solum 8. 
curramus); θῶμεν AC. See the lower note. 
5. 5 καὶ pri.] AC; om. 8. 


Compounds οὗ πλεῖν are sometimes 
used metaphorically, as ἐκπλεῖν (He- 
rod. iii. 155 ἐξέπλωσας τῶν φρενῶν), 
ἀποπλεῖν (Aristoph. .} 7. 11. p. 907 Mei- 
neke ἀποπλευστέ οὖν ἐπὶ τὸν νυμφίον)», 
διαπλεῖν (Plato Phaed. 85 Ὁ διαπλεῦ- 
σαι τὸν βίον). But καταπλεῖν can 
hardly be so explained here; and we 
must therefore suppose that the allu- 
sion is to the ἁλιερκὴς Ἰσθμοῦ δειράς 
(Pind. Zsthm. i. 10), which would na- 
turally be approached by sea. Livy 
(xxxiii. 32) describes the Isthmian 
games as ‘propter opportunitatem 
loci, per duo diversa maria omnium 
rerum usus ministrantis, humano 
generi concilium.’ In these later 
days of Greece they seem to have 
surpassed even the Olympian in im- 
portance, or at least in popularity: 
comp. Aristid. /sthm. p. 45 ἐν τῇ Kad- 
λίστῃ τῶν πανηγύρεων τῇδε καὶ ὀνομασ- 
τοτάτῃ κιτιλ. (see Krause Hed/en, 11. 2. 
p. 205 sq). If this homily was ad- 
dressed to the Corinthians (see 
above, p. 197), there would be singular 
propriety in this image, as in S. Paul’s 
contrast of the perishable and im- 
perishable crown likewise addressed 
to them, or again in the lessons which 
Diogenes the Cynic is reported to 
have taught in this city during the 
Isthmian games, maintaining the 
superiority of a moral over an athletic 
victory (Dion Chrysost. Orat. viii, 
ix). 

I. κοπιάσαντε)])͵͵. A word used 
especially of training for the contest : 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


a Ke ’, . ’ ᾿ 
ἡμεῖς οὖν ἀγωνισώμεθα, ἵνὰ πάντες 

oe , \ «ὧν \ Δ Ὁ = 
ὥστε θέωμεν τὴν ὁδὸν τὴν evOeiav, 





























3 θέωμεν] conj. (so too S distinctly — 7 
4 els αὐτὸν] AC; 272 certamen — 
ἀγωνισώμεθα] AS; ἁγνισώμεθα Cy 


see the notes on Ign. Polyc. 6 and — 
Philippians ii. 16. For the connexion — 
here comp. 1 Tim. iv. 10 καὶ κοπιῶμεν — 
καὶ ἀγωνιζόμεθα (the correct reading). 

3. O€wpev] For the accusative — 
after this verb see Lobeck Paral. 
p. 511: comp. also Cic. Of. iii. τὸ 
‘stadium currit’ (from Chrysippus), 
The reading of the Greek MSS, — 
θῶμεν, can hardly stand. It is 
explained as referring to the ἀγω- — 
νοθεσία; but in this case the 
ἀγωνοθέτης should be God Himself 
(see Tertull. ad Mart. 3); and 
moreover θῶμεν τὴν ὁδὸν is in itself 
an awkward expression. Gebhardt, 
having read θέωμεν in first edition, — 
has returned to θῶμεν in his second, — 
being apparently persuaded by Bryen- 
nios. But the argument of Bryennios — 
appears to me to be based on a mis- © 
conception. He urges that we can- — 
not read θέωμεν on account of the 
words immediately following, Kal 
πολλοὶ eis αὐτὸν καταπλεύσωμεν, and 
he argues 6 ὁ δὲ ἄρτι ἀγωνιζόμενος χρείαν. 
οὐκ ἔχει εἰς τὸν ἀγῶνα κατελθεῖν, as Γ 
the reading θέωμεν involved a hys- 
teron-proteron. But in fact 
clause introduces an entirely ne 
proposition, of which the stress lies 
on πολλοί ; ‘let us not only take part in 
this race (θέωμεν τὴν ὁδόν), but let us 
go there zz great numbers and con- 
tend (πολλοὶ καταπλεύσωμεν καὶ ἀγωνι 
σώμεθα). On the other hand it has 
not been shown that θεῖναι τὴν 680 
or τὸν ἀγῶνα can be said of the com 








































? \ / , 

εἰ μὴ δυνάμεθα πάντες 
΄ / ἔ 

τοῦ στεφάνου γενώμεθα. 


ἡ εἰδέναι] A; add. δὲ CS. 
δοκειται Α. 


batants themselves. Bryennios in- 
deed explains it θῶμεν ἑαυτοῖς ἢ 
προθώμεθα, but this explanation stands 
self-condemned by the necessity of 
using either the reflexive pronoun 
(ἑαυτοῖς) or the middle voice (mpo- 
θώμεθα) to bring out the sense. The 
construction which we have here 
occurs from time to time with θέειν, 
but is more common with τρέχειν, 
because the verb itself is more com- 
mon; e.g. Heb. xii. 1 τρέχωμεν τὸν 
προκείμενον ἡμῖν ἀγῶνα (see Bleek’s 
note). Polybius (i. 87. 1, xviii. 35. 
6) has the proverb τρέχειν τὴν ἐσχάτην. 

5. καὶ εἰ μὴ δυνάμεθα x.7.d.] This 
seems to point to some public recog- 
nition of those who came nextafterthe 
victor. In the Olympian chariot races 
there were second, third, and fourth 
prizes; but in the foot racesthenotices 
of any inferior prize or honourable 
Mention are vague and uncertain: 
see Krause He//en. 11. 1. p. 170 sq. 
This passage is quoted loosely by Do- 
rotheus Doctr. xxiii ὡς λέγει καὶ ὁ ἅγιος 
Κλήμης, Κἂν μὴ στεφανῶταί τις, ἀλλὰ 
σπουδάσει μὴ μακρὰν εὑρεθῆναι τῶν στε- 
φανουμένων. 

6. κἂν ἐγγὺς κιτ.λ.] See Joseph. 
B. J. 1. 21. 8 ἄθλα μέγιστα προθεὶς ἐν 
οἷς οὐ μόνον οἱ νικῶντες ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ 
αὐτοὺς καὶ οἱ τρίτοι τοῦ βασιλικοῦ 
πλούτου μετελάμβανον. Comp. Afost. 
Const. ii. 14. 

8. φθείρων] ‘ vitiating.” The word 
is used of violating the conditions of 
the contest, e.g. by making a false 


CLEM, II. 





AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


ὁ] here A; before ἀγωνιζόμενος, C. 
φθείρας] A; φθείρων C, so apparently S. 


225 


~ aN 3 \ 
στεφανωθῆναι, κἂν ἐγγὺς 
39. 7 ε cal « € \ 
εἰδέναι ἡμᾶς δεῖ, OTL ὁ τὸν 


φθαρτὸν ἀγῶνα ἀγωνιζόμενος, ἐὰν εὑρεθῆ φθείρων, 
μαστιγωθεὶς αἴρεται καὶ ἔξω βάλλεται τοῦ σταδίου. 
’ ΄- ε \ ~ ᾽ , > - , , 
Ti δοκεῖτε; ὁ τὸν τῆς ἀφθαρσίας ἀγώνα φθείρας, τί 


10 δοκεῖτε] 


start or cutting off a corner or trip- 
ping up an adversary or taking any 
underhand advantage: comp. Epi- 
phan. Haer. lxi. 7 παραφθείρας ἀγῶνα 
ὁ ἀθλητὴς μαστιχθεὶς ἐκβάλλεται τοῦ 
ἀγῶνος (quoted by Cotelier). The 
word is specially chosen here for the 
sake of the neighbouring φθαρτόν 
ἀφθαρσίας. See Chrysippus in Cic. 
OF. ili. 10 ‘ Qui stadium currit, eniti 
et contendere debet, quam maxime 
possit, ut vincat; supplantare eum 
quicum certet aut manu depellere 
nullo modo debet: sic in vita etc.’, 
Lucian Cal. non tem. cred. 12 6 μὲν 
ἀγαθὸς δρομεὺς... τῷ πλησίον οὐδὲν 
κακουργεῖ... .ὁ δὲ κακὸς ἐκεῖνος καὶ ἄναθλος 
ἀνταγωνιστὴς. ..ἐπὶ τὴν κακοτεχνίαν ἐτρά- 
mero x.t.A. The turn given to the 
image in φθείρων was perhaps sug- 
gested by 2 Tim. ii. 5 οὐ στεφανοῦται 
ἐὰν μὴ νομίμως ἀθλήσῃ (comp. Epictet. 
Diss. iii. 10. 8 δός μοι ἀπόδειξιν εἰ 
νομίμως ἤθλησας). 

9. μαστιγωθείς] i.e. by the ῥαβδοῦ- 
xo or, as they are sometimes called 
(e.g. Lucian Hermot. 40), μαστιγο- 
φόροι. Pollux (iii. 153) furnishes also 
a third name, μαστιγονόμοι. Compare 
Herod. viii. 59 ἐν τοῖσι ἀγῶσι οἱ προεξ- 
ανιστάμενοι ῥαπίζονται, Thucyd. v. 50 
ἐν τῷ ἀγῶνι ὑπὸ τῶν ῥαβδούχων πληγὰς 
ἔλαβεν, Lucian adv. 7παοεί. 9, Piscat. 
33. On these police see Krause He/- 
Zen. Il. 1. pp. 112 Sq, 139, 142, 144, II. 
2. p- 46 sq. See Schweighaeuser 
on Epictet. Déss. iii. 15. 5 (p. 689). 

αἴρεται ‘zs removed,’ 


15 





226 


ἃς - \ \ , , \ 
madeira; τῶν yap μή τηρήσάντων, φησίν, τήν oppa- 


γῖδα 6 οκώληξ AYT@N οὐ TEAEYTHCE! Kal τὸ πῦρ a¥T@N 


> ’ ‘ » 
OY CBECOHCETAI, KAI ECONTAI 


VIII. ‘Ws 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [vit 


εἶς ὅρδοιν TACH σδρκί. 


> 3 \ os 
OUV E€OMEV ἐπι 







ars 


γῆς, μετανοήσωμεν" 


\ ~ ~ ἃ 
πηλὸς γάρ ἐσμεν εἰς τὴν χεῖρα τοῦ τεχνίτου. ὃν 


͵ \ ΄ ΄ \ wn 
τρόπον yap ὁ κεραμεύς, ἐὰν ποιῃ σκεῦος Kal ἐν ταῖς 


\ 3 ΄ a 
χερσὶν αὐτοῦ διαστραφῇ 


\ / Lod 

ἀναπλάσσει: ἐὰν δὲ προφθάση εἰς τὴν κάμινον TOU 
\ > A ~ ore θη 3 ἜΝ [2 ὲ 
πυρὸς αὐτὸ βαλεῖν, οὐκέτι βοηθήσει αὐτῷ" οὕτως καὶ 
~ ¢ \ Ψ ~ / ? ΄σ ὃ 
ἡμεῖς, ἕως ἐσμὲν ἐν τούτῳ τῷ κόσμῳ, ἐν τῆ σαρκὶ 


1 παθεῖται] A; πείσεται C. 


doubtful. 7 ἢ AS; om. C. 


τοῦ πυρὸς] AC; om. S, but see the next note. 
It is not probable however that any corresponding 


burat id et pereat ( perdatur) S. 


I. τὴν σφραγῖδα] By a compari- 
son with ὃ 6 ἐὰν μὴ τηρήσωμεν τὸ βάπ- 
τισμα, it appears that baptism is here 
meant by the seal. So again ὃ 8 τη- 
ρήσατε τὴν σφραγῖδα ἄσπιλον. Comp. 
Hermas Sim. viii. 6 εἰληφότες τὴν 
σφραγῖδα καὶ τεθλακότες αὐτὴν καὶ μὴ 
τηρήσαντες ὑγιῆ κιτιλ., «271. ix. 16 ὅτ- 
αν δὲ λάβῃ τὴν σφραγῖδα...ἡ σφραγὶς 
οὖν τὸ ὕδωρ ἐστίν κιτιλ., also .5277. 
viii. 2, ix. 17, 31, Clem. Hom. xvi. 19 
τὸ σῶμα σφραγῖδι μεγίστῃ διατετυπω- 
μένον (with the context), Act. Paul. 
et Thecl. 25 μόνον δός μοι τὴν ἐν Χρισ- 
τῷ σφραγῖδα, Hippol. Aniichr. 42 
(p. 119, Lagarde), Cureton’s Ancient 
Syriac Documents Ὁ. 44. So of Aber- 
cius it is said (Jen. and Polyc. τ. p.496) 
λαμπρὰν σφραγεῖδαν ἔχοντας, Suicer 
5... quotes Clem. Alex. Quis div. salv. 
39 (Pp. 957), Strom. ii. 3 (p. 434), and 
later writers. Barnabas § 9 speaks 
of circumcision as a σφραγὶς after S. 
Paul, Rom. iv. 11. But it may be ques- 
tioned whether S. Paul (σφραγισάμενος 
2 Cor. i. 22, comp. Ephes. iv. 30) or 8. 


2 τὸ πῦρ αὐτῶν] AS; 
6 ποιῇ] A; ποιήσῃ C, but the present tense is wanted here; see below. 
here, A; before διαστραφῇ, CS thus altering the sense. 























x a , 43 ὦ 
ἢ συντριβῇ, πάλιν αὐτὸ 


τὸ πῦρ (om. αὐτῶν) a 
ἐν] A; om. C; Sis 
8 ἀναπλάσσει] A; ἀναπλάσει C, 

9 βαλεῖν] AC; add. et com- 


John (Rev. ix. 4 τὴν σφραγῖδα τοῦ Θεοῦ. 
ἐπὶ τῶν μετώπων) used the image with 
any direct reference to baptism. 

2. OoK@Anék.t.rA.] Anaccuratequo- 
tation from the Lxx of the last verse 
of Isaiah (Ixvi. 24) 6 yap σκώληξ αὐτῶν 
καιλ. The denunciation is utte 
against τῶν ἀνθρώπων τῶν παραβεβη- 
κότων, and the context does not con 
tain any reference to the broken seal. 

VIII. ‘We are as clay in the 
hands of the potter. At present, if we 
are crushed or broken, He can mow c 
us again; but when we have been once 
thrown into the furnace, nothing will 
availus. Therefore let us repent in 
time. After death repentance is too 
late. Let us keep the flesh pure now 
that we may inherit eternal life here 
after. This is our Lord’s meaning 
when He says, 77 ye kept not tha 
which ts small, who shall give γι 
that which is great?’ . 

4. ‘Qs οὖν] ‘While then? For th 
sense of ὡς see ὃ 9 ὡς ἔχομεν καιρό 
with the note. 



































vii] 


~ af 
TQVOELVY ETL. 


νιον. 


words stood in the Greek text. 


AC; add. super nostris peccatis S. 
16 σάρκα] C; capxay A; add. ἡμῶν 8. 


5. πηλὸς γάρ ἐσμεν κιτ.λ. The 
image of Jeremiah xviii. 4—6, adopt- 
ed by S. Paul Rom. ix. 21. The pre- 
sent passage is suggested rather by 
the prophet than by the Apostle. 
The image is drawn out in Zest. xiz 
Patr. Nepht. 2, and in Athenag. 
Suppl. 15. 

6. ποιῇ σκεῦος καὶ «.7.A.] There 
can be no doubt that the more 
graphic reading of A is correct. 
The very point of the comparison is 
that the breakage happens zz the 
making (ποιῇ), happens under the 
hands of the potter (ἐν ταῖς χερσὶν 
αὐτοῦ διαστραφῇ), and not afterwards, 
as mowjon...tais χερσὶν αὐτοῦ καὶ διασ- 
τραφῇ would imply. 

7. συντριβῇ) Rev. ii. 27 ὡς τὰ 
σκεύη τὰ κεραμικὰ συντρίβεται. 
᾿ πάλιν αὐτὸ ἀναπλάσσει)] Hilgen- 
feld refers to Theoph. ad Auvtol. 
i, 26 καθάπερ σκεῦός τι, ἐπὰν πλασθὲν 
αἰτίαν τινὰ σχῇ, ἀναχωνεύεται ἢ ἀνα- 
πλάσσεται εἰς τὸ γενέσθαι καινὸν καὶ 
ὁλόκληρον ; see the references there 
given by Otto. 

8. ἐὰν δὲ προφθάσῃ κ-τ.λ.] ‘When 


2 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


μικρὸν οὐκ €THPHCaTe, TO μέγὰ TIC ὑμῖν δώσει; 


ἔχομεν καιρὸν] A; καιρὸν ἔχομεν (. 
τοῦ κόσμου] AC; τῆς σαρκός 8. 


οὕτω C. 11 4] Ο; οἱ guid 8. 
dum S; ὡς ἔτι (, 
AS; om. Ὁ. 


227 


a9 , \ ἤ 3 « ~ 

a ἐπραξἕαμεν πονηρὰ μετανοήσωμεν ἐξ ὅλης τῆς καρ- 
/ « ~ \ “- ε af 

δίας, ἵνα σωθῶμεν ὑπὸ τοῦ Κυρίου, ἕως ἔχομεν και- 
\ A ~ ΄- ΄- 

ρὸν μετανοίας" μετὰ γὰρ τὸ ἐξελθεῖν ἡμᾶς ἐκ τοῦ 
΄ o # , > ~ 3 , x 

κόσμον, οὐκέτι δυνάμεθα ἐκεῖ ἐξομολογήσασθαι ἢ με- 

«“ 3 \ 

ὥστε, ἀδελφοί, ποιήσαντες TO θέλημα 
~ \ A / A 5 ’ 

τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ τὴν σάρκα ἁγνὴν Τηρήσαντες καὶ τὰς 

Α ~ 

ἐντολὰς τοῦ Κυρίου φυλάξαντες ληψόμεθα ζωὴν aiw- 

λέγει γὰρ ὁ Κύριος ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ: Εἰ τὸ 
yet γὰρ ρ Ὁ εὐαγγελίᾳ τ 


λέγω 
βοηθήσει] A; βοηθεῖ CS. οὕτως] A; 
Ths] A; om. (. 12 ἕως] A; 


13 μετανοίας] 
14 ἐξομολογήσασθαι} 
15- ποιήσαντες] AC; add. οὖν (Ὁ) 5. 


He has once cast it into the fiery 
Jurnace, He will no more come to its 
rescue.” προφθάνειν occurs Matt. xvii. 
25 and several times in the LXx. 

16. τὴν σάρκα ἁγνὴν x.t.r.] Act. 
Paul. et Thecl. 5 μακάριοι οἱ ἁγνὴν τὴν 
σάρκα τηρήσαντες, 12 τὴν σάρκα μὴ 
μολύνητε ἀλλὰ τηρήσητε ἁγνήν. 

18, Ei τὸ μικρὸν κιτ.λ.] Probably 
a quotation fused from Luke xvi. 10 
ὁ πιστὸς ἐν ἐλαχίστῳ kal ἐν πολλῷ πισ- 
τός ἐστιν, καὶ ὁ ἐν ἐλαχίστῳ ἄδικος καὶ 
ἐν πολλῷ ἄδικός ἐστιν᾽ εἰ οὖν ἐν τῷ 
ἀδίκῳ μαμωνᾷ πιστοὶ οὐκ ἐγένεσθε, τὸ 
ἀληθινὸν τίς ὑμῖν πιστεύσει; and Matt. 
XXV. 21, 23, ἐπὶ ὀλίγα ἧς πιστός, ἐπὶ 
πολλῶν σε καταστήσω. Lrenzeus (ii. 34. 
3) cites it somewhat similarly, ‘ Si in 
modico fideles non fuistis, quod mag- 
num est quis dabit vobis?’ The quo- 
tation of our Clementine writer may 
perhaps be taken from an apocryphal 
gospel (see the notes on §§ 4, 5, 12); 
but the passage of Irenzeus, who can 
hardly have borrowed from an apo- 
cryphal source, shows how great di- 
vergences are possible in quotations 
from memory, and lessens the pro- 


15--.2 


228 


γὰρ ymin ὅτι ὁ πιοτὸς ἐν €AayicT@ καὶ EN πολλῷ πι- 


οτός ἔοτιν. 


/ ς A \ \ ~ » « \ 
σάρκα ἁγνὴν καὶ τὴν σφραγῖδα ἀσπιλον, ἵνα τὴν 

/ \ i 
[αἰώνιον] ζωὴν ἀπολάβωμεν. 


1 πολλῷ] AC; πολλοῖς 85. 
lower note. 


bability of this solution. Hilgenfeld’s 
inference (p. xxxix), ‘Irenzeus hac 
epistula quamvis nondum Clementi 
Romano adscripta usus esse videtur,’ 
seems to me quite unwarranted by 
the coincidence. We have in fact a 
similar coincidence in Hippol. Haer. 
X. 33 (p. 336) iva ἐπὶ τῷ μικρῷ πιστὸς 
εὑρεθεὶς καὶ τὸ μέγα πιστευθῆναι δυνηθῇς. 

2. ἄρα οὖν] A favourite colloca- 
tion of particles in S. Paul: see Fritz- 
sche on Rom, v. 18. The accentua- 
tion dpa οὖν is erroneous. 

τοῦτο λέγει] ‘He means this’: as 
in § 2 (twice), § 12. See the note 
on Galatians iii. 17. The words there- 
fore which follow ought not to be treat- 
ed as an apocryphal quotation, as they 
are by several editors and others. 

3. ἄσπιλον] For τηρεῖν ἄσπιλον 
comp. I Tim. vi. 14, James i. 27. 

4. αἰώνιον) The omission in the 
Syriac is probably correct; comp. 
§ 14 τοσαύτην δύναται ἡ σὰρξ αὕτη 
μεταλαβεῖν ζωὴν κιτιλ., ὃ 17 συνηγμένοι 
ὦμεν ἐπὶ τὴν ζωήν. The epithet may 
have beeninserted from the expression 
just above, ληψόμεθα ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 
Similarly in John xx. 31 αἰώνιον is 
added after ζωὴν by NCD etc., and 
in 1 Tim. vi. 19 τῆς αἰωνίου ζωῆς 
(from ver. 12) is substituted for the 
less usual τῆς ὄντως ζωῆς by several 
authorities. In Luke x. 25 Marcion 
read (wiv without αἰώνιον (see Tertull. 
c. Marc. iv. 25), and so one Latin copy. 

ἀπολάβωμεν] ‘secure’ The pre- 
position implies that it is already 
potentially our own, so that we are 
only recovering a right: see Gala- 
tians iv. αὶ with the note. 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


> — a 
dpa οὖν τοῦτο λέγει" τηρήσατε τὴν 


_ 4 ἀπολάβωμεν] A; ἀπολαβητε CS: see the 
















































(vir 


The licence in the change of per- — 
sons (τηρήσατε, ἀπολάβωμεν) has ο΄ 
fended the transcribers here, though 
occasionally indulged in even by © 
the best writers in all languages, — 
eg. Jeremy Taylor Works Vl. p. — 
364 ‘If ἦεν were all zealous for © 
the doctrines of righteousness, and 
impatient of sin, in yourselves and 
in the people, it is not to be im- — 
agined what a happy nation we 
should be.’ See also e.g. Rom. vii. 
4 ἐθανατώθητε, καρποφορήσωμεν, Vili. 
15 ἐλάβετε, κράζομεν, and frequently 
in S. Paul. 

IX. ‘Do not deny the resurrection 
of the body. As we were called in- 
the flesh, so also shall we be judged © 
in the flesh. As Christ being spirit” 
became flesh for us, so shall we in 
the flesh receive our recompense, 
Let us love one another; let us make 
a return to God for His goodness. 
What must this return be? Sincere 
repentance and unceasing praise— 
the praise not of our lips only, but of 
our hearts and of our actions.’ 

5. Καὶ μὴ λεγέτω τις κιτ.λ.)] This” 
passage, as far as ἀποληψόμεθα τὸν, 
μισθόν, is quoted in several collections 
of Syriac fragments, immediately aftet 
the opening sentence of this epistle: 
see the note on the beginning of § 1, 
and comp. I. p. 185. The sentence 
εἷς Χριστὸς... «ἡμᾶς ἐκάλεσεν is alse 
quoted by Timotheus of Alexa 
see I. p. 180. 

αὕτη ἡ σὰρξ «.7.A.]  Difficultie 
on this point were very early felt ar 
met by S. Paul, 1 Cor. xv. 12 sq. 
little later the precursors of Gnost 





Ix] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 229 


IX. Καὶ μὴ λεγέτω τις ὑμῶν, ὅτι αὕτη ἡ σὰρξ 


> , PANS! ; ey, 
οὐ κρίνεται οὐδὲ ἀνίσταται. 


΄ ’ 
γνῶτε" ἐν τίνι ἐσωθητε, 


/ ‘ -~ \ / ao i 
ἐν Tim ἀνεβλέψατε, εἰ μὴ ἐν TH σαρκὶ ταύτη ὄντες; 
ἐ 


5 τ] AC; S translates, as if it had read μηδείς. 


cism boldly maintained that the only 
resurrection was a spiritual resurrec- 
tion (2 Tim. ii. 18). It afterwards 
became a settled tenet of the Gnostic 
sects to deny the resurrection of the 
body: see Polyc. Phzl. 7 ὃς ἂν pebo- 
δεύῃ τὰ λόγια τοῦ Κυρίου πρὸς τὰς ἰδίας 
ἐπιθυμίας καὶ λέγῃ μήτε ἀνάστασιν μήτε 
κρίσιν εἶναι, Justin Dia/. 80(p. 306 D) 
εἰ yap καὶ συνεβάλετε ὑμεῖς τισὶ λεγο- 
μένοις Χριστιανοῖς...οἱ καὶ λέγουσι μὴ 
εἶναι νεκρῶν ἀνάστασιν ἀλλ᾽ ἅμα τῷ 
ἀποθνήσκειν τὰς ψυχὰς αὐτῶν ἀναλαμ- 
βάνεσθαι εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν, μὴ ὑπολάβητε 
αὐτοὺς Χριστιανούς x.t.A., Iren. ii. 31. 
"2 τοσοῦτον δὲ ἀποδέουσι τὸν νεκρὸν 
ἐγεῖραι.. «αἱ ne quidem credant hoc in 
totum posse fieri; esse autem resur- 
rectionem a mortuis agnitionem ejus, 
quae ab eis dicitur, veritatis’ (comp. 
Vv. 31. 1, 2), Act. Paul. et Thecl. 14 
ἡμεῖς σε διδάξομεν, ἣν λέγει οὗτος ἀνά- 
στασιν γενέσθαι, ὅτι ἤδη γέγονεν ἐφ᾽ οἷς 
ἔχομεν τέκνοις, καὶ ἀνιστάμεθα Θεὸν ἐπε- 
γνωκότες ἀληθῆ, Tertull. de Res. Carn. 
19 ‘Nacti quidam sollemnissimam 
eloquii prophetici formam, allegorici 
et figurati, non tamen semper, resur- 
rectionem quoque mortuorum mani- 
feste annuntiatam in imaginariam 
significationem distorquent etc.,’ with 
the following chapters. 

From this doctrine the antinomian 
Gnostics deduced two consequences; 
(1) That the defilement of the flesh is 

a matter of indifference, provided 
_ that the spirit has grasped the truth. 
Against this error is directed the 
warning Hermas Szm. v. 7 τὴν σάρκα 
gov ταύτην φύλασσε καθαρὰν καὶ ἀμίαν- 
‘Tov, ἵνα τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ κατενοικοῦν ἐν 
αὐτῇ μαρτυρήσῃ αὐτῇ καὶ δικαιωθῇ 
σου ἡ σάρξ' βλέπε μήποτε ἀναβῇ ἐπὶ 


6 οὐδὲ] A; οὔτε C. 


τὴν καρδίαν σου τὴν σάρκα σου ταύ- 
την φθαρτὴν εἶναι καὶ παραχρήσῃ 
αὐτῇ ἐν μιασμῷ τινί κιιλ. So too 
Ps.-Ign. 7.75. 2 ἕτεροι δὲ [λέγουσιν 
ὅτι ἡ σὰρξ αὕτη οὐκ ἐγείρεται, καὶ δεῖ 
ἀπολαυστικὸν βίον ζῆν καὶ μετιέναι. 
See also Orig. c. Cels. ν. 22. This 
practical consequence our writer 
seems to have distinctly in view §§ 8» 
g. (2) That it is legitimate to decline 
martyrdom and to avoid persecution 
by a denial of Christ with a mental 
reservation. Rightly or wrongly this 
charge is constantly brought against 
them by their antagonists. Thus 
Agrippa Castor, writing against Basi- 
lides (Euseb. H.£. iv. 7), represented 
him as teaching ἀδιαφορεῖν εἰδωλοθύ- 
Tov ἀπογευομένους καὶ ἐξομνυμένους 
ἀπαραφυλάκτως τὴν πίστιν κατὰ τοὺς 
τῶν διωγμῶν καιρούς : and Iren. Haer. 
iii. 18. 5 ‘Ad tantam temeritatem pro- 
gressi sunt quidam ut etiam martyres 
spernant et vituperent eos qui prop- 
ter Domini confessionem occiduntur 
etc.’ (comp. i. 24. 6). This is a con- 
stant charge in Tertullian. See on 
this subject Ritschl A/thath. Kirche 
Ρ. 495 sq. This view again seems to 
be combated by our writer, §§ 4, 5, 
7, 10. 

Schwegler Nachap. Zettalt. 1. p. 
453 54 maintained that the expres- 
sion in our text is directed against 
docetic Ebionism. He is well re- 
futed by Hilgenfeld AZost. Vat. 
p. 115 sq. 

7. ἐν tin] ‘in what, not ‘in 
whom, as the following εἰ μὴ ἐν τῇ 
σαρκὶ shows. 

ἀνεβλέψατε] ‘ye recovered your 
sight?; comp. § 1 τοιαύτης ἀχλύος 
γέμοντες ἐν τῇ ὁράσει ἀνεβλέψαμεν k.T.A, 





230 


΄΄ Ss ~ \ ~~ 
δεῖ οὖν ἡμᾶς ὡς ναὸν Θεοῦ φυλάσσειν τὴν σάρκα" 
a , A ᾽ ΄ ἕω 
ὃν τρόπον γὰρ ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ ἐκλήθητε, καὶ ἐν TH 


σαρκὶ ἐλεύσεσθε. 


ἡμᾶς, ὧν μὲν τὸ πρῶτον πνεῦμα, ἐγένετο σὰρξ καὶ 
οὕτως ἡμᾶς ἐκάλεσεν, οὕτως καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐν ταύτη τῇ 5 
σαρκὶ ἀποληψόμεθα τὸν μισθόν. 
λήλους, ὅπως ἔλθωμεν πάντες εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ 
Θεοῦ. ὡς ἔχομεν καιρὸν τοῦ ἰαθῆναι, ἐπιδῶμεν ἑαυ- 


2 καὶ ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ...ὃ odcas] AC; et in carne venit christus dominus (noster), . 
unus existens, is gui salvavit 5. This may be explained by the obliteration of some 
letters, so that ἐλεύσεσθε was read ελ...θε, and translated as if ἦλθε. 
el] Fragm Syr; εἷς ACS Timoth: see the lower — 
4 πνεῦμα] AS; λόγος C: see above, I. p. 125, for the motive of this” 

ἐγένετο] AC; add. δὲ 5 Timoth Fragm-Syr. 
καὶ οὕτως] A; καὶ οὕτως καὶ C. 


σεσθε] ελευσεσθαι A. 
note. 

change. 
carne S Timoth Fragm-Syr. 


I. ὡς ναὸν Θεοῦ κ-τ.λ. See Ign. 
Philad.7 τὴν σάρκα ὑμῶν ὡς ναὸν Θεοῦ 
τηρεῖτε: comp. I Cor. iii. 16, 17, vie 
19, 2 Cor. vi. 16, and see Ign. Ephes. 
g. 15 (with the notes). 

3. ἐλεύσεσθε] Not, I think, εἰς 
τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ Θεοῦ, as Harnack 
takes it, but εἰς τὴν κρίσιν. 

εἰ Χριστὸς κιτ.λ. The reading εἰ 
for εἷς, now supported by ample 
authority, is evidently required by 
the context. Mill and others would 
have read ὡς, which gives the same 
sense. 
Ign. Magn. 7 εἷς ἐστὶν Ἰησοῦς Χριστός, 
but εἷς is quite out of place here, 
though appropriate there where the 
writer is dwelling on wmity. It is 
possible that the reading of A 
€IC arose out of EIIC i.e. εἰ Ἰησοῦς, 
or EIOIC i.e. εἰ ὁ Ἰησοῦς. The confu- 
sion would be easier, as the preceding 
word ends in €. 

4. ὧν μέν] As though the sentence 
were intended to be continued in a 
participial form γενόμενος δέ. 

τὸ πρῶτον πνεῦμα] The doctrine 
of the pre-existence of the Son, as 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


εἰ Χριστὸς ὁ Κύριος, 6 σώσας 


Editors quote as a parallel 




























μαι 


3 a“ 423 > 
ἀγαπώμεν οὖν αλ- 


3 ἐλεύ- 


σὰρξ] AC; im © 
5 ἐκά- 


the Logos, is here presented in a 
somewhat unusual form ; comp. how- — 
ever Hermas Sim. v. 6 τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ 
ἅγιον, τὸ mpodv, τὸ κτίσαν πᾶσαν τὴν 
κτίσιν, κατῴκισεν ὁ Θεὸς εἰς σάρκα ἣν 
ἐβούλετο, ix. I ἐκεῖνο γὰρ τὸ πνεῦμα, 
6 υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐστίν, Theoph. ad Au- 
tol. ii. το οὗτος οὖν ὧν πνεῦμα Θεοῦ καὶ 
ἀρχὴ καὶ σοφία καὶ δύναμις ὑψίστου. 
κατήρχετο εἰς τοὺς προφήτας καὶ Oe 
αὐτῶν ἐλάλει κιτιλ., Tertull. adv. Mare. 


Lagarde) λόγος σὰρξ ἦν, πνεῦμα 
δύναμις ἦν κιτιλ. See especially Dor- 
ner Lehre von der Person Christi 
Pp. 205 sq. 

8. ὡς ἔχομεν καιρόν] ‘while 
have opportunity’: comp. Gal. vi. 
(with the note), Ign. Smyrn. 9 ὡς 
ἔτι καιρὸν ἔχομεν. Another instan 
of ὡς, ‘while, occurs above,§ 8. 

10. προγνώστης] Justin Aol. i. 4 
(p. 82 B), Tatian ad Graec. 19, Theoph 
ad Autol. ii. 15. 4 

11. τὰ ἐν καρδίᾳ] 2 Chron. xxxii. 3 
εἰδέναι τὰ ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ αὐτοῦ, De 
viii. 2 διαγνωσθῇ τὰ ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ σι 































Ix] AN 


> / 

ἐν καρδίᾳ. 

᾿ / ε c / 
προσδέξηται ws υἱούς. 


| πᾶτρός ΜΟΥ. 


οὕτως sec.] A; οὕτω C. 
om. C, 
ἐλικρινουσ A. 
corde nostrum S. 


Cs. 13 ἡμᾶς] AC; καὶ ἡμᾶς 8. 


I Sam. ix. 19, εἴο. Hilgenfeld reads 
a ἐνκάρδια, saying of A “ἐνκάρδια (s. 
κάρδια) Cc. cod., Jun., ἐν καρδίᾳ ceteri 
edd.’ But, inasmuch as an iota sub- 
script or adscript never appears in 
Mss of this date, the transcriber could 
not have written ἐν καρδίᾳ otherwise 
han he has done. Moreover, since ἐν 
apdia and ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ occur number- 
less times in the LXxX, whereas the 
adjective ἐγκάρδιος is not once found 
here, this reading seems to me im- 
probable. In Clem. Alex. Paed.i. 3 (p. 
103) I should be disposed conversely 
Ὁ read διορῶν ra ἐν καρδίᾳ (for ἐγκάρ- 
a) λόγος. The word ἐγκάρδιος how- 
sver is legitimate in itself. 

12. αἶνον αἰώνιον] This is doubtless 
the right reading; see above, I. p. 
20 and the note on εὑρεῖν below 
ὃ το. Comp. AZost. Const. iii. 1 τὸν 
τἰώνιον ἔπαινον. 

15. ᾿Αδελφοί μου κ-τ.λ.] Matt. xii. 
49 ἰδοὺ ἡ μήτηρ μου καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοί 
του ὅστις γὰρ ἂν ποιήσῃ τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
τατρός μου τοῦ ἐν οὐρανοῖς, αὐτός μου 
ἀδελφὸς καὶ ἀδελφὴ καὶ μήτηρ ἐστίν 
comp. Mark iii. 35); Luke viii. 21 


ANCIENT HOMILY. 


Ἀδελφοί MOY OYTO EICIN οἱ TOIOYNTEC 


231 


\ - ΄ a > , » κα , 

τοὺς τῷ θεραπεύοντι Θεῷ, ἀντιμισθίαν αὐτῷ διδόντες" 
’ Ἁ ~ > ~ 7] 

ποίαν; τὸ μετανοῆσαι ἐξ εἰλικρινοῦς καρδίας: προ- 
/ ΄σ \ ~ \ 
γνώστης yap ἐστιν τῶν πάντων Kal εἰδὼς ἡμῶν τὰ 
΄: Ss ΄σ > \ \ 
δώμεν οὖν avT@ αἶνον αἰώνιον, μὴ ἀπὸ 
7 , 3 \ \ 3 \ / «“ ε ~~ 
στόματος μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπὸ καρδίας, iva ἡμᾶς 

\ Φ / 
καὶ yap εἶπεν ὁ Κύριος" 


τὸ θέλημὰ τοῦ 


λεσεν] AC; add. existens in carne (av ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ) S, but this may be only a gloss 
of οὕτως and probably does not represent any additional words in the Greek text. 
6 ἀποληψόμεθα)] αποληψομαιθα A, 
9 τῷ θεραπεύοντι)] AC; add. μος S. 
11 τὰ ἐν καρδίᾳ] ταενκαρδια A; τὰ ἐγκάρδια C; ca quae in 
12 αἶνον αἰώνιον] αἰωνιον (om. awov) A; αἷνον (om. αἰώνιον) 


οὖν} AS; 


10 εἰλικρινοῦς] 


15 ποιοῦντες] πουντεσ Α. 


μήτηρ μου καὶ ἀδελφοί μου οὗτοί εἶσιν, 
οἱ τὸν λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ ἀκούοντες καὶ 
ποιοῦντες. Epiphanius, 7667. xxx. 14 
(p. 139), gives the saying Οὗτοί εἰσιν 
οἱ ἀδελφοί pov καὶ ἡ μήτηρ, of ποιοῦντες 
τὰ θελήματα τοῦ πατρός μου, as it is 
assumed, from an Ebionite gospel 
(Westcott Canon p. 160, Hilgenfeld 
Apost. Vit. p. 122); but I do not think 
his language implies more than that 
the Ebionites allowed the saying to 
stand in their recension of the Gos- 
pel, and he may be quoting loosely 
from the canonical Evangelists. A 
still wider divergence from the ca- 
nonical passages is in Clem. Alex, 
Ecl. Proph. 20 (p. 994) ἄγει οὖν eis 
ἐλευθερίαν THY τοῦ πατρὸς συγκληρονό- 
μους υἱοὺς καὶ φίλους" ᾿Αδελῴφοί μου 
γάρ, φησιν ὁ Κύριος, καὶ συγκληρονόμοι 
οἱ ποιοῦντες τὸ θέλημα τοῦ πατρός 
μου, where the context shows that 
συγκληρονόμοι is deliberately given as 
part of the quotation. Omitting καὶ 
συγκληρονόμοι and inserting οὗτοί εἰσιν, 
it will be seen that this form of the 
saying agrees exactly with our pseudo- 
Clement’s quotation, 








232 


«“ , . 
X. “Wore, ἀδελφοί pov, ποιήσωμεν τὸ θέλημα 

- \ ΄σ , ~ ε 
τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ καλέσαντος ἡμᾶς, ἵνα (irene “καὶ 
διώξωμεν μᾶλλον τὴν ἀρετήν, τὴν δὲ κακίαν κατα- 


λείψωμεν ὡς 


1 ἀδελφοί μου] A; ἀδελφοί (om. μου) C; ἀδελφοὶ καὶ ἀδελφαί [μου] 5. On the 
uncertainty respecting the pronoun in S in such cases see below, ὃ 13. 


X. ‘Let us therefore fulfil the will 
of our Father. Let us flee from vice, 
lest evil overtake us. Let us do good, 
that peace may pursueus. They who 
teach the fear of men rather than the 
fear of God, are duly punished. And, 
if they themselves alone suffered, it 
were tolerable. But now they shall 
have a double condemnation, for they 
lead others besides themselves into 
ruin.’ 

2. ἵνα ζήσωμεν] To be connected 
not with τοῦ καλέσαντος ἡμᾶς, but with 
ποιήσ μεν. 

4. προοδοίπορον] ‘a forerunner’; 
for κακία is the evil disposition, while 
ἁμαρτία is the actual sin. On κακία 
see Trench WV. 7. Sym. 1st ser. ὃ xi, 
where he quotes the definition of 
Calvin (on Ephes. iv. 32) ‘ Amimé 
pravitas quae humanitati et aequitati 
est opposita et malignitas vulgo nun- 
cupata.’ The substantive mpoodoimo- 
pos seems to be very rare, though the 
verb προοδοιπορεῖν occurs occasion- 
ally. 

6. ἀγαθοποιεῖν] See the note on 
the First Epistle ὃ 2 ἀγαθοποιΐαν. 

7. tevpeivt] sc. εἰρήνην ; ‘ For this 
reason aman cannot find peace. If 
we take the reading of the Greek Mss, 
no other meaning seems possible ; 
but it can hardly be correct. Yet 
this must have been the reading of 
S, which translates ‘on est hominid 
(cuiguam) inventive homines illos qui 

Saciunt timorem humanum, as if the 
construction were οὐκ ἔστιν ἄνθρωπον 
εὑρεῖν (ἐκείνους) οἵτινες x.t.A.; but for 
οπξὰσ ‘gui faciunt, ought we not 


προοδοίπορον τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν ἡμῶν, καὶ 


























THE EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. [x 


e 


to read eras ‘gui transeunt, 
thus more closely representing mapd- 
γουσι, which however it mistranslates?’ 
Previous editors have supposed the 
error to lie in ἄνθρωπον, written ANON” 
in the ms. Accordingly ANON (i.e. 
ἂν Θεόν) has been suggested by Wot- 
ton ; OYNON (i.e. οὐρανόν) by Davies; 
and AINON (αἶνον) by Hilgenfeld. 
But in the first correction the ἄν is 
grammatically inexplicable ; and the 
second and third give unnatural ex- 
pressions. I believe the mistake is 
in €YPEIN, and should suggest 
€IPHNHNEYPEIN or EIPHNEYEI N; 
or still better E€YHMEPEIN. If 
εὐημερεῖν ‘to prosper’ be adopted, 
the writer seems to have in mir ἅ 
Ps. xxxiv. 9 sq φοβήθητε τὸν Κύ- 
ριον πάντες... οὐκ ἔστιν ὑστέρημα το is 
φοβουμένοις avtov...poBov ke 
piov διδάξω ὑμᾶς. τίς ἐστιν ἄνθρωτ 
ὁ θέλων ζωήν, ἀγαπῶν. ἡμέρας ἰδεῖν 
ἀγαθάς ;...ἔκκλινον ἀπὸ κακοῦ 
ποίησον ἀγαθόν, ζήτησον εἰρήνη; 
καὶ δίωξον αὐτήν, where the coinc 
dences are striking. The contrast 
between the fear of men and the 
of God, which underlies this passagt 
would naturally suggest to our autho 
the words in which the Psalmist en 
phatically preaches the fear of th 
Lord. For εὐημερεῖν, εὐημερία, on 
2 Macc. v. 6, viii. 8, x. 28, xii. 15m 
16, xiv. 14. For the manner in» 
the transcriber of our principal 
drops letters (more especially whi 
there is a proximity of similar for 
comp. ὃ 9 αἰώνιον for αἶνον a 











































6 yap] AS; δὲ C. 


mouvrea for ποιοῦντες, ὃ 11 ασουκ for 
Gs οὖς οὐκ. See also in the First 
Epistle § 11 ετερογνωμοσ, ὃ 25 τε- 
λευτηκοτοσ, ὃ 32 ἡμερασ (for ἡμετέρας), 
etc., and (if my conjecture be correct) 
§ 40 the omission of ἐπιμελῶς before 
ἐπιτελεῖσθαι. Lipsius (Academy July 
9, 1870: comp. Jen. Lit, 13 Jan. 
1877) would read οὐκ ἔστιν εἰρήνη 
ἀνθρώποις οἵτινες κιτ.λ. 

Hilgenfeld (ed. 2, pp. xlviii, 77) 
supposes that there is a great lacuna 
at this point οὐκ ἔστιν εὑρεῖν ἄνθρω- 
πον | οἵτινες παράγουσιν φόβους ἀν- 
θρωπινούς κιτιλ. In this lacuna he 
finds a place not only for this quota- 
tion in the so-called John of Da- 
mascus (see above, I. p. 194 sq), but 
also for the reference to the Sibyl in 
Pseudo-Justin which I have discussed 
already (I. p. 178 sq). This theory 
however seems highly improbable for 
the following reasons. 

(1) Though there is good reason 
for assuming that the existing text 
is faulty at this point, the external 
facts are altogether adverse to the 
supposition that a great lacuna exists 
here, such for instance as would be 
produced by the disappearance of 
one or more leaves in an archetypal 
“Ms. Such an archetypal MS must 
have been of very ancient date, for 
all our three extant authorities (see 
above, I. p. 145) have the same text 
It is not indeed impossible 
that this archetypal Ms should have 
been defective, seeing that the com- 
mon progenitor of ACS certainly had 
‘minor corruptions. But though pos- 
‘sible in itself, this supposition is 


: 


x] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


/ \ > a A ε ΄“΄ /, / 
φύγωμεν τὴν ἀσέβειαν, μὴ ἡμᾶς καταλάβῃ κακά. 


233 


2\ 
εαν 


γὰρ σπουδάσωμεν ἀγαθοποιεῖν, διώξεται ἡμᾶς εἰρήνη. 
\ , \ \ a > ᾽ ε ΄ » 
Διὰ ταύτην γὰρ τὴν αἰτίαν οὐκ ἔστιν {εύρεῖν! ἀν- 


: οδοίπορον] AC; proditorem (as if προδότην) S. This rendering again may be due to 
the obliteration of some letters in the word. 


ἁμαρτιῶν] A; ἁμαρτημάτων Ὁ. 


hardly consistent with other facts. 
It is highly improbable that a long 
passage which had disappeared thus 
early should have been preserved in 
any MS accessible to the Pseudo- 
Damascene, or even to the Pseudo- 
Justin. Moreover the enumeration 
of verses in the S#chometria of Ni- 
cephorus seems to have been made 
when the epistle was of its present 
size, and is not adapted to a more 
lengthy document. In the colophon 
at the end of the Second Epistle (see 
above, I. p. 122) C gives στίχοι x’, 
ῥητὰ κε. As Nicephorus (see I. p. 
196) gives the numbers of στίχοι in 
the two Clementine Epistles as By’, 
Bryennios supposes that x’ here is 
an error for Bx’, the ,β having dropped 
out. But, as Hilgenfeld himself has 
pointed out, as the ῥητά, or scriptural 
quotations, are given as 25, this must 
refer to the Second Epistle alone. 
When counted up, they do in fact 
amount to 25, one or two more or less, 
for it is difficult in some cases to de- 
cide whether to reckon the quotations 
separately or not. The 600 verses 
therefore must refer to the Second 
Epistle alone. I may add that this 
agrees with the reckoning of Ni- 
cephorus, which giving 2600 to the 
Two Epistles leaves 2000 for the 
First. Thus the proportion of the 
First Epistle to the Second is roughly 
as 2000 : 600, or as 10:3. In my 
translation the two Epistles take up 
respectively 34} and τοὶ pages, these 
numbers being almost exactly as 
10: 3. 

(2) Again; though the two frag- 





234 


.« / / > 7, ! 

θρωπον, οἵτινες παράγουσι φόβους ἀνθρωπίνους, mpoy-— 
, ΄ \ , , \ \ / : " 
ρημένοι μᾶλλον τὴν ἐνθάδε ἀπόλαυσιν ἢ τὴν μέλλου- 


3 ’ 
σαν ἐπαγγελίαν. 


7 ’ .« \ 4 
ἡ ἐνθάδε ἀπόλαυσις, καὶ οἵαν τρυφὴν ἔχει ἡ μέλλουσα 


> / 
ἐπαγγελία. 

\ ἫΝ 
ἄνεκτον nV" 


\ 3 “ ΄ 3 2 7 / \ 4 
Tas ἀναιτίους ψυχάς, οὐκ εἰδότες OTL δισσὴν ἕξουσιν 
\ / / \ / nw 
τὴν κρίσιν, αὐτοί TE καὶ οἱ ἀκούοντες αὐτῶν. 


ΧΙ. 


I προῃρημένοι] προαιρούμεθα AC. S translates, as if it had read προαιρούμενοι; 
which was also conjectured by Bryennios. 


3 ἐπαγγελίαν] ewayyedeav A. 
ἀνάπαυσις C. 


ments which Hilgenfeld would assign 
to this lacuna are not incongruous in 
subject, yet the sentiments in the 
extant context on either side of the 
supposed lacuna are singularly appro- 
priate to one another, and in this 
juxtaposition seem to have been 
suggested by the language of Ps. 
xxxiv. 9 sq quoted in my note. 

(3) The style of the fragment quoted 
by the Pseudo-Damascene betrays a 
different hand from our author’s, Its 
vocabulary is more _ philosophical 
(καθόλου, τὰ φεῦκτα, ὑπόθεσις καὶ ὕλη, 
τὰ ἀσπαστὰ, κατ᾽ εὐχήν), and altogether 
it shows more literary skill. 

The probable account of the quo- 
tations in the Pseudo-Justin and in 
the Pseudo-Damascene is given above 
(I. p. 178 sq, 194 sq). 

I. οἵτινες] ‘men who, the antece- 
dent being the singular ἄνθρωπον. 
This grammatical irregularity is not 
uncommon : see Jelf’s Gramm. § 819. 
2. ἃ. 

παράγουσι κ.τ.λ.] ‘introduce (instil) 
fears of men’: comp. ὃ 4 οὐ δεῖ 
ἡμᾶς φοβεῖσθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους μᾶλλον 
ἀλλὰ τὸν Θεόν. The passages in the 


, - \ ey, / sf , 

ἀγνοοῦσιν yap ἡλίκην ἔχει βάσανον 
‘ > \ > \ / lo x 

καὶ εἰ μεν αὐτοὶ MOVOL TaVTAa ἔπρασσον, 5 


~ \ > / ΄σ 
νῦν δὲ ἐπιμένουσιν κακοδιδασκαλοῦντες 


Ἡμεῖς οὖν ἐν καθαρᾷ καρδίᾳ δουλεύσωμεν 
é é 


ἡλίκην] ἡληκὴν A. 
5 ἐπαγγελία] επαγγελεια A. 
translates erat iis fortasse respiratio, but this probably does not represent any 


























THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [x 


2 ἀπόλαυσιν] AS; ἀνάπαυσιν C, 
4 ἀπόλαυσι:] AS; 
6 ἀνεκτὸν ἦν] AC; S 


lexicons will show that Hilgenfeld’s 
correction παρεισάγουσι for παράγουσι 
is unnecessary. He rightly explains 
the words (Afosz¢. Vat. p. 118) to refer 
to those Gnostics who taught that 
outward conformity to heathen rites — 
was indifferent and that persecution — 
might thus be rightly escaped: comp. — 
κακοδιδασκαλοῦντες below, and see the 

note above on § 9 αὕτη ἡ σὰρξ κιτιλ. 

3. ἐπαγγελίαν] i.e. the subject, 
the fulfilment, of the promise, as 6.5. 
Acts i. 4, Gal. iii. 14, Heb. vi. 15. 

6. ἀνεκτὸν ἦν] For the imperfect — 
see Winer § xlii. p. 321. 

κακοδιδασκαλοῦντες} Ign. Philad. 2° 
κακοδιδασκαλίας. So καλοδιδασκάλους, — 
Tit. ii. 3. 

7. δισσὴν κιιλ] For the form 
of the sentence comp. Gen. xliii. Ir 
καὶ τὸ ἀργύριον δισσὸν λάβετε. Comp. 
Apost. Const. v. 6 καὶ ἑτέροις αἴ 
ἀπωλείας γενησόμεθα καὶ διπλοτέρ 
ὑποίσομεν τὴν τίσιν. 

ΧΙ. ‘Let us therefore serve 
and believe His promise. If we wa- 
ver, we are lost. Remember how the 
word of prophecy denounces the dis 
trustful, how it compares the fulfi 




























x1] 


different Greek. 


τὸ δεῖν πιστεύειν κιτ.λ. 8. 
Ss. 14 πάντα] A; πάλαι CS. 

AC; om. S. ἐπὶ] AC; ἀπὸ 5. 
A; φυλλορροεῖ ΓΟ. 


ment of God’s purpose to the gradual 

‘ripening of the fruit on the vine, how 
it promises blessings at the last to 
His people. God is faithful and He 
will perform. Let us therefore work 
patiently, and we shall inherit such 
good things as pass man’s under- 
Standing.’ 

9. καθαρᾷ καρδίᾳ] 1 Tim. i. 5, 2 
Tim. ii. 22 (comp. Matt. v. 8), Her- 
mas 7s. iii. 9. 

12. 6 προφητικὸς λόγος] See 2 Pet. 
i.19. From some apocryphal source, 
perhaps Eldad and Modad: see the 
notes on the First Epistle § 23, where 
also the passage is quoted. The va- 
‘Yiations from the quotation in the 
First Epistle are these: (1) τῇ καρδίᾳ] 
τὴν ψυχὴν (2) πάντα] om. (3) ἡμεῖς 
δὲ... ἑωράκαμεν] καὶ ἰδοὺ γεγηράκαμεν 
καὶ οὐδὲν ἡμῖν τούτων συνβέβηκεν (4) 
ἀνόητοι] ὦ ἀνόητοι. (5) γίνεται] add. 
εἶτα φύλλον, εἶτα ἄνθος καὶ. (6) οὕ- 
om καὶ x.7.A.] this close of the quota- 

ἢ not given. These variations are 
‘sufficient to show that the writer of 
_the Second Epistle cannot have de- 
3 the passage solely from the 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


δὰ / 3 / 
Θεοῦ, ταλαίπωροι ἐσόμεθα. 
\ 4 ’ ' > ε ῃ ε ’ 
φητικος λογος" Τλδίπωροι ΕἸΟΙΝ ΟἹ Alyyyol, ΟἹ AICTA- 
ZONTEC TH KapAla, οἱ λέγοντεο᾽ Ταῦτὰὸ πᾶντὰ HKOYCAMEN 


ἡ ἀναιτίους] ανετιουσ Α. 
μὴ πιστεύειν κ.τ.λ.1 A; δουλεύσωμεν διὰ τὸ μὴ πιστεύειν κιτιλ. C3 πιστεύσωμεν, διὰ 
12 ταλαίπωροι] AC; vere (ἀληθῶς or ὄντως) misert 
ἠκούσαμεν] A; ἠκούομεν CS. 


235 


“ “ \ A \ “ 
» τῷ Θεῷ, καὶ ἐσόμεθα δίκαιοι: ἐὰν δὲ μὴ δουλεύσω- 
΄ ~ ~ 7 ΄σ 
μεν διὰ τοῦ μὴ πιστεύειν ἡμᾶς TH ἐπαγγελίᾳ τοῦ 


λέγει γὰρ καὶ ὁ προ- 


‘ > ‘ a , ε [οἱ ε a ‘ ε ul > ς ͵ 
; KAl ἐπὶ τῶν πὰάτέρων ἡμῶν, ἡμεῖς δὲ HMEPAN ἐξ ἡμέρδο 
προσδεχόμενοι οὐδὲν TOYT@N EwPdKameNn. ᾿Ανόητοι, CYM- 
βάλετε ἑδυτοὺὴς ξύλῳ, λάβετε ἄμπελον" πρῶτον μὲν φγλ- 
a 3 1 , ᾿ “Ὁ ΕἾ 3 
λοροει, εἰτὰ BAaACTOC γίνετῖτὰι, META TAYTA ὀμφὰξ, εἰτὰ 


1054 δουλεύσωμεν διὰ τοῦ 


15 καὶ] 


17 μὲν] AC; om. 8. φυλλοροεῖ] 


18 μετὰ ταῦτα] AS; εἶτα C. 


First. At the same time the coinci- 
dence of two remarkable quotations 
in this very chapter (see below on οὖς 
οὐκ ἤκουσεν x.T.A.), Which occur also 
in the First Epistle, besides other 
resemblances (e.g. § 3), seems to 
prove that our writer was acquainted 
with and borrowed from the genuine 
Clement. 

The additions which some editors 
introduce into the text here (υἱοὶ 
after ἡμεῖς δέ, and ἔτι after ἑωρά- 
kapev) are due to a mistake. The 
traces, which they have wrongly so 
read in A, are the reversed impres- 
sions of letters on the opposite leaf 
(now lost). The photograph shows 
this clearly. 

15. ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας] ‘day after 
day’: Num. xxx. 15, 2 Pet. ii. 8. This 
additional coincidence of the passage 
quoted with the language of 2 Peter 
(see the notes on the First Epistle, 
§ 23) is worthy of notice. It seems 
hardly possible that the two can be 
wholly independent, though we have 
no means of determining their rela- 
tion. 


236 


CTAPYAH πὰρεοτηκγῖδ᾽ οὕτως KAI ὁ AADC MOY AKATACTACIAC 


κἀὶ θλίψεις ἔσχεν" 


\ land \ ᾿ 
ἀδελφοί μου, μὴ διψυχώῶμεν, ἀλλὰ ἐλπίσαντες ὑπο- 
, .«“ \ A \ 
μείνωμεν, iva καὶ τὸν μισθὸν κομισώμεθα. 
> c > , \ > WS 
ἔστιν ὁ émarreiAdmenoc Tas ἀντιμισθίας ἀποδιδόναι ἑκα-. 


~ / ~ 
CTW τὼν ἔργων αὐτοῦ. 
έ 


> / ΄- ΄ > "ἢ 
οσύνην ἐναντίον τοῦ Θεοῦ, εἰσήξομεν εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν 


1 σταφυλὴ] AS; βλαστὸς C. 
emira A. 3 ἀλλὰ] ἀλλ᾽ C. 


THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 


ἐπειτὰ ATOAHWEeTal TA ἀγὰθᾶ. 


2\ 53 , \ a 
ἐὰν οὖν ποιήσωμεν τὴν δικαι- 


ὁ λαός pov] AC; 












“ὥστε, 


πιοτὸς γάρ. 


add. πρῶτον S. 2 ἔπειτα] 
4 wa] AC; om. 5. 8 οὖς 


οὐκ ἤκουσεν οὐδὲ ὀφθαλμὸς εἶδεν] AC (but A acovx for ασουσουκ) ; oculus non 
vidit et auris non audivit (transposing the clauses) S. This latter is the order in 


1 Cor. iii. 9, and in Clem. Rom. 34. 


3. μὴ Supvydpev] See the note on 
the First Epistle § 11. 

4. πιστὸς γάρ κιτιλ.] Heb. x. 23 
πιστὸς γὰρ ὁ ἐπαγγειλάμενος. 

5. ἀποδιδόναι ἑκάστῳ κ-τ.λ.] Matt. 
xvi. 27, Rom. ii. 6, Rev. xxii. 12. See 
also the quotation given in the First 
Epistle, § 34. 

7. εἰσήξομεν) ‘Vocem εἰσήκειν non 
agnoscunt lexica’, Jacobson. It oc- 
curs as early as Aischylus, and 
several instances of it are given in 
Steph. Thes. 

8. οὖς κιτιλ.] See the note on the 
First Epistle § 34, where the same 
passage occurs. The as should not 
be treated as part of the quotation. 

XII. ‘Let us then patiently wait 
for the kingdom of God. The time 
of its coming is uncertain. Our Lord’s 
answer to Salome says that it shall 
be delayed till the two shall be one, 
and the outward as the inward, and 
the male with the female, neither 
male nor female. By this saying He 
means that mutual harmony must 
first prevail, that there be perfect 
sincerity, and that no sensual pas- 
sion be harboured.’ 

11. καθ᾽ ὥραν] ‘ detimes,’ ‘tempes- 
tive,’ according to its usual meaning ; 
e.g. Job v. 26, Zech. x. 1. It is com- 





















9. εἶδεν] δὲν A. 12 ἐπειδὴ] 
monly translated here 
‘from hour to hour’. 

13. ἐπιφανείας] This word, as 
synonyme for the παρουσία, occurs in 
the New Testament only in the Pas- 
toral Epistles, 1 Tim. vi. 14, 2 Tim 
i. 10, iv. 1, 8, Tit. ii. 13; compare 
indirect use in 2 Thess. ii. 8 τῇ ἐπιφα- 
veia τῆς παρουσίας αὐτοῦ. 

14. ὑπό τινος] By Salome. 
incident was reported in the Gosf 
of the Egyptians, as we learn 
Clem. Alex. Strom. iii. 13, p. 553 (in 
a passage quoted from Julius Cassi- 
anus), where the narrative is givet 
thus: πυνθανομένης τῆς Σαλώμης, 
γνωσθήσεται τὰ περὶ ὧν ἤρετο, ἔφη. 
Κύριος, Ὅταν τὸ τῆς αἰσχύνης ἔνδυμ 
πατήσητε, καὶ ὅταν γένηται τὰ δύο ὁ 
καὶ τὸ ἄρρεν μετὰ τῆς θηλείας οὔτ 
ἄρρεν οὔτε OfAv. To this Cleme 
adds ἐν τοῖς παραδεδομένοις ἡμῖν τ 
ταρσιν εὐαγγελίοις οὐκ ἔχομεν τὸ pi 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ κατ᾽ Αἰγυπτίους. Simi 
passages from this gospel and a 
parently from the same context a 
quoted by Clement previously, S77 
iii. 6 (p. 532) τῇ Σαλώμῃ ὁ Καὶ 
πυνθανομένῃ μέχρι more θάνατος ic 
σει..«Μέχρις ἄν, εἶπεν, ὑμεῖς αἱ γυνα 
τίκτετε, and Strom. iii. 9 (p. 539 


κἀκεῖνα λέγουσι Ta πρὸς Zar 


‘in horas’, 





AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 237 


17 


“ ΄ \ τς > 3, 
ὑτοῦ καὶ ληψόμεθα τὰς ἐπαγγελίας, ἃς οἷς οὐκ HKoy- 


εν οὐδὲ ὀφθδλμόὸς εἷλεν, οὐδὲ ἐπὶ KAPAIAN ἀνθρώπου 
λνέβη. 
ΧΙ. ’Exdexwucba οὖν καθ᾽ ὥραν τὴν βασιλείαν 


an a > 9 / \ / > \ > af 

ov Θεοῦ ἐν ἀγάπῃ καὶ δικαιοσύνη, ἐπειδὴ οὐκ ol- 

A ~ ΄σ ΄ 

αμεν τὴν ἡμέραν τῆς ἐπιφανείας τοῦ Θεοῦ. ἐπερω- 

. \ \ > A € , ε ’, / « 
ηθεὶς yap αὐτὸς o Κύριος ὑπὸ τινος, πότε ἥξει 
A; ἐπεὶ C, or so probably S. 13 émipavelas] επιφανιασ A. τοῦ Θεοῦ] 
AC; αὐτοῦ 8. ἐπερωτηθεὶς] A; ἐρωτηθεὶς (. 14 ὑπό Twos] AC; add. 
τῶν ἀποστόλων S. The addition is unfortunate, for the questioner was Salome; see 
the lower note. ἥξει] AC; venit (a present) S. 


ρημένα, ὧν πρότερον ἐμνήσθημεν (Strom. 

Hii. 6, just ποίᾳ)" φέρεται δὲ, οἶμαι, 

ἐν τῷ kat Αἰγυπτίους εὐαγγελίῳ" φασὶ 

γὰρ ὅτι αὐτὸς εἶπεν ὁ σωτήρ, Ἦλθον 

ιαταλῦσαι τὰ ἔργα τῆς θηλείας...ὅθεν 

εἰκότως περὶ συντελείας μηνύσαντος τοῦ 

yyou, ἡ Σαλώμη φησί" Μέχρι τίνος οἱ 

ἄνθρωποι ἀποθανοῦνται ;... παρατετηρη- 

(vas ἀποκρίνεται 6 Κύριος, Μέχρις 

Py τίκτωσιν αἱ γυναῖκες...τί δέ; οὐχὶ καὶ 

ἃ ἑξῆς τῶν πρὸς Σαλώμην εἰρημένων 
ἐπιφέρουσιν οἱ πάντα μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ κατὰ 
ἣν ἀλήθειαν εὐαγγελικῷ στοιχήσαντες 
ανόνι; φαμένης γὰρ αὐτῆς, Καλῶς οὖν 
ἐποίησα μὴ τεκοῦσα.. ἀμείβεται λέγων 
Κύριος, Πᾶσαν φάγε βοτάνην, τὴν δὲ 
ἰκρίαν ἔχουσαν μὴ φάγῃς. One of the 
sayings in the last passage is again re- 
erred toin Exc. Theod. 67,p.985, ὅταν 
ὁ σωτὴρ πρὸς Σαλώμην λέγῃ μέχρι τότε 
ἵναι θάνατον ἄχρις ἂν ai γυναῖκες τίκτω- 
σιν. There is nothing in these pas- 
sages to suggest that Clement himself 
had read this gospel (unless indeed, 
as has occurred to me, we should 
read τί δὲ οὐχὶ κιτ.λ.; for τί dé; οὐχὲ 
τιλ. in Strom. iii. 9), and the ex- 
pressions λέγουσι, οἶμαι, φασί, seem 
Ο imply the contrary; though it is 
renerally assumed that he was ac- 
uainted with it. Of the historical 
value of this narrative we may remark: 
1) The mystical colouring of these 
ayings is quite alien to the character 




























of our Lord’s utterances as reported in 
the authentic Gospels, though entirely 
in keeping with the tone of Grzeco- 
Egyptian speculation. Epiphanius 
thus describes this apocryphal gospel 
(Haer. xii. 2, p. 514) πολλὰ τοιαῦτα ὡς 
ἐν παραβύστῳ μυστηριωδῶς ἐκ προσώπου 
τοῦ σωτῆρος ἀναφέρεται. (2) The only 
external fact which can be tested— 
the reference to Salome as childless— 
is in direct contradiction to the cano- 
nical narratives. This contradiction 
however might be removed by an 
easy change of reading, καλῶς οὖν ἂν 
ἐποίησα for καλῶς οὖν ἐποίησα. The 
Egyptian Gospel was highly esteem- 
ed by certain Gnostic sects as the 
Ophites (Hippol. Waer. v. 7, p. 99), 
by the Encratites (Clem. Alex. Strom. 
ll. cc.), and by the Sabellians Epi- 
phan. Haer. l.c.). The Encratites 
especially valued it, alleging the pas- 
sages above quoted as discounte- 
nancing marriage and thus favouring 
their own ascetic views. This was 
possibly the tendency of the Egyp- 
tian Gospel, as is maintained by 
Schneckenburger (Ueber das Evang. 
der Aegypt. Bern 1834, p. 5 sq) and 
Nicolas (Evangiles Apocryphes p. 
119 sq); but the inference is at least 
doubtful. Clement of Alexandria 
refuses to accept the interpretations 
of the Encratites ; and though his own 


238 


~ -> a » 
αὐτοῦ 4 βασιλεία, εἶπεν: Ὅταν éctai τὰ 


ἔξω ὧς τὸ ἔσω, Kal 


ἄροεν οὔτε θῆλγ. 


ε ΄σ > / \ > \ / > ᾿ ΤῈ 
μὲν ἑαυτοῖς ἀλήθειαν, καὶ ἐν δυσὶ σώμασιν ἀνυποκρί-. 


7 , , \ 
τως εἴη μία ψυχή. Kal 


1 sq τὸ ἔξω ὡς τὸ ἔσω] AS; τὰ ἔξω ὡς τὰ ἔσω C. 
4 ἑαυτοῖς] C; αὐτοισ A; nobis S, which represents” 


3 δύο δὲ] A; δὲ δύο C. 


are sometimes fanciful, still all the 
passages quoted may reasonably be 
explained otherwise than in an En- 
cratite sense. 


This quotation has a special inter- 


est as indicating something of the 
unknown author of our Second Epi- 
stle. As several of his quotations 
cannot be referred to the canonical 
Gospels (see 88 4, 5, 8), it seems not 
unnatural to assign them to the apo- 
cryphal source which in this one in- 
stance he is known to have used. 
This suspicion is borne out by a fact 
to which I have called attention 
above. One of our Lord’s sayings 
quoted by him (§ 9) bears a close 
resemblance to the words as given in 
the Excerpta Theodoti; and we have 
just seen that the Gospel of the 
Egyptians was quoted in this collec- 
tion. Thus our pseudo-Clement 
would seem to have employed this 
apocryphal gospel as ἃ principal 
authority for the sayings of our Lord. 

3. Ta δύο δὲ ἕν] i.e. when peace 
and harmony shall reign. So the 
opposite is thus expressed in Seneca 
de Ira iii. 8 ‘Non tulit Caelius adsen- 
tientem et exclamavit, Dic aliguid 
contra, ut duo simus’; comp. Plato 
SYMP. ΙΟΙ Ὁ ὁ épas.. "ἐπιχειρῶν ποιῆσαι 
ἕν ἐκ δυοῖν καὶ ἰάσασθαι τὴν φύσιν τὴν 
ἀνθρωπίνην (quoted by Lagarde Rel. 
Fur. Eccl. p. 75). 

4. ἑαυτοῖς} ‘to one another, as 
e.g. Ephes. iv. 32, Col. iii. 13, 16, 
1 Pet. iv. 8, 10. If the reading of 


TO APCEN μετὰ τῆς 


‘ ͵ λα > 
Τὰ ayo δὲ ἕν ἐστιν, 


τὸ ἔξω ὧς τὸ ἔσω, 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [xn 































Ayo ἕν, Kal τὸ 
OHAEIAC, οὔτε 
ὅταν λαλῶ- 


τοῦτο 


2 θηλείας] θηλιασ A, 


the MSs be correct, it must be aspi- 
rated αὑτοῖς, and this form is perhaps” 
less unlikely than in the earlier and 
genuine epistle (see the notes there 
on §§ 9, 12, 14, etc.). The expression 
occurs in Ephes. iv. 25 λαλεῖτε ἀλή- 
θειαν ἕκαστος μετὰ τοῦ πλησίον avrod. 
5. τὸ ἔξω ὡς τὸ ἔσω] Perhaps 
meaning originally ‘when the ou “ie le 
corresponds with the inside, when mei 
appear as they are, when there is n 0 
hypocrisy or deception.’ The pseudo- 
Clement’s interpretation is slightly 
but not essentially different. his 
clause is omitted in the quotation of 
Julius Cassianus (Strom. iii. 13, p. 
553, quoted above), who thus appears 
to have connected ra δύο ἕν closely 
with τὸ ἄρρεν μετὰ τῆς θηλείας and in: 
terpreted the expression similarly. 
See Hippol. Haer. v. 18 (p. 173 56 
καὶ ἔστιν ἀρσενόθηλυς δύναμις Kal ἐπί- 
νοια, ὅθεν ἀλλήλοις ἀντιστοιχοῦσιν... 
ὄντες.. ἔστιν οὖν οὕτως καὶ τὸ φανὲν ἐπ 
αὐτῶν, ἕν ὄν, δύο εὑρίσκεσθαι, ἀ ἀρσενό ͵ 
Aus ἔχων τὴν θήλειαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, a pe 
sage quoted by this father from th 
Great Announcement of the Sim 
nians. We may perhaps infer fro 
a comparison of Cassianus’ quot ti 
with our pseudo-Clement’s, that Cz 
sianus strung together detache 
tences, omitting all that could no 
interpreted to bear on his Encri 
views. Compare pseudo-Lin 
Pass. Petr. Apost. (Bigne’s 7 
Bibl. Patr.\. p. 72 Ἐ) ‘Unde Do 
nus in mysterio dixerat: Si non f 








































xu] 


μα λέγει. 


ἑαυτοῖς. δυσὶ] A; δύος. 


Α; δήλη C. 


ritis dextram sicut sinistram et sinis- 
tram sicut dextram, et quae sursum 
sicut deorsum et quae ante sicut 
retro, non cognoscetis regnum Dei,’ 
which ‘appears to contain another 
version of this saying’ (Westcott 
Introd, to Gospels p. 427). 

8. δῆλος] The lexicons give only 
one instance of this feminine, Eurip. 
Med. 1197 δῆλος ἦν κατάστασις. Com- 
pare τέλειον in Ign. Philad. τ. 

9. καὶ τὸ ἄρσεν x.r.d.] This sup- 
posed saying of our Lord was inter- 
preted by Julius Cassianus, as for- 
bidding marriage. Whether this was 
its true bearing, we cannot judge, as 
the whole context and the character 
of this gospel are not sufficiently 
known. It might have signified no 
more than that ‘in the kingdom of 
heaven there is neither marrying nor 
giving in marriage (Matt. xxii. 30),’ 
or that the distinctive moral excellen- 
ces of each sex shall belong to both 
equally. Clement of Alexandria, an- 
swering Julius Cassianus, gives thefol- 
lowing interpretation of the passage : 
The male represents θυμός, the female 
ἐπιθυμία, according to the well-known 
Platonic distinction; these veil and 
hinder the operations of the reason; 
they produce shame and repentance; 
they must be stripped off, before the 
reason can assume its supremacy ; 
then at length ἀποστᾶσα τοῦδε τοῦ 
σχήματος ᾧ διακρίνεται τὸ ἄρρεν καὶ τὸ 
θῆλυ, ψυχὴ μετατίθεται εἰς ἕνωσιν, οὐθέ- 
τερον οὖσα. It appears from the con- 
text that our preacher’s interpretation 
᾿ 
᾿ 


ἡ. 
hen 





AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


6 τὸ ἔσω, τὸ δὲ ἔξω] AS; τὸ ἔξω τὸ δὲ ἔσω C. 
9 Onrelas] θηλιασ A. 


239 


/ \ \ / δες ὧδ \ x? oe \ ~ 
λέγει" τήν ψυχὴν λέγει TO ἔσω, TO δὲ ἔξω TO σώ- 
ΓΌΟΝ, > \ “- ἢ 7 
ὃν τρόπον οὖν σου τὸ σώμα φαίνεται, ov- 

ΒῚ ὰ / ~ " 3 a - yA 
TWS καὶ ἢ ψυχή σου δῆλος ἔστω ἐν τοῖς καλοῖς εργοις. 

\ ‘aan. \ a ' » 3, πὰ a 

Καὶ TO APCEN META THC OHAEIAC, OYTE APCEN OYTE OAAY, 


5 τὸ ἔξω] ὡς τὸ ἔσω AC; τὸ ἔσω ὡς τὸ ἔξω 8, 


8 δῆλος] 


7 οὕτως] οὕτω C. 


was more closely allied to that of 
Cassianus than to that of Clement. 
At the same time I have shown above 
(I. p. 408) that the statements of 
Epiphanius and Jerome, who speak 
of Clement as teaching virginity, do 
not refer to this epistle, as many sup- 
pose. And the references elsewhere 
in the epistle to the duty of keeping 
the flesh pure (δὲ 6, 8, 9, 14, 15) are 
as applicable to continency in wedded 
as in celibate life. Comp. e.g. Clem. 
Hom. iii. 26 γάμον νομιτεύει...εἰς ay- 
νείαν πάντας ἄγει. 

This saying of the Egyptian Gos- 
pel, if it had any historical basis at 
all (which may be doubted), was 
perhaps founded on some utterance 
of our Lord similar in meaning to 
S. Paul’s οὐκ ἔνι ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ, Gal. 
iii. 28. It is worth observing that 
Clement of Alexandria, in explaining 
the saying of the Egyptian Gospel, 
refers to these words of S. Paul and 
explains them similarly of the θυμὸς 
and ἐπιθυμίας See also the views of 
the Ophites on the ἀρσενόθηλυς (Hip- 
pol. Haer. v. 6, 7), whence it appears 
that they also perverted S. Paul’s lan- 
guage to their purposes. The name 
and idea of ἀρσενόθηλυς had their 
origin in the cosmical speculations 
embodied in heathen mythology ; 
see Clem. Hom. vi. 5, 12, Clem. Re- 
cogn. i. 69, Athenag. Suppl. 21, Hip- 
pol. Haer. v. 14 (p. 128). 

It is equally questionable whether 
the other sayings attributed to our 
Lord in this context of the Egyptian 











240 


τοῦτο λέγει, ἵνα ἀδελφὸς ἰδὼν ἀδελφὴν + οὐδὲν + por 
περὶ αὐτῆς θηλυκόν, μηδὲ φρονῆ τι περὶ αὐτοῦ ἀρσενικόν. | 
ταῦτα ὑμῶν ποιούντων, φησίν, ἐλεύσεται ἡ βασιλεία, 


τοῦ πατρός μου. 

ΧΗ], 
νήψωμεν ἐπὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν" 
ἀνοίας καὶ πονηρίας. 


1 τοῦτο] After this word A is mutilated, and the remainder of the so-called 
οὐδὲν φρονῇ] οὐδὲν φρονεῖ C. 


epistle is wanting; see I. p. 117. 
add. guum soror videbit fratrem S. 
omitting οὖν. 


Gospel have any bearing on Encra- 
tite views. The words ‘so long as 
women bear children’ seem to mean 
nothing more than ‘so long as the 
human race shall be propagated,’ 
and ‘I came to abolish the works of 
the female’ may have the same sense. 
The clinching utterance, πᾶσαν φάγε 
βοτάνην, τὴν δὲ πικρίαν ἔχουσαν μὴ 
φάγῃς, which has been alleged as 
showing decisively the Encratite ten- 
dencies of the gospel, appears to 
me to admit of a very different inter- 
pretation. It would seem to mean 
very much the same as S, Paul’s 
πάντα μοι ἔξεστιν ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πάντα συμ- 
φέρει, and to accord with the Apos- 
tle’s injunctions respecting marriage. 

1. οὐδέν] The previous editors, 
while substituting φρονῇ for φρονεῖ, 
have passed over οὐδέν in silence. 
But with φρονῇ we should certainly 
expect μηδέν. The reading οὐδέν 
can only be explained by treating 
οὐδὲν θηλυκόν as a separate idea, 
‘should entertain thoughts which 
have no regard to her sex, so as 
to isolate οὐδέν from the influence of 
iva; but the order makes this ex- 
planation very difficult. The gram- 
mars do not give any example of 
the use of οὐ (οὐδέν) which is ana- 
logous; see Kihner II p. 747 sq, 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


Aaa touvt ἤδη ποτὲ μετανοήσωμεν᾽" 8 


ἐξαλείψωμεν ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν τὰ πρό-᾿ 


As S commonly renders ἀδελφοί alone by ‘NN /ratres mei, it is 


























ἢ 
~ a 
CIT 
ai 

Ἢ 

; 


aq 


el 
48 


μεστοὶ γάρ ἐσμεν πολλῆς 


2 μηδὲ] 
5 ᾿Αδελφοὶ οὖν] ᾿Αδελφοί [μου] S, 


Winer ὃ lv. p. 599 sq. The sentence 
is elliptical, and words must be 
understood in the second clause, 
μηδὲ [ἀδελφὴ ἰδοῦσα ἀδελφὸν] φρο 7 
x.7.A. Similar words, it will be seen, 
are supplied in the Syriac; but I 
attribute this to the exigencies of 
translation, rather than to any differ- 
ence in the Greek text which the 
translator had. Gebhardt ingeni- 
ously reads μηδ᾽ ἥδε; but ἥδε.. αὐτοῦ, 
does not seem a natural combination 7 
of pronouns here. 

3. φησίν] It does not follow that 
the preacher is quoting the exact 
words of the Gospel according to 
the Egyptians; for φησίν may mean 
nothing more than ‘he says in effect,’ 
‘he signifies.’ See e.g. Barnab. 7 
οὕτω, φησίν, οἱ θέλοντές με ἰδεῖν Kt. 
a passage which has been wrongly 
understood as preserving a sayin; 
of Christ elsewhere unrecorded, br 
in which the writer is really givin; 
only an explanation of what hai 
gone before. This use of φησι 
occurs many times elsewhere i 
Barnab. §§ 6, 10, 11, 12, where tl 
meaning is indisputable. P 

XIII. ‘Let us therefore 
and be vigilant: for now we are 
of wickedness. Let us wipe out ὁ 
former sins ; and not be men-plez 

































xu] 


domini S. ἡμᾶς] S; ὑμᾶς C. 
petra] add. δι᾽ ὑμᾶς 8. 
the lower note. 


et we must approve ourselves by 
bur righteousness to the heathen, 
Jest God’s Name be blasphemed, as 
Phe Scriptures warn us. And how 
it blasphemed? When the Ora- 
les of God command one thing, 
nd we do another: for then they 
reat the Scriptures as a lying fable. 
hen for instance God’s Word tells 
is to love those that hate us, and 
ey find that, so far from doing 
his, we hate those that love us, 
hey laugh us to scorn, and they 
Plaspheme the holy Name.’ 

ἢ 5. οὖν] This particle cannot stand 
ter the vocative, and indeed is 
itted in the Syriac. Perhaps οὖν 
a corruption of pov, as ἀδελφοί 
Hov occurs several times, §§ 9, 10, 11; 
r the scribe has here tampered with 
ne connecting particles, as he has 
one elsewhere (δ 7 ὥστε οὖν, ἀδελφοί 
υ), and in this case has blundered. 
6. νήψωμεν ἐπὶ x.r.d.] 2 Tim. ii. 26 
νήψωσιν...εἰς τὸ ἐκείνου θέλημα, 
Pet. iv. 7 νήψατε εἰς προσευχάς, 
Οἶγο. Phil. 7 νήφοντες πρὸς τὰς εὐχάς. 
7. ἐξαλείψωμεν] Harnack quotes 
cts iii, 19 μετανοήσατε οὖν καὶ 
totpéware εἰς τὸ ἐξαλειφθῆναι 

y τὰς ἁμαρτίας. 

9. ἀνθρωπάρεσκοι)] Ephes. vi. 6, 
ol. iii. 22. See also the note on 
Oporapeckeiv Ign. Rom. 2. 

10. ἑαυτοῖς] ‘one another, i.e. 
CLEM. II. 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


uncertain whether the translator has μου in his text. 


πᾶσιν] om. S. 


241 


Ma / > ~ “ 
Epa ἁμαρτήματα, καὶ μετανοήσαντες ἐκ ψυχῆς σωθῶ- 
A > , A / 
ev. Kat μὴ γινώμεθα ἀνθρωπάρεσκοι: μηδὲ θέλωμεν 
/ ε -- a 72 ’ \ \ a If 3 / 
ὄνον ἑαυτοῖς ἀρέσκειν, ἀλλα καὶ τοῖς ἔξω ἀνθρώποις 
ry / «“ Ἀν led \ 
Fr τῇ δικαιοσύνη, ἵνα τὸ ὄνομα δι’ ἡμᾶς μὴ βλασφη- 
- / \ Ae , \ \ \ o>» ͵ 
ἤται. Aéyée γὰρ καὶ ὁ Κύριος Διὰ tantéc τὸ ὄνομά ΜΟΥ 


a na a 3: \ δ \ > «a 
BAachumeital ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς EONECIN’ καὶ πάλιν Οὐδὶ Ar ON 


11 τὸ ὄνομα] add. 
12 καὶ] 5; om. (, 13 βλασφη- 
πάλιν Οὐαὶ δι᾽ ὃν] S; διὸ C. See 


‘our fellow-Christians,’ as rightly 
explained here by Harnack; comp. 
§ 4 ἐν τῷ ἀγαπᾶν ἑαυτούς, ὃ 12 λαλῶμεν 
ἑαυτοῖς ἀλήθειαν, but not § 15. 

τοῖς ἔξω ἀνθρώποις) ‘the heathen. 
For the expression οἱ ἔξω see the 
note Colossians iv. 5. 

II. τὸ ὄνομα] ‘the Name’; so 
Tertull. Zdo/. 14 ‘ne nomen blas- 
phemetur’ For other instances of 
this absolute use, and for the man- 
ner in which (as here) translators 
and transcribers supply the imagined 
defect, see the note on Ign. Ephes. 3. 

12. Διὰ παντὸς x.r.A.] From the 
LXX Is, lit. 5 τάδε λέγει ὁ Κύριος, Av 
ὑμᾶς διὰ παντὸς τὸ ὄνομά μου βλα- 
σφημεῖται ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν. The Syriac 
translator inserts 8. ὑμᾶς, and omits 
πᾶσιν ; but these are obvious altera- 
tions to conform to the familiar Lxx 
of Isaiah. 

13. καὶ πάλιν Οὐαὶ x.r.A.] I have 
adopted the reading of the Syriac 
here, because the Greek text is 
obviously due to the accidental o- 
mission of some letters (perhaps 
owing to homceoteleuton), a common 
phenomenon in our MS. On the 
other hand it is hardly conceivable 
that any scribe or translator could 
have invented the longer reading 
of the Syriac out of the shorter 
reading of the Greek. The Syriac 
reading however is not without its 


16 








i 





242 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [X11 


a! 3: U , ΄ 
BAachumeital τὸ ὄνομά Moy? ἐν τίνι βλασφημεῖται: 
> o \ - 4 τὰν ἃ U \ 4 , 
ἐν τῷ μὴ ποιεῖν ὑμᾶς ἃ βούλομαι. τὰ ἔθνη γάρ, 
3 ͵ ~ / ε ~ ΄ a 
ἀκούοντα ἐκ τοῦ στόματος ἡμῶν τὰ λόγια τοῦ Θεοῦ, 
ς \ \ G , ” " 4 
ws καλὰ καὶ μεγάλα θαυμάζει: ἔπειτα, KaTauabdvTa 

‘ees “ «“ af af - ε e J 
Ta ἔργα ἡμῶν OTL οὐκ ἔστιν ἀξια τῶν ῥημάτων ὧν 
4 af 2 , 
λέγομεν, ἔνθεν eis βλασφημίαν τρέπονται, λέγοντες. 
> “δ ΄' \ ΄ \ / 
εἶναι μῦθόν τινα Kal πλάνην: ὅταν yap ἀκούσωσιν. 
φησ See J , « \ > ͵ ς α 4 ie 
map ἡμῶν ὅτι λέγει ὁ Θεὸς ΟΥ̓ χάρις ὑμῖν εἰ drandte 


‘ > “Ὁ € lal > ‘ ‘ c a > > a 
Toyc ἀγάπῶντδο YMAC, ἀλλὰ YAPIC ὑμῖν εἰ ἀγὰ πᾶτε TOY 


1 ἐν τίνι] add. δὲ S: comp. § 3. 
3 ἡμῶν] 5; ὑμῶν Ὁ. 


add. τότε 8. 


difficulty. If the first quotation Διὰ 
παντὸς κιτιλ. is taken from Is. lii. 
5, whence comes the second Oval 
k.7.A.2 The explanation seems to 
be, that Is. lii. 5 itself was very 
frequently quoted in the early ages 
Οὐαὶ δ ὃν (or δέ od) κιτιλ. (see 
instances collected in the note to 
Ign. Zyvadl. 8), though there is no 
authority for it either in the LXX or 
in the Hebrew. Our preacher there- 
fore seems to have cited the same 
passage in two different forms—the 
first from the LXx, the second from 
the familiar language of quotation— 
supposing that he was giving two 
distinct passages. 

I. ἐν τίνι κιτιλ.] This is no longer 
any part of the quotation, but belongs 
to the preacher’s explanation. He has 
however put the words into the mouth 
of God Himself, after his wont: e.g. 
§ 12 ταῦτα ὑμῶν ποιούντων K.t.d., § 14 
τηρήσατε τὴν σάρκα κιτιλ. The read- 
ing of the Syriac, μὴ ποιεῖν ἡμᾶς ἃ 
λέγομεν, is obviously a correction 
to overcome this difficulty. For other 
examples where this preacher begins 
his explanations with ἐν τίνι see 


$$ 3, 9. 


4 ἔπειτα] add. δὲ S. 
5, the word being doubtless added to bring out the force of μῦθον. 9 4 
10 ἐχθροὺς] add. ὑμῶν S. The addition of pronouns is v 




























᾿ 


2 ὑμᾶς ἃ βούλομαι] ἡμᾶς ἃ λέγομεν i 
7 μῦθόν τινα] add. deli: 


3. τὰ λόγια τοῦ Θεοῦ] A synonyme: 
for the Scriptures; comp. Rom. iii. 
2, Heb. v. 12; Clem. Rom. 19, 53, 
62, etc. The point to be observe 
is that the expression here refers to 
an evangelical record : see the next) 
note below. Thus it may be com 
pared with the language of Papias 
Euseb. H. £. iii. 39 Mar@aios...cwe 
γράψατο ra λόγια, which must havé 
been nearly contemporaneous; sé 
Essays on Supernatural Religion p 
170 sq. Similarly our author abo 
§ 2 quotes a gospel as γραφή. 4 

4. ἔπειτα κιτ.λ.] Afost. Const. ii. 
ὁ τοιοῦτος... βλασφημίαν προσέτριψε T 
κοινῷ τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τῇ διδασκαλ 
ὡς μὴ ποιούντων ἐκεῖνα ἃ λέγομεν εἶνι 
καλὰ k.T.A. ἡ 

8. λέγει ὁ Θεός] ‘ God saith. ΤΊ 
passage quoted therefore is regardé 
as one of τὰ λόγια τοῦ Θεοῦ. As 
words of our Lord follow, it mig 
perhaps be thought that the expr 
sion λέγει ὁ Θεός refers not to 
Divine inspiration of the Gos] 
but to the Divine personali 
Christ, of whom the writer says ὁ 
οὕτως Sei ἡμᾶς φρονεῖν περὶ "In 
Χριστοῦ ὡς περὶ Θεοῦ. But, n 





























xiv] 


which occur below. 
translation. 
add. τοῦ Χριστοῦ 8. 


14 καὶ] om. 8. 


mention that such a mode of speak- 
ing would be without a parallel in 
the early ages of Christianity, the 
preceding ra λόγια τοῦ Θεοῦ deter- 
mines the sense here. 
Οὐ χάρις κιτ.λ.] A loose quotation 
from Luke vi. 32, 35 εἰ ἀγαπᾶτε τοὺς 
ἰγαπῶντας ὑμᾶς, ποία ὑμῖν χάρις ἐστίν ; 
«πλὴν ἀγαπᾶτε τοὺς ἐχθροὺς ὑμῶν... 
ὶ ἔσται ὁ μισθὸς ὑμῶν πολύς. For the 
se of χάρις comp. I Pet. ii. 19, 20. 
11. ἀγαθότητος] ‘goodness’ in the 
sense of ‘kindness,’ ‘ beneficence,’ 
as ἀγαθοποιεῖν in the context of St 
Luke (vv. 33, 35). This substantive 
does not occur in the N. T., and only 
arely (Wisd. vii. 26, xii. 22, Ecclus. 
ν. 23) in the Lxx; the form com- 
monly used being ἀγαθωσύνη. 
XIV. ‘If we do God’s will, we 
hall be members of the eternal, 
piritual Church; if not, we shall 
9elong to that house which is a den 
Ἢ thieves. The living Church is 
christ’s body. God made male and 
emale, saith the Scripture. The male 
Christ, the female the Church. 
he Bible and the Apostles teach 
that the Church existed from 
ternity. Just as Jesus was mani- 
ed in the flesh, so also was the 
Shurch. 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


€y@poyc Kal τούς μιοοῦντὰς ὑμᾶς' 


If therefore we desire to 


243 


΄ ε΄ ’ 
ταῦτα ὅὃταν ἀκού- 


/ \ ε \ ~ 3 ,ὔ 
σωσιν, θαυμάζουσιν τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς ἀγαθότητος" 
2 4 ‘ a 
ὅταν δὲ ἴδωσιν ὅτι οὐ μόνον τοὺς μισοῦντας οὐκ ἀγα- 
ρο > Sak 29\ \ > “ ~ 
πώμεν, ἀλλ᾽ OTL οὐδὲ TOUS ἀγαπῶντας, καταγελῶσιν 
ε ~ \ ΄ \ »f 
᾿ ἡμῶν, καὶ βλασφημεῖται τὸ ὄνομα. 
“ δὲ} a \ , a 
XIV. “ὥστε, ἀδελφοί, ποιοῦντες TO θέλημα τοῦ 
\ - fol 7 ~ / “- 
πατρὸς ἡμῶν Θεοῦ ἐσόμεθα ἐκ τῆς ἐκκλησίας Tis πρώ- 
᾿ - ΄ - \ 7 \ / 
TNS, τῆς πνευματικῆς, τῆς πρὸ ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης ἐκτισ- 


common in S$; and I have not thought it necessary to record several instances 
13 ὅτι] om. S, perhaps owing to the exigencies of 
βλασφημεῖται] add. οὖν 8. 


τὸ ὄνομα] 


partake of the spiritual archetype, 
we must preserve the fleshly copy 
in its purity. This flesh is capable 
of life and immortality, if it be united 
to the Spirit, that is to Christ. And 
the blessings which await His elect 
are greater than tongue can tell.’ 

16. τῆς πρώτης x.t.A.] This doc- 
trine of an eternal Church seems to 
be a development of the Apostolic 
teaching which insists on the fore- 
ordained purpose of God as having 
elected a body of men to serve Him 
from all eternity; see esp. Ephes. 
i. 3 SQ ὁ εὐλογήσας ἡμᾶς ἐν πάσῃ 
εὐλογίᾳ πνευματικῇ ἐν τοῖς ἐπου- 
ρανίοις ἐν Χριστῷ, καθὼς ἐξελέξατο 
ἡμᾶς ἐν αὐτῷ πρὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου 
«ὐπροορίσας ἡμᾶς εἰς υἱοθεσίαν k.7.X., 
a passage aptly quoted by Bryennios. 
The language of our preacher stands 
midway in point of development, 
and perhaps also about midway in 
point of chronology, between this 
teaching of S. Paul and the doctrine 
of the Valentinians, who believed in 
an eternal zon ‘ Ecclesia,’ thus car- 
rying the Platonism of our pseudo- 
Clement a step in advance. 

17. πρὸ ἡλίου «t.A.] This expres- 
sion is probably taken from Ps. 
Ixxi (Ixxii). 5 συμπαραμενεῖ τῷ ἡλίῳ 


16—2 





244 


μένης" ἐὰν δὲ μὴ ποιήσωμεν TO θέλημα Κυρίου, ἐσόμεθα 
ἐκ τῆς γραφῆς τῆς λεγούσης Ἐγενήθη ὁ οἶκός. ΜΟΥ 


σπέλδιον λμηοτῶν. 


΄ ΄σ be J ΄σ 
ἐκκλησίας τῆς ζωῆς εἶναι, ἵνα σωθώμεν. 


2 ἐκ τῆς γραφῆς τῆς λεγούσης] ex tis de guibus scriptum est S. 
οὖν] C; ὥστε, ἀδελφοί [μου] S, omitting οὖν. 


καὶ πρὸ τῆς σελήνης γενεὰς γενεῶν 
and 26. ver. 17 πρὸ τοῦ ἡλίου διαμενεῖ 
τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ; for though in these 
passages, as the Hebrew shows, πρὸ 
has or ought to have a different 
meaning (Aquila εἰς πρόσωπον τῆς 
σελήνης, Symmachus ἔμπροσθεν τῆς 
σελήνης), yet it was commonly so 
interpreted, as appears from Justin 
Dial. 64 (p. 288) dmodeixvurat...dre 
οὗτος (i.e. 6 Χριστός) καὶ πρὸ τοῦ 
ἡλίου ἦν, in proof of which statement 
he cites the passages just quoted ; 
comp. 76. 45 (p. 264) ὃς καὶ mpd 
ἑωσφόρου καὶ σελήνης ἦν, 34 (p. 252), 
76 (p. 302); and so Athanasius c. 
Arian. i. 41 (I. p. 351) εἰ δὲ καί, ὡς 
ψάλλει Aavid ἐν τῷ ἑβδομηκοστῷ πρώτῳ 
ψαλμῷ, Πρὸ τοῦ ἡλίου διαμένει τὸ 
ὄνομα αὐτοῦ, καὶ πρὸ τῆς σελήνης εἰς 
γενεὰς γενεῶν, πῶς ἐλάμβανεν ὃ εἶχεν 
ἀεὶ κιτιλ. Similarly too in his Zafos. 
in Psalm. \xxi (1. p. 897) he explains 
the two expressions, vv. 5, 17, πρὸ 
αἰώνων and πρὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου 
respectively. Meanwhile Eusebius 
Comm. in Psalm. ad loc. (Op. V. p. 
800 ed. Migne) had mentioned and 
rejected this meaning; οὐ yap πρὸ 
Ths σελήνης, τούτεστι πρὶν γενέσθαι 
τὴν σελήνην, GAN ἐνώπιον ὥσπερ καὶ 
ἔμπροσθεν ἡγούμενος τῆς σελήνης. 

For the idea see esp. Hermas Zs. 
ii. 4 Tis οὖν ἐστίν; φημί. Ἢ Ἐκκλησία, 
φησίν. εἶπον οὖν αὐτῷ, Διὰ τί οὖν 
πρεσβυτέρα; Ὅτι, φησίν, πάντων πρώτη 
ἐκτίσθη διὰ τοῦτο πρεσβυτέρα, καὶ διὰ 
ταύτην ὁ κόσμος κατηρτίσθη, quoted by 
Bryennios. Comp. also Orig. c. Ceds. 
vi. 35, where speaking of the phrase 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


J 3 ε / 3 A a 
ὥστε οὖν αἱρετισώμεθα ἀπὸ τῆς 


-daeorum synagoga est ecclesia 








































[xiv 


οὐκ οἴομαι 


3 ὥστε 
See above, p. 240. 


ἀπορροίας ἐκκλησίας ἐπιγείου which 
Celsus had attributed among other 
absurdities to the Christians, he 
writes, τάχα ἐλήφθη ἀπὸ τοῦ ὑπό τινων 
λέγεσθαι ἐκκλησίας τινὸς ἐπουρανίου, 
καὶ κρείττονος αἰῶνος ἀπόρροιαν εἶναι 
τὴν ἐπὶ γῆς ἐκκλησίαν. And see the 
passages quoted in the notes on 
τὰ βιβλία κιτιλ. and ἀντίτυπον. Hil- 
genfeld quotes Clem. Alex. Strom. 
iv. 8 (p. 593) εἰκὼν δὲ τῆς οὐρανίου 
ἐκκλησίας ἡ ἐπίγειος (this father has 
just before cited Ephes. v. 21 sq, 
Col. iii. 18 sq), 2. vi. 13 (p. 793) 
αἱ ἐνταῦθα κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν προκοπαὶ 
«ὐμιμήματα, οἶμαι, ἀγγελικῆς δόξης 
κἀκείνης τῆς οἰκονομίας τυγχάνουσιν 
ἣν ἀναμένειν φασὶν ai γραφαὶ τοὺς κα 
ἴχνος κιτιλ. 

2. ἐκ τῆς γραφῆς κατλ. } A 100d 
expression, meaning ‘of those persons 
described in the Scripture’. he 
Syriac translator has paraphrased 
accordingly. The passage is Jer. vil. 
II μὴ σπήλαιον λῃστῶν ὁ οἶκός μου, 
ἐπικέκληται τὸ ὄνομά μου ἐπ᾽ av 
κιτιὰλ., to which also our Lord allud 
(Matt. xxi. 13, Mark xi. 17, Luke 
xix. 46). For the application her 
comp. Apost. Const. ii, 17. 

3. ὥστε οὖν] A pleonasm whicl 
our author repeats elsewhere ; 88 4, 

αἱρετισώμεθα)] ‘choose’, ‘prefe: 
a common word in the Lxx. |] 
the N.T. it is found only Matt. x 
18, in a quotation from Is. ΧΙ]. 
where however it does not occur 
the Lxx. See Sturz Dial. Mac. 14 

4. τῆς ζωῆς] Harnack writes ‘ 





























xiv] 


Xpictoy: 


8 τὸ θῆλυ] C; καὶ τὸ θῆλυ 8. 
prophetarum 8. 


tis’. The contrast however is not 
between the Synagogue and the 
Church of Christ, but between mere 
ἢ external membership in the visible 
body and spiritual communion in the 
Ἢ celestial counterpart. 

5. σῶμά ἐστιν Χριστοῦ] Ephes. i. 
23 τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἥτις ἐστὶν τὸ σῶμα 
αὐτοῦ; comp. 20. iv. 4, 12 sq, 16, 
Vv. 23, 30, Rom. xii. 5, 1 Cor. x. 17, 
xil. 12—27, Col. i. 18, 24, ii. 19, 
111. 15. 

6. ἘἘποίησεν κιτ.λ.} Gen. i. 27 
Peroincey ὁ Θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον, κατ᾽ 
εἰκόνα Θεοῦ ἐποίησεν αὐτόν" ἄρσεν καὶ 
θῆλυ ἐποίησεν αὐτούς. The applica- 
tion seems to be suggested by 8. 
Paul’s treatment of this portion of 
the Mosaic account, Ephes. v. 31 sq; 
where, after representing the Church 
the body and spouse of Christ, 
and quoting Gen. ii. 24, he says, ro 
υστήριον τοῦτο μέγα ἐστίν" ἐγὼ δὲ 
έγω εἰς Χριστὸν καὶ [εἰς] τὴν ἐκκλη- 
, 


8. καὶ dr] Some words have 
evidently dropped out in the MS 
here: see the introduction, I. p. 144 
q. The lacuna is conveniently sup- 
plied by λέγουσιν δῆλον after ἄνωθεν, 
as I have done. This seems to me 
better than the more obvious solution 
of Bryennios, who would attach this 
+ to the preceding ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν, and 
inderstand merely φασί or διδάσκουσι 
yr the like. The Syriac translator 
bmits the ὅτι and inserts a λέγουσι 
3 some similar word. This is 
early an arbitrary correction. 
τὰ βιβλία καὶ οἱ ἀπόστολοι] This is 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


ε ΄σ΄ ΄:- .« > / 
δὲ ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν ὅτι ἐκκλησία 
A \ > ͵ 
λέγει yao ἡ γραφή ᾿Ἐποίηςεν ὁ 
᾿ “ Η a \ a \ 
ANOPGTON APCEN KAl BHAY* TO αρσεν ἐστὶν ὁ 


καὶ ὅτι] atgue etiam 5. 


245 


ζῶσα C@MA ECTIN 
ὁ Θεὸς TON 
ε 


Χριστός, 


΄σ \ τ΄ \ , \ ε > / 
τὸ θῆλυ ἡ ἐκκλησία" καὶ ὅτι τὰ βιβλία καὶ οἱ ἀπόστο- 


τὰ βιβλία] add. 


a rough synonyme for the Old and 
NewTestaments respectively. Though 
the Apostolic and Evangelical writ- 
ings are elsewhere in this epistle 
treated as γραφαί (ὃ 2) and even as 
λόγια τοῦ Θεοῦ (ὃ 13), being thus co- 
ordinated in point of authority with 
the Old Testament, yet the term 
ta βιβλία, ‘the Books’, is not yet 
extended to them. For somewhat 
similar expressions for the Old and 
New Testaments in early writers, see 
the note on Ign. Philad. 5. The 
exact mode of expression is however 
unique. The Syriac translator’s 
‘books of the prophets’ is the ob- 
vious gloss of a later age. 

But what Books of the Old Testa- 
ment and what Apostolic writings 
had the preacher in view? : 

(1) As regards the O.T. the an- 
swer is partly supplied by his own 
context. In the first place the history 
of creation in Genesis is contem- 
plated. Such treatment was alto- 
gether in accordance with the theo- 
logical teaching of his age. Anastasius 
of Sinai (Routh’s Red Sacr. 1. p. 15; 
comp. Anastas. Of. p. 860, Migne) 
says, Παπίου τοῦ πάνυ τοῦ Ἱεραπολίτου 
τοῦ ἐν τῷ ἐπιστηθίῳ φοιτήσαντος, καὶ 
Κλήμεντος Πανταίνου τῆς ᾿Αλεξαν- 
δρέων ἱερέως, καὶ ᾿Αμμωνίου σοφωτά- 
του, τῶν ἀρχαίων καὶ πρώτων συνῴδων 
ἐξηγητῶν, εἰς Χριστὸν καὶ τὴν 
ἐκκλησίαν πᾶσαν τὴν ἑξαήμερον νοη- 
σάντων. We might almost suppose 
that Anastasius was here alluding 
to our pseudo-Clement, if he had 
not in a parallel passage (p. 962 





/ 


246 


λοι THY ἐκκλησίαν οὐ νῦν εἶναι, ἀλλὰ ἄνωθεν [Ἀέγουσιν, 
δῆλον)" ἦν γὰρ πνευματική, ὡς καὶ ὁ πηδοῦν ἡμῶν, ἐφαν 
νερώθη δὲ ἐπ’ ἐσχάτων τῶν ἡμερῶν ἵνα ἡμᾶς σώση" 
ἡ ἐκκλησία δὲ πνευματικὴ οὖσα ἐφανερώθη ἐν TH σαρκὶ 


1 οὐ νῦν] add. dicunt S. 


Migne), where he is again enume- 
rating ancient interpreters who ex- 
plained the statements respecting 
paradise in Genesis as eis τὴν Χριστοῦ 
ἐκκλησίαν ἀναφερόμενα, specified Κλή- 
μης ὁΣτρωματεύς. He writes again 
(p. 964), ‘admirabiles quos diximus 
interpretes...decreverunt...duos quos- 
dam esse paradisos...terrestrem et 
caelestem, qui cernitur et qui in- 
telligitur, sicut etiam est Christus 
caelestis simul et terrestris, congru- 
enter typo duarum ecclesiarum, ter- 
venae, inquam, e¢ caelestis civitatis 
Domini virtutum etc.’ (a passage 
which illustrates the language of our 
preacher respecting the Church); 
and he himself accordingly maintains 
that whatever is said of Adam and 
Eve applies to Christ and the Church 
(e.g. pp. 999, 1007, 1027, 1050). But 
besides the Hexaemeron, our preacher 
may have been thinking of other parts 
of the O.T., such as Ps. xliv (xlv), 
in which ‘the queen’ was already 
interpreted of the Church (Justin 
Dial. 63, p. 287). So too he would 
not improbably have the Song of 
Solomon in his mind. 

(2) As regards the ‘Apostles’ 
again his context indicates his chief 
reference. The Epistle to the E- 
phesians seemed to him more es- 
pecially to inculcate this doctrine. 
But he would find it elsewhere. 
There are some indications that he 
was acquainted with the Epistle to 
the Hebrews; and, if so, he would see 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


λέγουσιν δῆλον] om. CS; see the lower noted” [ 
2 ὡς καὶ ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἡμῶν, ἐφανερώθη δὲ κ.τ.λ.} et vir etus autem (δὲ) spiritalis est, is 
qui est iesus christus dominus noster, manifestatus est autem, etc. 5. 





























[xiv 


3 ἦμε- 


a confirmation of his view in πόλει, 
Θεοῦ ζῶντος Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἐπουρανίῳ... 
πανηγύρει καὶ ἐκκλησίᾳ πρωτοτόκων ἀπο- 
γεγραμμένων ἐν οὐρανοῖς (xii. 22, 23). 
Again such words as Apoc. xxi. 9, 10, 
τὴν νύμφην τὴν γυναῖκα τοῦ apviov... 
τὴν ἁγίαν Ἱερουσαλὴμ καταβαίνουσαν 
ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ, would 
suit his purpose admirably. . 
I. οὐ νῦν κιτιλ.] ‘not now for the 
first time, du¢ from the beginning’. 
For this sense of ἄνωθεν see Luk 
i. 3, Acts xxvi. 5; comp. Justin Dial. 
24 (p. 242) ὥσπερ ἄνωθεν ἐκηρύσο ( 
2b. 63 (p. 286) ὅτι ἄνωθεν ὁ Θεὰφι 
γεννᾶσθαι αὐτὸν ἔμελλε, where it isa 
explanation of πρὸ ἑωσφόρου ἐ ἐγέ 
σε. Harnack compares Gal. iv. 26 
etc., but the opposition to νῦν here 
suggests the temporal rather than 
the local meaning of ἄνωθεν. 
2. 6 Ἰησοῦς ἡμῶν] 56. πνευμα 
ἦν, so that ὁ Ἰησοῦς, not ἡ ἐκκλῆς 
is the nominative of ἐφανερώθη: com) 
ὃ 9 Χριστὸς 6 Κύριος, ὁ σώσας ἡμᾶ 
ὧν μὲν τὸ πρῶτον πνεῦμα, 
σὰρξ καὶ οὕτως ἡμᾶς ἐκάλεσεν. F 
ἐφανερώθη δὲ κιτιλ. comp. I Pet. 
20 Χριστοῦ προεγνωσμένου μὲν πὶ 
καταβολῆς κόσμου, pavepwdérvros | 
ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάτου (ν.1. ἐσχάτων) τῶν χρ 
νων dv ὑμᾶς KT. ἐ. 
3. ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάτων τῶν ἡμερῶν] " wl 
the days were drawing to a clo: 
‘at the end of all things’ ; 
uncommon LXX κὰν οὐμρεστος 6 
xlix. 1, Deut. iv. 30 (v.L), Da 
28, x. 14, Hos. iii. 5, Mic. iv. 151 








































xiv] 


ρῶν] temporum ὃ. 


So 2 Pet. iii. 3, but in Heb. i. 2 the 
correct reading is ἐπ᾿ ἐσχάτου τῶν 
ἡμερῶν. 

4. ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ Χριστοῦ] When Christ 
took a bodily external form, the 
Church did the same. Moreover this 
external form might be said to be 
ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ αὐτοῦ, since the Church 
exists by union with Him. 

5. τηρήσῃ αὐτήν] ‘keep her pure 
and undefiled’, i.e. so far as con- 
cerns his own conduct as one member 
of the body. The believer in his own 
special department is required to do 
that which Christ does throughout 
the whole, Ephes. v. 27 παραστῆσαι 
ἔνδοξον τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, μὴ ἔχουσαν 
σπῖλον ἢ putida κ-ιτ.λ. 

6. ἀπολήψεται αὐτήν] i.e. by being 
incorporated in the celestial, spiritual 
Church. 

ὃ, τὸ ἀντίτυπον] ‘thé counterpart, 
or copy’. ‘The Platonic doctrine of 
ideas underlies these expressions. 
The αὐθεντικόν is the eternal, spiritual 
archetype, the original document, as 
it were, in God’s own handwriting : 
comp. Tertull. de Monog. 11 ‘in 
‘Graeco authentico’, ‘the Greek origi- 
nal’, before it was corrupted by tran- 
Scription; de Praescr. 36 ‘ipsae au- 
thenticae literae eorum’, ‘the auto- 
graph letters of the Apostles’; Dig. 
‘Xxvili. 3. 12 ‘exemplo quidem aperto 
nondum apertum est testamentum ; 
quod si authenticum patefactum est 
totum, apertum’, where ‘authenti- 
‘cum’ is the original, and ‘exemplum’ 
the copy; Julius in Athan. AZo/. c. 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


247 


΄σ fal toa 14 / ~ 4 > \ 
Χριστοῦ, δηλοῦσα ἡμῖν ὅτι, ἐάν τις ἡμῶν τηρήση αὐτὴν 
3 4, \ \ \ 0 / 3 λ jWera a iT ἣν > - 
ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ Kat μή φθείρη, amoAn ι αὐτὴν ἐν τῷ 
/ 7 en, eee ε \ \ « > , , > 

πνεύματι τῷ ἁγίῳ: ἡ yap σὰρξ αὕτη ἀντίτυποός ἐστιν 
΄ > \ 3 / / \ 
τοῦ πνεύματος" οὐδεὶς οὖν TO ἀντίτυπον φθείρας τὸ 


7 ἀντίτυποο] C; typus 8, and so τὸ ἀντίτυπον just below; 
but this is probably owing to the poverty of the language. 


Arian, 28 (1. p. 116) προεκόμισε χεῖρα 
ὁλόγραφον αὐθεντικήν, i.e. ‘written 
from first to last by his own hand’. 
The ἀντίτυπον is the material, tem- 
porary manifestation, the imperfect 
and blurred ¢ranscripfi of the original : 
comp. Synes. ᾿Ξ 22:2. 68 (p. 217) τοῖς 
ταχυγράφοις τὰ ἀντίτυπα δοῦναι τῶν 
τότε γραφέντων ἐπέταξα, Epist. in 
Athan. Aol. c. Arian. 85 (1. p. 158) 
τῷ ἀντιτύπῳ τοῦ θείου γράμματος. For 
ἀντίτυπον, thus contrasted with the 
heavenly and true, comp. Heb. ix. 24 
ἀντίτυπα τῶν ἀληθινῶν, where the 
ἀντίτυπα are defined in the context 
as τὰ ὑποδείγματα τῶν ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς 
and the ἀληθινά as αὐτὰ τὰ ἐπουράνια. 
See also the anonymous Valentinian 
in Epiph. Haer. xxxi. 5 (pp. 168, 169) 
ἀντίτυπος τοῦ προόντος ᾿Αγεννήτου, ἀν- 
τίτυπον τῆς προούσης τετράδος. And 
more especially for the pseudo-Cle- 
ment’s teaching here compare the 
Valentinian language, Iren. i. 5. 6 
ὃ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸ ἐκκλησίαν εἶναι λέγουσιν, 
ἀντίτυπον τῆς ἄνω Ἐκκλησίας. 
In such senses ἀντίτυπον depreciates 
relatively; and with this meaning 
the material elements in the eucha- 
rist were commonly called by the 
fathers dytiruma of the body and 


‘blood of Christ,e.g. Apost. Const. v. 14, 


Vi. 30, vii. 25: see Suicer Zhes. s.v. 
On the other hand ἀντίτυπον is some- 
times opposed to τύπος, as the fin- 
ished work to the rough model, the 
realization to the foreshadowing, in 
which case it extols relatively; comp, 
1 Pet. iii. 21. 





248 


αὐθεντικὸν μεταλήψεται. 


λάβητε. 


\ \ a , » 5 4. "4 , \ , 
Kat TO πνευμα Χριστόν, apa ουν O ὑβρίσας THV TapkKa 


εἶ \ 3 7 
ὕβρισεν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν. 


ψεται τοῦ πνεύματος, ὅ ἐστιν ὁ Χριστός. 
δύναται ἡ σὰρξ αὕτη μεταλαβεῖν ζωὴν καὶ ἀθανασίαν, 
κολληθέντος αὐτῇ τοῦ πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου. 
ἐξειπεῖν τις δύναται οὔτε λαλῆσαι ἃ ὑτοίμδλοεεν 6 
Κύριος τοῖς ἐκλεκτοῖς αὐτοῦ. 

XV. Οὐκ οἴομαι δὲ ὅτι μικρὰν συμβουλίαν ἐποιη-, 
σάμην περὶ ἐγκρατείας, ἣν ποιήσας τις οὐ μετανοήσει; 


I μεταλήψεται) CS. 


written above by the same hand. See the note on φιλοπονεῖν below, ὃ 19. 
ὑβρίσας...τὴν ἐκκλησίαν] is gui contumelia affecit carnem suam contumelia affecit 
carnem christi ecclesiam 5. This might possibly represent ὁ ὑβρίσας τὴν σάρκα 
[τὴν ἰδίαν, τοῦ χριστοῦ τὴν σάρκα] ὕβρισεν, τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, the words in bracke 
having been omitted in C by homeeoteleuton; but I am disposed to regard it as 


I. ἄρα οὖν κιτ.λ.1 This apparently 
refers not to what has immediately 
preceded, but to an application which 
the preacher has made of an evan- 
gelical text several chapters before, ὃ 8 
dpa οὖν τοῦτο λέγει Τηρήσατε τὴν σάρκα 
ἁγνὴν κιτιλ. It is almost impossible 
however to trace the connexion of 
thought in so loose a writer. 

3. τὴν σάρκα] as being the Jody 
of Christ. This language does not 
occur in S. Paul, for in Ephes. v. 30 
ἐκ τῆς σαρκὸς αὐτοῦ is an interpolation. 
The relation of Christ to the Church 
is represented by S. Paul as that of 
the Aead to the body, whereas here it 
is that of the sfzrz¢t to the body, so 
that ‘body’ is equivalent to ‘flesh’. 

Altogether our preacher seems to 
be guilty of much confusion in his 
metaphor in this context ; for here 
the relation of flesh to spirit repre- 
sents the relation of the Church to 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


/ oO ΄σ , 
apa οὖν τοῦτο λέγει, ἀδελ- 
/ i A , J rod 
poi, Τηρήσατε τὴν σάρκα iva τοῦ πνεύματος μετα- 
\ , 53 
εἰ δὲ λέγομεν εἶναι τὴν σάρκα τὴν ἐκκλησίαν. 


ὁ τοιοῦτος οὖν οὐ μεταλή- 


In C however it was first written ἀπολήψεται, and μετὰ is 

















[xiv 


τοσαύτην 


ve 
OUTE 


46 


Christ, whereas just above it has re- 


Church and Christ. The insertion 
in the Syriac does not remove the 
difficulty. See the criticism of Pho- 
tius on the inconsequence of this 
writer’s sentiments, quoted above on 
δ 1. | 
7. μεταλαβεῖν] With an accusa- 


monly in classical writers. On 
different sense of the two cases with 
this verb see Kiihner 11. p. 294 s¢ 
The propriety of the change here 
will be obvious. Similarly ro avé 
τικὸν μεταλήψεται above. 

8. τοῦ πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου] S 
above, I. p. 125. The language he: 
is still more unguarded than in § 9. 

9. ἐξειπεῖν] ‘express’; Clem. Rot 
48. “ἢ 

ἃ ἡτοίμασεν] A reference to t 




































xv| 


\ / \ ᾽ Ὡ 
καὶ λέγη καὶ ἀκούη. 


\ , a > ~ 
TO διδόναι τοῦ αἰτοῦντος. 


merely a paraphrastic rendering of S. 


same passage of which part has been 
already quoted by our preacher at 
the end of § 11. See the note on 
Clem. Rom. 34. 

XV. ‘He, that obeys this exhorta- 
tion to chastity, will save both him- 
self and the preacher. It is no small 
recompense to convert and save a 
perishing soul. Faith and love are 
the only return that speaker and 
hearer alike can make to God their 
Creator. So therefore let us be true 
to our belief, for God promises an 
immediate response, declaring Him- 
self more ready to give than we to 
ask. We must not grudge ourselves 
these bounties of His goodness ; for 
as the rewards of submission are 
great, so the punishment of disobedi- 
ence is great also.’ 

II. οἴομαι] The word has oc- 
curred twice already in this writer 
§§ 6, 14. 


13. καὶ ἑαυτὸν κιτ.λ.] 1 Tim. iv. 16 


εἰ 
ΠΝ 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


J \ 
ἀπολλυμένην ἀποστρέψαι εἰς TO σωθῆναι. 


λέγων καὶ ἀκούων] S translates as if it had read ὅ τε λέγων καὶ ὁ ἀκούων. 
πίστεως καὶ ἀγάπης] cum caritate et cum fide S, transposing the words. 

repetition of the preposition see above, I. p. 137. 
in illud ut det petitionem ejus qui petit ab ipso S, thus supplying a substantive to 
govern τοῦ αἰτοῦντος and mistaking the sense. 
guoniam igitur hac jucunditate et bonitate det jucundamur S. 


249 


/ me: ‘ / 
ἀλλὰ Kal ἑαυτὸν σώσει κἀμὲ τὸν συμβουλεύσαντα. 
\ ae, \ t \ \ 
μισθὸς yap οὐκ ἔστιν μικρὸς πλανωμένην ψυχὴν καὶ 


ταύτην γὰρ 


ἔχομεν τὴν ἀντιμισθίαν ἀποδοῦναι τῷ Θεῷ τῷ κτίσαντι 
ἡμᾶς, ἐὰν 6 λέγων καὶ ἀκούων μετὰ πίστεως καὶ ἀγάπης 
ἐμμείνωμεν οὖν ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἐπιστεύ- 
σαμεν δίκαιοι καὶ ὅσιοι, ἵνα μετὰ παρρησίας αἰτώμεν 
τὸν Θεὸν τὸν λέγοντα Ἔτι λάλοῦντός coy ἐρῶ idoy πᾶρ- 
εἰμι τοῦτο γὰρ τὸ ῥῆμα μεγάλης ἐστὶν ἐπαγγελίας 
σημεῖον. ἑτοιμότερον γὰρ ἑαυτὸν λέγει ὁ Κύριος εἰς 
τοσαύτης οὖν χρηστότητος 


It ἐποιησάμην] add. ὑμῖν 85, 17 6 
μετὰ 
On the 


22 els τὸ διδόναι τοῦ αἰτοῦντος] 


23 τοσαύτης... μεταλαμβάνοντες] 


καὶ σεαυτὸν σώσεις καὶ τοὺς ἀκούοντάς 
σου. See also Ρεϊον, ὃ 19. Harnack 
quotes Barnab. I μᾶλλον συγχαίρω 
ἐμαυτῷ ἐλπίζων σωθῆναι, ὅτι ἀληθῶς 
βλέπω ἐν ὑμῖν ἐκκεχυμένον..-πνεῦμα. 

14. μισθὸς κιτ.λ.} James ν. 20 ὁ ἐπι- 
στρέψας ἁμαρτωλὸν ἐκ πλάνη ς ὁδοῦ 
αὐτοῦ σώσει ψυχὴν ἐκ θανάτου κιτ.λ. 

16. ἀντιμισθίαν] A favourite word 
with our author, especially in this 
connexion ; see the note on ὃ 1. 

19. δίκαιοι καὶ ὅσιοι] See on §§ 1, 5. 

20. Ἔτι λαλοῦντος x.7.A.] Is. lviii. 
Q ὁ Θεὸς εἰσακούσεταί gov, ἔτι λαλοῦν- 
ros σου ἐρεῖ ᾿Ιδοὺ πάρειμ. Comp. 
Apost. Const. iii. 7, where, as here, it 
is quoted ἐρῶ (though with a ν.1.), 
probably (as Lagarde points out) 
from a confusion with Is. lxv. 24 ἔτι 
λαλούντων αὐτῶν ἐρῶ, Ti ἐστιν; So too 
it is given ‘dzcam’ in Iren. iv. 17. 3, 
but ἐρεῖ in Justin Dza/. 15 (p. 233). 

23. τοῦ αἰτοῦντος] sc. eis τὸ αἰτεῖν 
‘more prompt to give than the asker 








ak i ὸ 


250 THE EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. [xv 
μεταλαμβάνοντες μὴ φθονήσωμεν ἑαυτοῖς τυχεῖν TOTOU= 
των ἀγαθῶν. ὅσην γὰρ ἡδονὴν ἔχει τὰ ῥήματα ταῦτα 
τοῖς ποιήσασιν αὐτά, τοσαύτην κατάκρισιν ἔχει τοῖς 


παρακουσασιν. 


XVI. “ὥστε, ἀδελφοί, ἀφορμὴν λαβόντες οὐ 
μικρὰν εἰς τὸ μετανοῆσαι, καιρὸν ἔχοντες ἐπιστρέψωμεν, 
ἐπὶ τὸν καλέσαντα ἡμᾶς Θεόν, ἕως ἔτι ἔχομεν TOV 
παραδεχόμενον ἡμᾶς. ἐὰν γὰρ ταῖς ἡδυπαθείαις Taq 
ταις ἀποταξώμεθα' καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν ἡμῶν νικήσωμεν ἐν, 


I τοσούτων] C3 τοιούτων (?) 5. 


σοῦ] domini nostri tesu christi S. 


is to ask’; as in the Collect ‘more 
ready to hear than we to pray’. The 
Syriac translator has misunderstood 
the sense. 

XVI. ‘Therefore let us repent 
and return to God betimes. If we 
conquer our appetites and desires, 
we shall obtain mercy of Jesus. For 
be assured, the day of judgment is at 
hand; as a heated furnace shall it 
be ; the heavens shall be fused and 
the earth shall be as melting lead; 
and all the deeds of men shall be 
revealed. Almsgiving is a token of 
repentance. Fasting is greater than 
prayer, and almsgiving than both. 
Love covereth a multitude of sins, 
and prayer delivereth from death. 
Blessed is he that aboundeth in these 
things. For almsgiving removeth 
the burden of sin.’ 

5. ἀφορμὴν λαβόντες) So Rom. 
vii. 8, 11. Conversely ἀφορμὴν δι- 
δόναι, 2 Cor. v. 12, 1 Tim. v. 14, Ign. 
Trall. ὃ. 

6. καιρὸν ἔχοντε]͵ So ὃ 8 ἕως 
ἔχομεν καιρὸν μετανοίας, ὃ 9 ὡς ἔχομεν 
καιρὸν τοῦ ἰαθῆναι. 

7. τὸν παραδεχόμενον)] It is yet 
the καιρὸς εὐπρόσδεκτος (2 Cor. vi. 2). 

ἡδυπαθείαις] See again ὃ 17, Not 


) 5 5 ἀδελφοί] add. ἀγαπητοί S. ἐἃ8 παρᾶ 
δεχόμενον] πατέρα δεχόμενον (ΠΡΑ for ΠΑΡΑ) C; patrem qui accifit 8. 11 “Iy- 





















16 κρείσσων νηστεία προσευχῆς] Ο; 


a Biblical word. On this word, which — 
was highly distasteful to the Stoics, 
see Wyttenbach on Plut. Mor. 132. 
c. It occurs at least as early as” 
Xenophon, Cyr. vii. 5. 74. 
9. ἀποταξώμεθα) See on ὃ 6. . 
11. ἔρχεται «.7.A.] Mal. iv. 1 ἰδοὺ 
ἡμέρα ἔρχεται καιομένη ὡς κλίβανος. 
13. τινες] This is obviously οο- 
rupt, though both our authorities 
are agreed, I think that for τινες we 
should probably read [ai] δυνάμεις, 
the expression being taken from Is. 
XXXiV. 4 καὶ τακήσονται πᾶσαι ai Suva- 
pets τῶν οὐρανῶν ; comp. Afoc, Petr. 
in Macar, Magn. iv. 7 (p.165, Blondel) 
καὶ τακήσεται πᾶσα δύναμις οὐρανοῦ. 
Where the Ms was torn and letters 
had dropped out, it might easily be 
read tinec. Comp. 2 Pet. iii. 7, 10, 
Orac. Sib. iii. 689 sq, Melito Afol. 12, 
p-432 (Otto). Though the existing text 
might be explained with Harnack an¢ 
Hilgenfeld by the common belief 
several heavens (comp. e.g. Orig. ¢ 
Cels. vi. 23), 1 can hardly think the 
our Clementine writer would have 6 
pressed himself in this way, even 1 
he had believed that some of t 
heavens would be spared from 1 
conflagration. The pseudo-Jus 











































xvi] 


΄ > 4 \ 
Ἱπροσευχῆς, ἐλεημοσύνη δὲ 


add. melior (xpeloowv) 8. 


| Quaest. ad Orthod. 74 probably refers 
to this passage: see I. p. 178 sq. 

14. μόλιβος] This seems to be the 
correct form in the Lxx generally, 
Exod. xv. 10, Num. xxxi. 22, Job 
xix. 24, etc. Both μόλιβος and μόλιβ- 
Sos are certified by their occurrence 
in metre. 

15. κρύφια καὶ φανερά] An exhaus- 
tive expression : comp. Wisd. vii. 21 
ὅσα τέ ἐστι κρυπτὰ καὶ ἐμφανῆ ἔγνων. 

καλὸν οὖν κιτ.λ.] If there is no cor- 
ruption in the text of this passage, it 
offers another illustration of the cri- 
ticism of Photius on our pseudo- 
Clement, 8221. 126, quoted above, 
§ 1. This however may be doubt- 
ful. The preacher seems to be 
thinking of Tobit xii. 8, 9 ἀγαθὸν 
προσευχὴ μετὰ νηστείας καὶ ἐλεημοσύ- 
νης καὶ δικαιοσύνης... καλὸν ποιῆσαι 
ἐλεημοσύνην ἢ θησαυρίσαι χρυσίον" 
ἐλεημοσύνη γὰρ ἐκ θανάτου ῥύεται καὶ 
αὕτη ἀποκαθαριεῖ πᾶσαν ἁμαρτίαν, where 
the first sentence as read in S is 
ἀγαθὸν προσευχὴ μετὰ νηστείας καὶ 
ἐλεημοσύνη μετὰ δικαιοσύνης ὑπὲρ ἀμ- 
φότερα. Here the very same function 
ἐκ θανάτου ῥύεσθαι, which our text as- 
signs to prayer, is assigned to alms- 
giving. Moreover our text having 
Stated that almsgiving is greater than 
‘prayer immediately afterwards as- 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


251 


- - \ 7 \ / 
τῷ μὴ ποιεῖν Tas ἐπιθυμίας αὐτῆς Tas πονηρᾶς, μετα- 
/ ΄σ ͵ ΄- 
ληψόμεθα τοῦ ἐλέους ᾿Ιησοῦ. 
af ς ε eas ς , ' ‘ 
ἤδη ἡ timépa τῆς κρίσεως ὡς KAIBANOC κἀιόμενος, Kal 


/ δ φ«΄ 3: 
Γινώσκετε δὲ ὅτι ἔρχετδι 


’ ' a > a \ ΄ _ 
TAKHCONTaI {τινες τῶν OYPANON, Kal πᾶσα ἢ γῆ ὡς 
, > \ \ / \ / ’ \ 
μόλιβος ἐπὶ πυρὶ τηκόμενος, Kal τότε φανήσεται Ta 
/ \ af a > V4 
κρύφια καὶ φανερὰ ἔργα τῶν ἀνθρώπων. 
/ / / / / 
ἐλεημοσύνη ὡς μετάνοια ἁμαρτίας" κρείσσων νηστεία 


\ 
καλὸν οὖν 


ἀμφοτέρων: ἀγάπη δὲ κὰ- 


bonum jejunium, oratio, S; but probably } has dropped out.. This insertion 
would bring the Syriac into conformity with the Greek. 


17 ἐλεημοσύνη δὲ] 


signs a more important work to 
prayer than to almsgiving. These two 
facts combined throw doubt on the 
integrity of the text. It would seem 
as though some words had been trans- 
posed and others perhaps omitted. 

16. ὡς μετάνοια ἁμαρτίας ‘as repent- 
ance from sin is good’, if the text be 
correct ; for the sense will hardly 
allow us to translate ‘as being re- 
pentance from sin’. I suppose that 
ἐλεημοσύνη here has its restricted 
sense of ‘almsgiving’, as in every 
passage where it occurs in the N.T. 

17. ἀμφοτέρων] See Ecclus. xl. 
24 ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα ἐλεημοσύνη ῥύσε- 
ται, where however the ἀμφότερα 
are ἀδελφοὶ καὶ βοήθεια eis καιρὸν 
θλίψεως. 

ἀγάπη δὲ κιτ.λ.] Taken from 1 Pet. 
iv. 8, where it is doubtless a quota- 
tion from Prov. x. 12. See the note 
on Clem. Rom. 49, where also it is 
quoted. There can be no doubt that 
in the original context it refers to 
passing over without notice, and so 
forgiving, the sins of others, nor is 
there any reason for interpreting it 
otherwise as adopted by S. Peter or 
by the genuine Clement. In James 
v. 20 the expression καλύψει πλῆθος 
ἁμαρτιῶν seems still to be used of the 
sins of others, but in the sense of 








252 


λύπτει πλῆθος AMAPTION’ 


/ , €¥ ΄σ 
δήσεως ἐκ θανάτου ῥύεται. μακάριος πᾶς ὁ εὑρεθεὶς 
᾽ ΄ ‘ 
ἐν τούτοις πλήρης" ἐλεημοσύνη γὰρ κούφισμα ἁμαρ- 


/ 
Tlas γίνεται. 


XVII. 


/ € ΑΝ / 
μὴ τις ἥμων παραπόληται. 
ef \ ον / \ ΄ ΄σ΄ 
ἵνα καὶ τοῦτο πράσσωμεν, ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώλων ἀποσπᾶν. 


7 ἵνα καὶ τοῦτο πράσσωμεν] so apparently S; καὶ τοῦτο πράσσομεν (om. ἵνα) C. 
Similar omissions of ἵνα appear in AC in § 48 ἐξομολογήσωμαι (where S is correct), 
and in S itself in ii § 11 κομισώμεθα (where AC are correct). 
but it perhaps does not represent a different reading. 


(adversus) S, as if πρός: 


12 προσέχειν καὶ πιστεύειν] S; πιστεύειν καὶ προσέχειν C. 


‘burying them from the sight of 
God, wiping them out by the con- 
version and repentance of the sinner’. 
On the other hand our preacher 
seems certainly to take it as mean- 
ing ‘atones for a multitude of one’s 
own sins’, as it is taken by some 
modern commentators: and so too 
Tertull. Scorp. 6. Clement of Alex- 
andria is hardly consistent with him- 
self. In Stvom. ii. 15 (p. 463) he ex- 
plains it of God’s love in Christ 
which forgives the sins of men; 
whereas in Quis div. salv. 38 (p. 
959) he takes it to mean that love, 
working in a man, enables him to 
repent and put away his own sins; 
and so apparently in Strom. i. 27 (p. 
423). Origen Juz Lev. Hom. ii. § 5 (11. 
p. 190) refers it to the man’s own 
sins; but the turn which he gives to 
the passage is shown by his quoting 
in juxtaposition Luke vii. 47 ἀφέωνται 
αὐτῆς ai ἁμαρτίαι ai πολλαί, ὅτι ἠγάπη- 
σεν πολύ---Δὲὴ explanation which re- 
moves the doctrinal objection to this 
interpretation, though the exegetical 
argument against it from the connex- 
ion of the passage in its original con- 
text (Prov. x. 12) still remains. 

I, “καλῆς συνειδήσεως] Heb. xiii. 
18. A commoner expression is ἀγαθὴ 


THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. [Xvi 


προσευχὴ δὲ ἐκ καλῆς συνει- 


, > ε « ; 
Μετανοήσωμεν οὖν ἐξ ὅλης καρδίας, ἵνα 
























> 2 ᾽} 
εἰ γὰρ ἐντολὰς ἔχομεν, 


10 περὶ]  Ο; ad 
14 εἰς οἶκον ἀπαλ- 


συνείδησις ; see the note Clem. Rom. 
41. For καθαρὰ συνείδησις see Clem. 
Rom. 45 with the note. j 

2. ἐκ θανάτου ῥύεται] This is said 
of ἐλεημοσύνη in Tobit iv. 10, xii. 9. 
(already quoted); and of δικαιοσύνη, 
which also signifies ‘almsgiving’, in 
Prov. x. 2, xi. 4; but not of προσευχή. 
See the note on καλὸν οὖν κιτιλ. above, 

3. ἐν] Comp. Ecclus. 1. 6 σελήνη. 
πλήρης ἐν ἡμέραις. ἢ 

ἐλεημοσύνη γὰρ κ-.τ.λ.] Prov. xvi. 6. 
(xv. 27) ἐλεημοσύναις καὶ πίστεσιν 
ἀποκαθαίρονται ἁμαρτίαι, Ecclus, iii. 30° 
ἐλεημοσύνη ἐξιλάσεται ἁμαρτίας: comp. 
Dan. iv. 24 τὰς ἁμαρτίας σου ἐν ΔΗ 
μοσύναις λύτρωσαι (Theod. Ἂ 

κούφισμα ἁμαρτίας] i.e. ‘removes 
the load of sin’, as with Bunyan’s 
pilgrims. So 3 Esdr. viii. 83 ov, Ki- 
pte, ὁ κουφίσας τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶ 
comp. Ezr. ix. 13 ἐκούφισας ἡμῶν 
ἀνομίας. al 

XVII. ‘Let us therefore repent 
lest we perish. For, if we are com- 
manded to convert even the heathen 
from their idolatry, how unpardon- 
able would it be to allow the ruil 
of a soul which has once known th 
true God! Therefore let us assis 
the weak, that we and they alik 
may be saved. And let us not giv 













































vit] 


νουθετήσωμεν. 


τεσθαι: see above, I. p. 136 sq. 


heed only while we are listening to 
τὶς instructions of our presbyters, but 

also when we have departed to our 
Bhomes. Let us also meet together 
more frequently, and thus endeavour 
to make progress in the command- 
ments of the Lord. He has declared 
that He will come to gather together 
all nations and languages. Then the 
@unbelievers shall see His glory and 
shall bewail their past obstinacy. 
Their worm shall not die; and their 
sufferings shall be a spectacle to all 
men. Meanwhile the righteous, see- 
ing their torments, shall give glory 
to God, because there is hope for 
His true and zealous servants.’ 

5. Meravonowpev x.t.A.] The ex- 
pression μετανοεῖν ἐξ ὅλης [Tis] καρδίας 
has occurred already ὃ 8, and will 
occur again § 19; comp. also § 9 
μετανοῆσαι ἐξ εἰλικρινοῦς καρδίας. 

6. παραπόληται)] ‘perish by the 
way, i.e. ‘unexpectedly, through care- 
lessness, without sufficient cause’; as 
e.g. Lucian Gymn. 13 ὁρῷ οὐδενὸς 
μεγάλου ἕνεκα παραπολλυμένας, lVigr. 
13 δέδοικα μὴ παραπόληται μεταξὺ 
λουόμενος, Hermot. 21 περιόψει pe 
παραπολόμενον. 

ἐντολὰς ἔχομεν] It was our Lord’s 
command, Matt. xxviii. 19 sq; comp. 
Mark xvi. 15. If we adopt the reading 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


253 


αἱ κατηχεῖν, πόσῳ μᾶλλον ψυχὴν ἤδη γινώσκουσαν 
τὸν Θεὸν οὐ δεῖ ἀπόλλυσθαι; συλλάβωμεν οὖν ἑαυτοῖς 
καὶ τοὺς ἀσθενοῦντας ἀνάγειν περὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν, ὅπως 
σωθῶμεν ἅπαντες" καὶ ἐπιστρέψωμεν ἀλλήλους καὶ 
καὶ μὴ μόνον ἄρτι δοκῶμεν προσέχειν 
καὶ πιστεύειν ἐν τῷ νουθετεῖσθαι ἡμᾶς ὑπὸ τῶν πρεσ- 
Ἰβυτέρων, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅταν εἰς οἶκον ἀπαλλαγῶμεν, μνη- 
λαγῶμεν] C; domum dimissi fuerimus et cessaverimus ab omnibus S. The variation 


might easily be explained by an omission in C owing to homceoteleuton, but it is 
more probably a periphrastic rendering of S to express the full force of ἀπαλλάτ- 


of the Greek MS, καὶ τοῦτο πράσσομεν 
must be taken as parenthetical so 
far as regards the structure, ‘and we 
obey this command’; so that ἀπο- 
σπᾶν will then be governed by ἐν- 
Todas ἔχομεν. 

9. συλλάβωμεν κ.τ.λ.] ‘Let us there- 
Sore assist one another, that we may 
elevate the weak also as concerning 
that whichis good’. This may be the 
meaning, if the text is correct; but 
it would seem as though some verb 
had fallen out after καί. For ἑαυτοῖς 
see the note on ὃ 13; and for ἀνάγειν 
comp. Clem. Rom. 49. 

11. καὶ ἐπιστρέψωμεν] to be con- 
nected with συλλάβωμεν, and not 
made dependent on ὅπως, as it is 
punctuated by Bryennios. 

12. μὴ μόνον ἄρτι κιτ.λ] This 
clearly shows that the work before 
us is a sermon delivered in church ; 
comp. ὃ 19 pera τὸν Θεὸν τῆς ἀληθείας 
ἀναγινώσκω ὑμῖν ἔντευξιν k.7.d. 

13. τῶν πρεσβυτέρων] ‘the pres- 
byters, who delivered their exhorta- 
tions after the reading of the Scrip- 
tures; see the note on ὃ 19 μετὰ 
τὸν Θεὸν κιτιλ. This sermon itself 
was obviously such an exhortation; 
but the preacher, doubtless himself a 
‘presbyter’, puts himself in the posi- 
tion of his hearers and uses the 








254 


μονεύωμεν τῶν τοῦ Κυρίου ἐνταλμάτων, καὶ μὴ ἀντ. 
παρελκώμεθα ἀπὸ τῶν κοσμικῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν, ἀλλα. 
πυκνότερον προσερχόμενοι vt anand προκόπτειν ey 
ταῖς ἐντολαῖς τοῦ Κυρίου, ἵνα πάντες TO αὐτὸ φρο- 
νοῦντες συνηγμένοι ὦμεν ἐπὶ τὴν ζωήν. 
Κύριος “Epyomal cynararein πάντὰὸ τὰ ἔθνη, yAdC Kal 


rA@ccac’ 


a ὅτε ἐλθὼν λυτρώσεται ἡμᾶς ἕκαστον κατὰ τὰ 


ἔργα αὐτοῦ. καὶ 


’ ε 7 \ , J 
κράτος οἱ ἄπιστοι, Kat ξενισθήσονται ἰδόντες τὸ βα- 


3 προσερχόμενοι] C3 προσευχόμενοι 8. 
9. τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ κράτος] gloriam ejus in robore et potestate S. This again 
might be explained by an omission in C owing to the repetition of similar begitis Γ 
nings of words, τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ [κατὰ τὴν δύναμιν (or τὴν ἰσχὺν)] καὶ τὸ Kpdros; 
but such an expression in Greek would be very awkward. 
therefore that robur et potestas is a double rendering of τὸ κράτος. 


third person, by a common form of 
speech, to avoid egotism: comp. e.g. 
Clem. Rom. 63 ἡσυχάσαντες τῆς pa- 
ralas στάσεως...καταντήσωμεν. 

I. ἀντιπαρελκώμεθα] ‘be dragged 
off in the opposite direction’ ; comp. 
Pers. Sa¢.v. 154 ‘duplici in diversum 
scinderis hamo’. The lexicons do 
not give this word. 

2. κοσμικῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν] The ex- 
pression occurs Tit. ii. 12. The word 
κοσμικὸς is apparently not found in 
the Lxx, and only once besides (in 
a somewhat different sense) in the 
N. T., Heb. ix. I. 

3. πυκνότερον προσερχύμενοι] ‘com- 
ing more frequently’, i.e. ‘to this 
place of meeting’, or perhaps ‘to 
the presence of God’ (comp. Heb. 
x. I, 22, Clem. Rom. 23, 29). On 
these injunctions to more frequent 
services, see the note on Ign. 221. 
13 σπουδάζετε πυκνότερον συνέρχεσ- 
θαι ; comp. ib. Polyc. 4 πυκνότερον 
συναγωγαὶ γινέσθωσαν. The Syriac 
reading however may be correct, 


THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


΄ δὲ / \ ε / - 3 / 
τοῦτο δὲ λέγει τὴν per τῆς emipana 


OYONTAI THN AGZAN 
























εἶπεν γὰρ ὁξ 


ya 


αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ 


7 τὴν ἡμέραν] super (de) die 8... 


It is more probable 
The preposi- 


5. ὁ Κύριος] Perhaps meaning 
‘Christ’, as Harnack takes it, re- 
ferring to § 3, where Is. xxix, 13. 
seems to be put into the mouth of 
our Lord. 4 

6. Ἔρχομαι k.r.d.] From Is. lxvi. 18 
ἔρχομαι συναγαγεῖν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη καὶ 
τὰς γλώσσας, καὶ ἥξουσι καὶ ὄψονται. 
τὴν δόξαν pov. There is nothing σΟΥ τὶ 
responding to φυλὰς in either the 
Hebrew or the LXX; and our preach- 
er must have got it from the familiar 
combination of ‘nations and tongues’ 
in Daniel, e.g. iii. 7 πάντα τὰ ἔθνη 
φυλαὶ καὶ γλῶσσαι in the LXx. ἡ 

7. τοῦτο δὲ λέγει] ‘but by this hi 
means’: see the note on § 8. d 

τὴν ἡμέραν κιτιλ.] The same ex: 
pression has occurred § 12, where 
see the note on ἐπιφανείας. ἡ 

8. λυτρώσεται] It is called ἡμέρα 
ἀπολυτρώσεως in ΕΡΠ65. iv. 30. F 
other passages, where ἀπολύτρωσ' 
refers to the final redemption, s 
Luke xxi. 28, Rom. viii. 23. S 

ἕκαστον «.r.\.] As only those wl 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 255 


xvii] 


- -“ ΄ Α nw 
σίλειον τοῦ κόσμου ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ λέγοντες, Οὐαὶ ἡμῖν, 
/ 53 γ᾽ \ 4 \ 
ὅτι σὺ ἧς καὶ οὐκ ἤδειμεν Kal οὐκ ἐπιστεύομεν, Kal 

3 3 7 ~~ ͵ ~ > / 
οὐκ ἐπειθόμεθα τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις τοῖς ἀναγγέλλουσιν 
΄ ΄σ - / ~ ε ’ > a > 
ἡμῖν περὶ τῆς σωτηρίας ἡμῶν" Kal Ὁ cK@AHZ ayTON oY 
τελευτήσει Kai τὸ πῦρ ἀγτῶν οὐ CBecOHceTal Kal ECONTAI 
> σ΄ , ͵ \ / , - 
εἰς Spacin πάοῃ capKi. THY ἡμέραν ἐκείνην Eyer τῆς 
« af \ > sae 7 \ 
κρίσεως, ὅταν ὄψονται τοὺς ἐν ἡμῖν ἀσεβήσαντας Kal 

A \ 3 “- ΄ 

παραλογισαμένους Tas évtoAas ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ. οἱ 
\ 7 / \ / 
δὲ δίκαιοι εὐπραγήσαντες καὶ ὑπομείναντες Tas βασά- 
tion (in place of the conjunction) may then be accounted for in two ways; (1) The 
translator read κατὰ κράτος for καὶ τὸ κράτος ; or (2) A Syriac transcriber inadver- 


tently wrote 3 for ἢ. The latter explanation seems to be more probable: see 
above, p. 181. 10 ἰδόντες] C; εἰδότες (from ιδο!τες) S. II τοῦ 


oF λέγοντες] e¢ tunc dicent S. 





shall be released are contemplated, 
this must imply different grades of 
happiness. I do not see sufficient 
reason for doubting the genuineness 
of λυτρώσεται. 

9. καὶ dyorvra] A continuation 
of the quotation from Isaiah, the 
intervening words being a paren- 
ἢ thetical explanation. See also Matt. 
xxiv. 30, Rev. i. 7. 

10, &enoOnoorvra] ‘shall be a- 
ἢ mazed’, as 1 Pet. iv. 4, 12. The 
active ξενίζοντα, ‘ perplexing’, ‘amaz- 
ing’, occurs in Acts xvii. 20, This 
sense is found in Polybius and from 
his time onward. See also the note 
on ἕενισμόν, Ign. Ephes. το. 

τὸ βασίλειον] ‘the kingdom’ or 
‘sovereignty’; see the note on § 6. 
We must understand ἐν τῷ Ἰησοῦ 
‘in the hands, in the power, of Jesus’, 
as in the common idiom εἶναι ἔν τινι: 
see Rost u. Palm Griech. Worterd. 
S.v. evi. 2. Ὁ. 

12. σὺ ἧς] ‘Thou wast He’; 566 
esp. John viii. 24 ἐὰν μὴ πιστεύσητε 
ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι, ἀποθανεῖσθε ἐν ταῖς 




























ie 
" 
La 
δὴ 


κόσμου] mundi huius 8. See the note on § 19 ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. 


ἐν τῷ ᾿Ἰησοῦ] om. 
17 ἡμῖν] 5; ὑμῖν Ο. 


ἁμαρτίαις ὑμῶν, 10. ver. 28 τότε γνώ- 
σεσθε ὅτι ἐγώ εἶμι, xiii. 19 ἵνα 
πιστεύσητε... .ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι. The 
preacher seems to be alluding to 
this language of our Lord, as re- 
corded by St John. 

14. ὁ σκώληξ κιτ.λ.] From Is. Ixvi. 
24, the last verse of the prophet. 
Our preacher has already quoted 
this passage, § 7; see the note there. 

17. ὅταν ὄψονται] ‘when men shall 
see’, the nominative being sug- 
gested by the preceding εἰς ὅρασιν 
πάσῃ σαρκί. For the future indica- 
tive with ὅταν see Winer xlii. p. 388; 
but no dependence can be placed on 
the MS in such a case. 

18, παραλογισαμένους] ‘Played false 
with’, ‘attempted to cheat’; see 
Ign. Magn. 3 τὸν ἀόρατον mapadoyi- 
ζεται (with the note). See 4 Esdr, 
vii, 72 with Bensly’s note (p. 63). 

19. εὐπραγήσαντες] If the reading 
be correct, it must mean ‘having 
been virtuous’ and not (as else- 
where) ‘having been prosperous’ ; 
comp, δικαιοπραγεῖν. 














256 THE EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. [xvi 





\ / A ε / ΄ ΄σ ε 
νους καὶ μισήσαντες τὰς ἡδυπαθείας τῆς ψυχῆς, ὅταν 
/ \ a “ ΔΩ͂ 
θεάσωνται τοὺς ἀστοχήσαντας καὶ ἀρνησαμένους διὰ, 
ε ’ \ \ ~ sl ae a “ ἽΝ 
τῶν λόγων ἢ διὰ τῶν ἔργων τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν, ὅπως κολά- 


διδόντες τῷ Θεῷ αὐτῶν, λέγοντες ὅτι ἴέεσται ἐλπὶς 5 
τῷ δεδουλευκότι Θεῷ ἐξ ὅλης καρδίας. 


XVIII. 


’ a , ΄ ~~ \ \ 9 ΄-«φ @ 
στούντων, τῶν δεδουλευκότων τῷ Θεῷ, καὶ μὴ ἐκ τῶν 
/ a \ \ Δ 
κρινομένων ἀσεβῶν. καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸς πανθαμαρτωλὸς, 
a’ \ , \ \ U > a) x 2 
wv Kal μήπω φυγὼν Tov πειρασμὸν, ἀλλ ETL ὧν EVI 


2 διὰ] ἢ διὰ S. 
5 διδόντες] S; δόντες Ο. 


I. ἡδυπαθείας] See the note on 816. 

2. ἀστοχήσαντας)] ‘missed the 
mark’, ‘gone astray’; see 1 Tim. 
i. 6, vi. 21, 2 Tim. ii. 18. The word 
is not uncommon in Polybius and 
later classical authors. 

4. πυρὶ ἀσβέστῳ] Matt. iii, 12, 
Mark ix. 43, Luke iii.17. For the re- 
ference of pseudo-Justin to this state- 
ment see I. p. 178 sq. 

XVIII. ‘Let us take our place 
with those who, having served God, 
will join in this thanksgiving. I 
myself, though I am still surrounded 
by the temptations of the devil, yet 
strive to follow after righteousness, 
that I may escape the judgment to 
come.’ 

9. πανθαμαρτωλός)] The word is 
not given in the lexicons. Compare 
πανθαμαρτητός Apost. Const. vii. 18, 
Barnab. 20 (where the MSS agree in 
writing it without an aspirate), παντά- 
δικος Philo de Creat. Pr. 3 (11. p. 362). 

11. ὀργάνοις] ‘the instruments, 
engines’; comp. Ign. Kom. 4. The 
word does not occur in the N.T.; 
and in the Lxx it seems to be ap- 
plied only to musical instruments, 


Kai ἡμεῖς οὖν γενώμεθα ἐκ τῶν εὐχαρι- 


4 πυρὶ] C; εἰ zgne S. 
7 οὖν] add. ἀδελφοί [μου] 8. 
φεύγων C; S has oop which perhaps represents φυγών. 






















ἔσονται] add. ἐν ἀγαλλιάσει S. 


10 φυγὼν] — 
15 ἔντευξιν] C3 


or military engines, or the like. 
The metaphor here ἰδ probably — 
military; comp. 2 Macc. xii. 27 
ἐνθάδε ὀργάνων καὶ βελῶν πολλαὶ 
παραθέσεις, and see Ephes. vi. 16 
τὰ βέλη τοῦ πονηροῦ [τὰ] πεπυρωμένα. 
The preacher finds himself ἐν ἀμῴι- 
βόλῳ, the enemy having environed 
him with his engines of war. 3 

12. δικαιοσύνην διώκειν] A phrase 
occurring in the Pastoral Epistles, 
1 Tim. vi. 11, 2 Tim, ii. 22 (comp. 
Rom. ix. 30). q 

κἂν ἐγγύς] ‘at all events near, 
if I cannot actually reach it’, For 
this use of κἂν comp. Ign. Zphes. 10° 
κἂν ἐκ τῶν ἔργων, with the note. 

XIX. ‘Therefore, brothers 2 
sisters, I have exhorted you to give 
heed to the Scriptures, that ye may 
save both me and yourselves. Your 
hearty repentance and earnest pur- 
suit of salvation is the return whi 
I ask for my trouble. Your ze 
will thus stimulate all the youn; 
who have any regard for godlines: 
And let us not be annoyed when w 
are admonished and turned awa 
from sin. Half-heartedness and di! 


































why διδόντας. 


governs τῆς ἀληθείας by ἔντευξιν. 
vobis verba (or oracula) dei 8. 


belief obscure our sense of right and 
rong; and our understandings are 
larkened by our lusts. Let us prac- 
ise righteousness. Blessed are they 
ho obey these precepts. They may 
ffer in this world, but they will 
eap the fruit of immortality. Let 
ot the godly man be sorrowful, 
he suffer now. An eternal life in 
Beaven awaits him, where he shall 
Bve in bliss with the fathers, and 
yhere sorrow shall have no place.’ 

14. ἀδελφοὶ καὶ ἀδελφαί] Comp. 
20. So Barnadb. 1 υἱοὶ καὶ θυγα- 
Bepes, Rel. Fur. Eccl. p. 74 (Lagarde). 
μετὰ τὸν Θεὸν κ.τ.λ.] 1.6. ‘After 
ou have heard the voice of God 
the Scriptures’, as it is rightly 
plained by Bryennios. The ser- 
hon or exhortation followed imme- 


the early Church: Justin AZol. 
67 συνέλευσις γίνεται καὶ τὰ ἀπομνη- 
ονεύματα τῶν ἀποστόλων ἢ τὰ συγ- 
nd, ματα τῶν προφητῶν ἀναγινώσκεται, 
3 pis ἐγχωρεῖ" εἶτα, παυσαμένου τοῦ 
ἱνώσκοντος, 6 προεστὼς διὰ “λόγου 
νουθεσίαν καὶ πρόκλησιν τῆς τῶν 


CLEM. II. 


supplicationem, id est, admonitionem S; 


ΧΙΧ] AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 257 


έσοις τοῖς ὀργάνοις τοῦ διαβόλου, σπουδάζω τὴν 
δικαιοσύνην διώκειν, ὅπως ἰσχύσω κἀν ἐγγὺς αὐτῆς 
ενέσθαι, φοβούμενος τὴν κρίσιν τὴν μέλλουσαν. 

XIX. “Wore, ἀδελφοὶ καὶ ἀδελφαί, μετὰ τὸν 
Θεὸν τῆς ἀληθείας ἀναγινώσκω ὑμῖν ἔντευξιν εἰς τὸ 
προσέχειν τοῖς γεγραμμένοις, ἵνα καὶ ἑαυτοὺς σώσητε 
αἱ τὸν ἀναγινώσκοντα ἐν ὑμῖν: μισθὸν γὰρ αἰτῶ ὑμᾶς 
ὁ μετανοῆσαι ἐξ ὅλης καρδίας σωτηρίαν ἑαυτοῖς καὶ 
τοῦτο γὰρ ποιήσαντες σκοπὸν πᾶσιν 


clearly a gloss. See I. p. 141. S 
17 Tov ἀναγινώσκοντα ἐν ὑμῖν] me gui lego 


19 σκοπὸν] S; κόπον C, This reading of S 
was anticipated by Bensly, Gebhardt, and Hilgenfeld. 


καλῶν τούτων μιμήσεως ποιεῖται ; Orig. 
¢. Cels. iii. 50 καὶ 80 ἀναγνωσμάτων 
καὶ διὰ τῶν eis αὐτὰ διηγήσεων mporpe- 
movres μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν εἰς τὸν Θεὸν τῶν 
ὅλων εὐσέβειαν καὶ τὰς συνθρόνους ταύ- 
Tn ἀρετάς, ἀποτρέποντες δὲ κιτ.λ. ; Apost. 
Const, ii. 54 μετὰ τὴν ἀνάγνωσιν καὶ 
τὴν ψαλμῳδίαν καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ ταῖς γρα- 
dais διδασκαλίαν. See also the notes 
on ὃ 17 μὴ μόνον ἄρτι x.7.A. and the 
introduction, p. 195. For the ex- 
pression ὁ Θεὸς τῆς ἀληθείας see 
ὃ. 3 τὸν πατέρα τῆς ἀληθείας (comp. 
§ 20). Its use here as ἃ synonyme 
for the Scripture is explained by the 
preachers language above ὃ 13, τὰ 
λόγια TOD Θεοῦ, λέγει ὁ Θεός. 

15. ἔντευξιν] ‘appeal’ ‘entreaty’; 
as e.g. Justin Afol. i. τ (p. 53), 
Joseph. Anz. xvi. 2. 5, Philo Viz. 
Moys. iii. 32 (1. p. 172), and so most 
frequently in classical authors. For 
its commoner sense in Christian 
writers, ‘supplication to God’, see 
the note on Clem. Rom. 63. 

16. tvaxaix.r.A.] Comp. Ezek. iii.21. 

18. μετανοῆσαι x.t.d.] See the note 


§ 17. 


17 


"(Ὁ 








258 


τοῖς νέοις θήσομεν τοῖς βουλομένοις περὶ τὴν εὐσέβεια , 
καὶ τὴν χρηστότητα τοῦ Θεοῦ φιλοπονεῖν. 
ἀηδῶς ἔχωμεν καὶ ἀγανακτῶμεν οἱ ἄσοφοι, ὅταν τις 
ἡμᾶς νουθετῇ καὶ ἐπιστρέφη ἀπὸ τῆς ἀδικίας εἰς τὴν 


/ 
δικαιοσύνην. 


σκομεν διὰ τὴν διψυχίαν καὶ ἀπιστίαν τὴν ἐνοῦσαν ἐν 
τοῖς στήθεσιν ἡμῶν, καὶ ἐεκοτίομεθὰ THN διάνοιὰν ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν τῶν ματαίων. | 
καιοσύνην ἵνα εἰς τέλος σωθώμεν. 
ὑπακούοντες τοῖς προστάγμασιν" 

2 φιλοπονεῖν] manifestent amorem laboris S: see Michaelis in Castell. Lex. 577. 


Ρ. 656. The scribe of C has first written φιλοσοφεῖν, but has afterwards corrected 
See p. 206. 


it so as to be read φιλοπονεῖν. 
sipientes S. 5 ἐνίοτε] S; ἔνια C. 


the less hesitation in striking out τούτῳ here because the general tendency of 8 i 
to insert the pronoun, not to omit it, in this connexion: e.g. ὃ 5, 19, 38, 60, ii. 18) 
ἀθάνατον] S; δὲ θάνατον C. The correction was obvious, even before the reading 
of S was known; and the only question was whether to read τὸν δ᾽ ἀθάνατον or 


2. φιλοπονεῖν] Ecclus. Prol. τῶν 
κατὰ τὴν ἑρμηνείαν πεφιλοπονημένων. 
The word occurs in classical writers 
of the best age. 

3. μὴ ἀγανακτῶμεν)] Clem. Rom. 
56 παιδείαν ἐφ᾽ ἧ οὐδεὶς ὀφείλει 
ἀγανακτεῖν. 

οἱ ἄσοφοι] ‘fools that we are’, for 
this is the force of the article; comp. 
§ 1 of ἀκούοντες (with the note). For 
ἄσοφος comp. Ephes. v.15. It seems 
not to occur again in the Bible 
(except Prov. ix. 8 in A, where there 
is nothing corresponding in the He- 
brew); and is not very common 
elsewhere. 

6. Supvxiay] As above ὃ 11 μὴ 
διψυχῶμεν. See the notes on Clem. 
Rom. 11,23. To the references there 
given add Barnab. 19 οὐ μὴ διψυχήσῃς 
πότερον ἔσται ἢ ov. 

7. ἐσκοτίσμεθα k.t.A.] From Ephes. 
iv. 17, 18, ἐν ματαιότητι τοῦ νοὸς av- 
τῶν, ἐσκοτωμένοι (V. 1. ἐσκοτισμένοι) 


THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. [x 


/ \ \ “ rm 
ἐνίοτε Yap πονηρὰ πράσσοντες οὐ γινώ- 

































ie 


\ ; 
Kat 4 y 


, 3 \ ὃ ' 
πράξωμεν οὖν τὴν δι- 
μακάριοι οἱ TOUTOIS: 

3 ἃ ας ῇ i 
κἂν ὀλίγον xpovov 


3 οἱ ἄσοφοι] C3; tanguam ill 171: 
11 τῷ κόσμῳ] 5; add. τούτῳ C. I have 


τῇ διανοίᾳ; comp. Clem. Rom. 361 
ἀσύνετος καὶ ἐσκοτωμένη διάνοια ἡμῶν. 
10. ὀλίγον χρόνον x.t.r.] Comp. 
1 Pet. i. 6 ὀλίγον ἄρτι, εἰ δέον, ἃ 
θέντες, ν. 10 ὀλίγον παθόντας. FO 
κακοπαθεῖν see 2 Tim. ii. 9, iv. 8 
James v. 13; comp. ovykaxomaé ft 
2 Tim. i. 8, ii. 3. . 
12. καρπὸν τρυγήσουσι» Hos. x. 
omeipate ἑαυτοῖς εἰς Pia 
γήσατε εἰς καρπὸν ζωῆς. ἡ 
13. μακάριος αὐτὸν κιτ.λ.] See Hi 
pol. de Univ. p. 69 (Lagarde) ἡ 7 
πατέρων δικαίων τε ὁρωμένη ὄψις 7 
τοτε μειδιᾷ ἀναμενόντων τὴν 
τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ἀνάπαυσιν καὶ aic 
ἀναβίωσιν.. «ἀλλὰ καὶ οὗτοι [οἱ ἄδ 
τὸν τῶν πατέρων χορὸν καὶ τ 
δικαίους ὁρῶσι, καὶ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ 
κολαζόμενοι... «καὶ τὸ σῶμα.. «δυνα! 
ὁ Θεὸς ἀναβιώσας ἀθάνατον mo 
and lower down ἀποφθέγξον 
φωνὴν οὕτως λέγοντες, Δικαία σι 
κρίσις, and again τὸ πῦρ ἄσβεσ 





























xx] 


τὸν ἀθάνατον. 
for ἀθανάτου γνώσεως in S itself. 


πιστεύομεν C. 


διαμένει...σ κὠληξ δέ τις ἔμπυρος KT. 
comp. ὃ 17). These resemblances 
suggest that our Clementine homily 
was known to this writer. 

15. ἀναβιώσας] 2 Macc. vii. 9 ἀπο- 
θανόντας ἡμᾶς ὑπὲρ τῶν αὐτοῦ νόμων 


ἀλύπητον] ‘inaccessible to sorrow’, 
fronger than ἄλυπον ; comp. Clem. 
om. Xi. 17 σὺν ἡμῖν τὸν ἄλυπον 
ἰῶνα κληρονομῆσαι. 

XX. ‘Be not dismayed, if you see 
vrong-doers prospering, while the 
srvants of God are straitened. Be- 
lieve it, this present life is the arena 
Mf our conflict; the crown will be 
warded in the future. Our reward 
; not instantaneous. If it were so, 
hen the pursuit of it would be a 
1atter of traffic and not of piety.’ 

| ‘To the one invisible God of truth, 
ho sent us a Saviour and through 
manifested truth and life to us, 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 


/ \ / 
TTAGEWS καρπον τρυγησουσιν. 

£ \ > \ ~ ~ / ΄ 
σεβης, ἐὰν ἐπὶ τοῖς νῦν χρονοις ταλαιπωρή" 


, \ ΄ ro , 
στενοχωρουμενους TOUS TOU Θεοῦ δούλους. 


259 


/ 2 - / ‘ , - 
κακοπαθήσωσιν ἐν TW κόσμῳ, TOV ἀθάνατον τῆς ava- 


\ 4» ε 
μὴ οὖν λυπείσθω ὁ εὐ- 
μακάριος 


> \ ,ὔ ‘ ΄:- J \ ΄σ΄' / 
αὐτὸν ἀναμένει χρόνος" ἐκεῖνος ἄνω μετὰ τῶν πατέρων 
> / 3 / > \ > , 77 
ἀναβιώσας εὐφρανθήσεται εἰς TOV ἀλύπητον αἰῶνα. 
A Ἄγ) ς A A / ΄σ 
XX. ᾿Αλλὰ μηδὲ ἐκεῖνο τὴν διάνοιαν ὑμῶν ταρασ- 
, « A 9537 “΄. \ 
σέτω, ὅτι βλέπομεν τοὺς ἀδίκους πλουτοῦντας, Kal 


πιστεύωμεν 


οὖν, ἀδελφοὶ καὶ ἀδελφαί: Θεοῦ ζῶντος πεῖραν ἀθλοῦμεν, 
\ 4 “ “ 7 .« co ΄ . 
καὶ γυμναζόμεθα τῷ viv βίῳ ἵνα τῷ μέλλοντι στεφανω- 


For another instance of the same error comp. § 36 θανάτου γνώσεως 


12 τρυγήσουσιν] delectabuntur...in S, i.e. 


τρυφήσουσιν ; for the same word (OD2) and its derivatives are used to translate 

τρυφή, ὃ το, and τρυφή, ἐντρυφᾶν 2 Pet. ii. 13. 
- to χρόνος and punctuates after πατέρων. 

S has ἡμῶν) μὴ ταρασσέτω τὴν καρδίαν ὑμῶν Rup 783. 
, 19 Θεοῦ] ὅτι θεοῦ 8. 


14 ἐκεῖνος] S attaches this 
16 μηδὲ ἐκεῖνο.. .ταρασσέτω] CS (but 
18 πιστεύωμεν] S; 


be the glory for ever.’ 

16. ᾿Αλλὰ μηδὲ ἐκεῖνο κιτ.λ.} This 
passage is quoted loosely and with 
some omissions in the Sacr. Parall. 
(MS Rupef.), which bear the name 
of Joannes Damascenus, Of. 11. p. 783 


- (Le Quien); see above, I. p. 193 sq. 


It will be seen that in the quotation 
the original words are altered, so as 
to conform to well-known scriptural 
passages; 6.8. μὴ ταρασσέτω τὴν 
καρδίαν ὑμῶν is substituted for μηδὲ 
ἐκεῖνο τῆν διάνοιαν ὑμῶν ταρασσέτω, 
after John xiv. 1, 27; and εὐσέβειαν 
is substituted for θεοσέβειαν, after 
1 Tim, vi. 5. 

19. πεῖραν] For the accusative after 
ἀθλεῖν comp. eg. Plato Leg. viii. 
Ρ. 830 A, Plut. Vit. Demetr. 5; and 
for such accusatives generally see 
Kihner 11. p. 264. For an elaborate 
application of the same metaphor 
see ὃ 7. 


17—2 














260 THE EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 


na a \ ae i 
θῶμεν. οὐδεὶς τῶν δικαίων ταχὺν καρπὸν ἔλαβεν, ἀλλ᾽ 
> / ὃ \ \ \ ΄σ Υ 
ἐκδέχεται αὐτόν. εἰ γὰρ τὸν μισθὸν τῶν δικαίων ὁ 

, > > > ee \ 
Θεὸς συντόμως ἀπεδίδου, εὐθέως ἐμπορίαν ἠσκοῦμεν καὶ 

9 ,ὔ > ΄σ \ > / > \ 

οὐ θεοσέβειαν: ἐδοκοῦμεν γὰρ εἶναι δίκαιοι, οὐ TO 
\ \ \ / / \ an 4 
εὐσεβὲς ἀλλὰ TO κερδαλέον διώκοντες" καὶ διὰ TOUTE 
᾽ “ \ ᾽ an 

θεία κρίσις ἔβλαψεν πνεῦμα pr ὃν δίκαιον, καὶ ἐβα- 


ρυνεν δεσμοῖς. 


΄σ / “ 3 , \ “ 3 4 ~~ 

Τῷ μόνῳ Θεῷ ἀοράτῳ, πατρὶ τῆς ἀληθείας, τῷ 

? can \ ΄ \ a 
ἐξαποστείλαντι ἡμῖν τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ ἀρχηγὸν τῆς 
ἀφθαρσίας, ov οὗ καὶ ἐφανέρωσεν ἡμῖν τὴν ἀλήθειαν. 


1 ταχὺν] C Rup; celeriter (ταχὺ) S, using the same adverb which renders συντό- 
3 συντόμως ἀπεδίδου, εὐθέως] CS; εὐθέως ἀπεδίδου Rup. 


pws just below. 


4 οὐ θεοσέβειαν] CS; οὐκ εὐσέβειαν Rup. 
7 δεσμοῖς] S; δεσμὸς C. 


σεβὲς] C Rup; θεοσεβὲς 5. 


add. domini nostri iesu christi (in apposition) S. 


4. θεοσέβειαν] See 1 Tim. ii. 10. 
It occurs occasionally in the LXx. 

5. διὰ τοῦτο x.7.A.] i.e. fon ac- 
count of these sordid motives Divine 
judgment overtakes and cripples the 
spirit of a man, seeing that it is not up- 
right, and loads it with chains’, The 
word βλάπτειν is used especially of Di- 
vine vengeance surprising its victim, 
checking and maiming him in his 
mid career; e.g. Hom. Od. i. 195 
ἀλλά νυ τόν ye θεοὶ βλάπτουσι κελεύθου, 
20. xiv. 178 τοῦ δέ τις ἀθανάτων βλάψε 
φρένας, Xen. Symp. viii. 43 ἢν μὴ 
Θεὸς βλάπτῃ, Plut. Vit. Caes. 45 ὑπὸ 
Θεοῦ μάλιστα βλαπτομένῳ τὴν γνώμην 
ἐοικὼς κιτιλ., Trag. in Lycurg. ὦ 
Leocr. p. 159 ὅταν γὰρ ὀργὴ δαιμόνων 
βλάπτῃ τινά, τοῦτ᾽ αὐτὸ πρῶτον, ἐξαφ- 
αἱρεῖται φρενῶν τὸν νοῦν τὸν ἐσθλὸν 
kr.A., and so frequently. Sordid 
motives bring their own punishment 
in a judicial blindness (βλάπτει πνεῦ- 
pa). The aorist here has its common 
gnomic sense, and is the most ap- 
propriate tense: see Kihner 11. p. 
136 sq. Previous editors seem to 
































οὐ τὸ] CS; οὐ διὰ τὸ Rup. 5 ev- 
8 τῆς ἀληθείας] 
9 ἡμῖν τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ ἀρχή: 


have mistaken the sense. Bryennios 
says μὴ bv δίκαιον, τούτεστιν, ἀδίκως, 
but it is not clear what he means. 
Hilgenfeld reads δεσμούς, and ex- 
plains ‘Christiani non omni ex parte 
justi persecutionem gentilium patie- 
bantur’. Harnack, misled by the 
aorist, says ‘auctor diabolum respt- 
cere videtur, quem tamquam avaritiat 
principem et auctorem hic infert (?).. 
censuit igitur, diabolum jam hoc tem- 
pore catenis onustum esse’. He mighi 
have quoted Wolsey’s warning to 
Cromwell in Henry VIII, ‘ By 
sin fell the angels’. 

8. Τῷ μόνῳ Θεῷ ἀοράτῳ] Comfy 
1 Tim. i. 17 ἀοράτῳ μόνῳ Θεῷ. q 

πατρὶ τῆς ἀληθείας] As in §3. 5 
also ὁ Θεὸς τῆς ἀληθείας ὃ 19. Th 
Syriac translator takes ‘the Trutl 
here to denote Christ Himself (Joh 
xiv. 6); comp. Orig. c. (δῖ. viii. | 
ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ τῆς μονογενοῦς avi 
ἀληθείας. So Papias (Euseb. 21. 
iii. 39) speaks of Christ’s persoi 
disciples as receiving commandme 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀληθείας. : 


eer « 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 261 











4 ‘ ‘ 3 ’ὔ ’ > ΄ ε / > \ IA 

καὶ τήν ἐπουράνιον ζωήν, αὐτῷ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας 
Lod , 7 ᾽ 

τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 


γὸν τῆς ἀφθαρσίας] salvatorem et principem vitae et salutis nostrae 8. τι ζωήν] 
C; delectationem (δ 211) S; which word elsewhere is a rendering of τρυφὴ (see 
above, § 19) or of ἀπόλαυσις (see i § 20). αὐτῷ ἡ δόξα] atgue etiam Jesu christo 
domino nostro cum spiritu sancto gloria et honor et imperium (i.e. ἡ δόξα καὶ ἡ τιμὴ 
καὶ τὸ κράτος) 8. 


9. τὸν σωτῆρα κιτ.λ.} Acts v. 31 ρίας. Comp. Zpist. Vienn. 17 (in 
ρχηγὸν καὶ σωτῆρα compared with Euseb. H. £. v. 1) ἀρχηγὸν τῆς ζωῆς 
il. 15 τὸν ἀρχηγὸν τῆς ζωῆς : see also τοῦ Θεοῦ. 

Heb. ii. 10 τὸν ἀρχηγὸν τῆς σωτη- 









































Page 


I 
2 


"- 


ae J 


I 
2 


The lacune in the Alexandrian Manuscript. 


[TTpoc] Kopin@ioye 

[Ἢ ἐκκλη]σία...ἢ παροι- 
κοῦσα [Ῥώμην] 

τῇ πα[ροικού]σῃ 

ἡγι[ασμέν]οις...τοῦ [Κυρίου 

ἡμ]ῶν.. [χάρις υὑ]μῖν...παν- 
το[κράτο]ρος 

[Ava τὰς] αἰφνιδίους...[γε- 
νομ]ένας 

[περιπτώσεις.. [νομίζομεν 

πεποιῆϊ σθ]αι 

[πα]ρ᾿ ὑμῖν.. [τ]ῆς τε 

ὑποτάσ[ o jovres 

Aap Bal v jovres 

ἀρ[κ]ούμενοι 

Διὰ ζῆλον καὶ φθόνο[ ν οἱ 
μέγιστοι 

στύλ[οι ἐδιώ]χθησαν... ἕως 
θανάτου ἤθλησαν] 

πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἡμών)] ... 
ἀποστόλους 

Πέτρον] s...ovx [ἕνα οὐἸ]δὲ 
δύο 

ὑπ[ήνεγκεν πόνους... μαρτυ- 
Loos 

ὀφειλ[όμενον]... διὰ ζῆλο[ν 

καὶ ἔριν] Παῦλος... [ὑπέ- 
δει]έεν 

[φυγα]δευθείς ...γ[ενόμενος 

ἐΐν τῇ] δύσει 

κατήντησαν] 


Page 


34. 


35: 


36. 


37: 


40. 
41. 
48. 


49. 


nb WwW N 


It 


τοῦτ[ ο] 

ὀστέων pl ου] 

ὑπομνήσκονΪ τες] 

σκάμματι] 

ἐπίκει[ ται]... κενὰς [καὶ] 

ἔλθω μεν] 

τ[ῆς 
ἴδω]μεν 

[καὶ τί πρό]σδεκτον ... τοῦ 
ποι[ήσαντἾος 


παραδό]σεως ... [καὶ 


[ἀτενίσ]ωμεν.. [καὶ γν]ῶμεν 

τῷ Θεῷ [καὶ πατρ]ὶ αὐτοῦ 

[σωτ]ηρίαν...τῷ κό[σμ]ῳ 

[διέλθ]ωμεν... [καὶ] καταμά- 
θωμεν 

γενεᾷ [κα]ὶ... ἔδω[κ]εν 

[δ]ελεχθῶμεν 

[αἱ] ἁμαρτίαι... ὑμῶν [ὡς] 

[πρὸς σὲ εἰσῆλ]θον 

[γῆς ἡμῶν]...ὁ γὰρ βασι- 
λεὺς οὕ]τως 

εἰσῆλθον [μὲν οἱ ἄνδρες 

[ἀλλὰ εὐθέ]ως...πορεύον[ται 


τῇ 886] 


γ[ινού]σκουσα....ὅτι [Κύριος 
ὁ Θεὸς] 

ὑμῖν [τὴν πόΪλιν ταύτην. 
Omitted in the colla- 
tion. For πολιν C has 


γὴν 








264 


Page 


52. 


53: 


55: 
56. 


63. 


THE EPISTLES OF S. 
Page 
49. 12 ὁ [τρό]μος...τοῖς κατοι]- 68. 
Kovow 
γέν[ηται] 
αὗτο[Ὁ] 
δικαιοσύν[ην] 
διδάσκωζν]... [οὕτως 70. 
ἐλεηθ[ῆ]7τε...ὦΓ-ς] ποιεῖτε 
ποιηθήσεται ὑμῖν] ..δοθή- 
σεται [ὑμῖν] 
κριθήσείσθε ὡς χ]ρηστεύ. 709. 
εσθε.. χρη[στευθή]σεται 
με[τρεῖτε] 
[ταύτῃ τ]ῇ..-παραγγέλ[μα- 
ow] 
ἑαυ[τοὺς εἰς 
[ὄντα]ς... αὐτοῦ τ]απεινο- 
φρονοῦντες 
[φησὶ]ν γὰρ...[ἐπι]βλέψω 
[ἡσ]ύχιον 
[δί]καιον 
[κ]αὶ πάλιν 
τῇ γλώσσῃ αὐ[τ]ῶν 82. 
[α]ὐτῶν 
κατηγ] ορεῖ λέγων].. «ἀπὸ ῥύ- 
πίου οὐδ᾽ ἂν] 83. 


64. 


65. 
67. 


68. 


13 
9 
II 


Nu 


19 


I 


αὐτο [Ὁ]...ἐν ὅλῳ [τῷ 
οἴκῳ] αὐτοῦ... .[ὑπηρε]σίας 
Α[ἴγυπτον]...[αἰκι]σμάτων 


κἀκεῖνος] 
ἐμ[εγα]λορημόνησεν ... 
τῆς] βάτου 
διδοί μένου... πέμπἰ εἰς] 
βρ[α]δύγλωσσος 
ἐξάλειψ[ ον] ...ἐν ἐμο[{] 
ἀπο[ρίγψῃς.. [καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα 
ἀντανέλῃς ἀπ᾽ ἐ]μοῦ...τὴν 
ἀγαλ[λίασιν 
τ]οῦ σωτηρίου.. 
νικῷ 


διδά! ξω ἀνό]μους...ἀ σεβεῖ]ς 


ἐ [πὶ 


«[ἡγεμο} 


. 20 [λ]έγει 


CLEMENT. 

















2 [ῥῦσαί] pe q 
3 tiis[owr|ypias...[d-yad]Aud- 

cerat...[Suxlaoovvny 
4 [dv]océets 
5 ἀναγ[ γ]ελεῖ...) θ]έλησας 
4 ἐμποδίϊ ζήοντα... ἀστέρων — 
5 διαταγὴν [αὐτοῦ : 


6 [π]αρεκβάσεως.. [το] ὺς endl 


τεταγμένους 
17 πρ[όσωπον δὲ] 
18 [τοῦ ἐξολε]θρεῦσαι... μνή- 
μ[όσυνον)] d 
19 ὁ δ[ίκαιος]... αὐτ[ οὔ καὶ ἐκ] 
πασῶν ' 
20 αἰ[ὐτοῦ ἐρύ]σατο 4 
22 μάσἰτιγες]...ἐλ[πίζον͵τας — 
23 κυκλώσει] 4 
24 κ[αὶ εὐερ]γετικὸς 
25 ἐπὶ τοὺς] φοβουμένους 


ἠπίως [τε] καὶ... αὐτί οὔ] 

προσερχομένοι s | 

τὴν ἀπαρχὴν] 

ἐκ νεκ[ρῶν] 

κατὰ καιςρὸν]...ἡμέρ[α 

δηλοῦσιν]... 

ἡ[μέρα]...... ἐπέρ[χεται 

βω]μεν 

13 [πῶς καὶ] τίνα τρόπον 

14 [ἐξῆλθεν ὁ σἸπείρων.... 
στο]ν 

15 πεσόντα] if 

τό διζαλύεται]... ἡ peyalAeu 
τ]ης 

17 [ἀνίσ]τησιν 

18 πλείονα] rr 

19 [ἴδω]μεν.. [γιν]όμενον. iy 

20 [τό]ποις a 


21 [κ]αὶ ἐκοιμήθην Ὁ 
22 ἐξη[ γ]έρθην....[καὶὶ : 





























Page 


μι 
ο 
- 


ΤΙΟΟ. 


102. 


wm On Am WwW δ 


xe Ss eS 
Ne OO 


Se oe eS oe 
An Ὁ WwW 


THE ALEXANDRIAN MANUSCRIPT. 


go. 1 [τὴ]ν σάρκα pov 
97. 24 
98. 


πεποιθήσεως γινώσκων 

ἡδέως προσήγεἾτο...ταπει- 
νοφρ[ οσύνης] 

αὐτοῦ δι᾽ ἀδελ]φὸν 

πρὸς Λαβὰν]... ἐδόθη αὐτῷ] 

τοῦ [Ἰσραήλ 

ἐάν] τις... εἰλικριν ὥς] 

[με]γαλεῖα...δεδομέ[νων] 

ἱερεῖ ς] 

Aevroupy| οῦνἾτες 

πίστ[ ε]ως 

ἀγαθοποιΐ[ας] 

δεσπότ[ης] 

μετὰ ἐκτενείαϊ ς] 

ἀγαθὸν] 

δ[εσπό]της...ἔρ[γοις] 

αὐτ[ οὔ] sec. 

ἐστήρισε[ν] 

συνέσει διεκό]σμησεν ... 
[διεχώρισεν 

[ἐπὶ τ]ὸν 

βου[λήματος 

αὐτῇ C|da...[Suar Jager 


3 θάλασσαν κ]αὶ...προδημι- 


13 


14 
15 


[ουργή]σας 

[δυ]νάμει 

[κα]ὶ.. [ἄνθρωπον 

[π]λῆθος 

κ[αὶ τὴν Kara |oxeow...7| ἧς 
vis] 

av tov κάθου]...ἕως ἂν [0d 

τοὺς] ἐχθρούς σου ὑποπό- 
διοῖν τῶν πο]δῶν 

ἐχθροί]... ἀντιτασσ[όμενοι] 
.- θελήματι 

αὐτοῦ] 


ἄνδ[ρες ἀδελ]φοί 


16 ἐκτενεία[ς ἐν τοῖς] ἀμώμοις 


17 


[αὐτοῦ]... στραζτευο]μένους 


Page 
113. 
Lig. 2 
115. 


116. ἢ 


117. 


Hise I 
121. 8 


131. 


22 
23 

24 

136. 3 
5 

6 


7 
137. 8 


9 


265 


ἡ wav |...everKTex| ὡς] 

ἐπιτελο[ Blow... πάντεϊ ς] 

ὅλο[ν] 

ὅλ[ον] 

ὑποτασσέσθ ὦ] 

καθὼς] 

μαρτυρείτ[ w] 

μ[αρ]τυρεῖσθαι 

[ἤτω] καὶ...γινώσζκων ὅτι 

ἕτ]ερος...[αὐτῷ] THv...dva- 
λογι[σώμ]εθα 

ποίας [ὕλης] 

tilves εἰϊσήλθαμεν ... [ἐκ 
ποί]ου 

[ὁ πλά]σας 

[εἰσή]γαγεν ... [προ]ετοιμά- 
σας 

[αὐτ]οῦ...[ταῦ]τὰ 

[ὀἸφείλομεν 

lating 

[ἀ]ῴρονες 

ἐϊκέλ]ευσεν 

[καὶ ἐπι]δείξατο 

[tds σφρα]γῖδας.... τὴ]ν σκη- 
ri] 

προε[ῖλεν τὰς] ῥάβδους 

ῥ[άβδος]... βεβλα[στηκυῖα] 

πρ[οἥδει] 

μέλλειν [ἔσεσθαι] 

ἀκ[αταστα]σία... οὕτως 

ἐποίησεν... .τ[ὸ ὄνομα 

μόνου [Θεοῦ] 

πολιτευομένους] 

φιλόνεικ[οι} 

[τῶν] ἀνηκόντων... év[ κεκύ- 
φα]τε 

[τὰς τοῦ] πνεύματος 

[ὅτι ov dev... παραπε[ποιη]- 
μένον 

[οὐχ ε]ύρήσετε 








266 


Page 
137. 10 


139. 11 


140. 
150. 


151. 


Oo On aun WwW «Ὁ 


152. 


153. 


THE EPISTLES OF 5. 


ἀποβεἰ βλημἼένους ... [ἐδι]- 
ώχθησαν 

ὑπὸ avo| ww |v 

[ἀνοσίων .... ὑπὸ πα[ρα]νό- 
μων 

[ὑἹ]πὸ τῶν... .[ἀ]νειληφότων 

[εἸύκλεως.... [τί] γὰρ 

[ἐβλήθη 

[ἢ] ᾿Ανανίας 

[πα]ναρέτῳ 

ἡ δόξ[α εἴς... .τῶν ail ovev 

ἀἸμήν ...[ο]}: δὲ ὑπο[μ]έ 
vovTes 

[κ]Ἰολληθῶμεν 

εὑρε[ θῆναι] 

[ὁ Θεός: δεώμε]θα...ἀπ[ὸ 

[εὑρεθώμεν] 

ἀνθρωζ[πίνης]...πᾶσα[ι ἀπὸ 

᾿Αδαὰμ] ἕως...παρῆ[λθον] 

τελειωθέν[ τες]... ἔχοζυσιν] 

φανερ[ θήσονται ... βασι- 
λ[είας] 

rot [Θε]οῦ.. 

ὅσον ὅσ[ ον] 

θυ[μός].. .ἡμέρ[ας] 


τοῦ ἐλέ] ους... 


«εἰσέλ[θετε) 


[ἐκ] τῶν θηκῶν 

[προσἸτάγματα .... ἐν ὁἾμο- 
νοίᾳ 

ἀφεθήΪναι] 

ἀ[φέ]θησαν 

ἐπεκα[λύ]φθησαν... ἀνὴρ] 

ἁμαρτία[ν].. αὐτί οὔ] 

e[ yé|vero 

np dv ]...a[ id |yov 

Ὅσα [οὖ]ν παρε[πέσα]μεν 

[το] ἀντικ[ ειμέ]νου...[ἀφε- 


θῆναι ἡμῖν] 
οἵτι[ν]ες ἀρχηγ[ οἱ] 
ἐγεν[ή]θησαν 


τῶν] παραπτωμάτων 


Page 


154. 


155. 


157. 


CLEMENT. 


6 [κρί]μα...κατέβ[η]σαν 
7 ζώϊν]τες ... θάνατος 

paver ; 

8 αἰύτούς...στρα[τιὰ αὐτ]οῦ 

9 ἡγούμενοι Αἰγ]ύπτου.. 

[ἀναβάται 

το [αἰτία]ν if 

11 [ἐρυθρ]ὰν.. [τὸ σκλ]ηρυνθ | 


ναι 
















12 ἀσυϊνέτου]ς 

13 [τὰ σημ]εῖα [καὶ].. Ane 
[πτου] 

14 [τοῦ θ]εράποντος.. {μ]ωῦ 
σέωΪ-ς] 

15 [6] δεσπότης 

16 [οὐ]δὲν.. {ἐρ]ομολογαῖσθαι, 

τῇ [ὁ ἐ]κλεκτὸς 

18 ἐξομολογήσο[μ]αι. 

20 π[α]λιν 

21 αἰνέσεως 


i 


4 


3 ἐπίστασθε tas 
4 [καὶ ἐγκ]εκύφατε 
5 [Θεοῦ εἰς ἀ]νάμνησιν.... 

τα [γράφομεν] 


6 dvaBailvovros εἰΐς...πὸ ἡ 
σαντος q 
ἡ τεσσερ]άκοντα .... τεσ cepa: 
κοντα c 


8 [καὶ ταπειν]ώσει.. αὐτὸν [ 

Θεύς] q 

9 [Moi]o9 Μωῦσῆ... [τὸ τάχος 

ἐντεῦθεν 4 

10 [6 λαός σΊου.. [Aiybrro]v 

11 ἐκ [τῆς ὁδοῦ]... [ἐποίησα)ν 

12 [καὶεἶπε]ν.. «λελάληκα 

13 [ἑώρακα] τὸν λαὸν 

14 [ἐστιν σἸκληροτράχηλος 
[με ἐξολ)εθρεῦσαι 

15 ἐξα[λείψω τ]ὸ ὄνομα..." 

κάτωθεν} a 













Page 


157. 


165. 


166. 


167. 


THE ALEXANDRIAN MANUSCRIPT. 267 


τό [oe εἰς €]Ovos...[Kat πολ ]ὺ 

17 [καὶ εἶπεν Μ]ωὐσῆς... Κύριε 
[ἄφες τὴν] 

15 [τὸ σπέρμὰ σου] τὰ δὲ τέκνα 
...[70 παμβό]τανον 

16 ἐλεύσῃ δὲ ἐν τά]φῳ... ὥρι- 
μοῖς κατὰ 

τ και]ρὸν... ὥσπερ θημω]νιὰ 

18 συ[νκομι]σθεῖσα ... ἀγαπη- 
[τοὶ πόσος] 

19 τ[οῖς παιδευ]ομένοις ... δε- 
σπόΪτου πατὴρ 

20 γὰρ] ἀγαθὸς... παιδεύει] εἰς 
τὸ ἐλε]ηθῆναι 

21 πἰαι]δείας 

22 [τῆς] στάσεως 

1 ὑποτάγη]τε ... παι[δεύ]- 

θητε 

2 κάμψανἶἾτες] 

4 av0ad| εια]ν 

5 [ἐν] τῷ ποιμνίῳ 

8 προήσομαζι 

9. ὑμῖ]ν.. [δὲ ὑμᾶ]ς 

© ἐπ[ειδηὶ ἐκάλουν]... ὑπηκού- 

σατε καὶ egéret|vov 

11 οὐ [προσείχετε]... ἐπο[ιεῦτε 
τὰς ἐμὰς] 

12 ἐμ[οῖς ἐλέγχοις] ... τοιγα- 
[ροῦν κἀγὼ] 

13 ἀπωλεί[ᾳ ἐπιγελάσοΐμαι... 
[ἡνίκα 

14 ἂν] ἔρχηται...ὄλεθρο[ς καὶ 
ὡς ἂν ἀἸφίκηται 

15 θόρυβος ἡ δὲ]...κ[αταιγίδι 

αν 


Page 


167. τό ὑμῖν θλίψις]...γ[άρ, ὅταν 
ἐπιϊκαλέσησθε 
168. τ [οὐκ εἰσα]κούσομαι... ζητ[ ἡ- 
σουσιν] 
2 εὑρηϊσουσιν].. [τὸν 
3 δὲ φό]βον .... προείλαϊντο 


οὐδὲ] 
4 προσέχειν βουλαῖς ]...ἐμοὺς 
ἐλέγχους] 


5 THs ἑαυτών].. [καὶ τῆς 
6 ἑαυτῶν].. .πλησθήσουϊται... 
At this point the ms breaks off 
until 
185. 15 ...Ao]urov...@eds [καὶ] 
16 [πάσης 
186. 1 [τὸ]ν Κύριον 
2 [εἰῆς λαὸν...[ψ]7υχῇ 
3 μεγαλο[π]ρεπὲς.. .[π]ΐστιν 
218. 4 ὀφείλο[μεν]...τ[ ούτοις] 
5 [αὐτὸν] καὶ 
6 το[ὺς] ἀνθρώπους 
7 δ[ια].. -πρασσόν[των] 
8 ἐμο[9]...μο[Ὁ] 
9 μο[Ὁ] 
221. 14 δουλευε[ν]... δ[ ουλ]εύειν 
15 ἀσύμφο[ρ]ον 
225. 1 στεφα[ν]ωθῆναι 
235. 11 [τῇ] ἐπαγγελίᾳ 
12 ταλαίπωρ[οι]... pol φη]τικὸς 
13 <io[w] 
14 τ[ῇ] καρδίᾳ...πά[ντα] 
15 πα[τέ]ρων 
239. 6 ἔξ[ω] 
8 ἐν τ[ οἷς] καλοῖς 
240. I τοῦτ[ο... 
Here the ms ends. 









Corrigenda in the collation of the Constantinopolitan ms [Ὁ]. 





| Page 
; 48. 8 ἀλλ᾽ εὐθέως 
7°. 1 οὐρανοί (om. οἷ) 
72. 2 παρατεθειμένὰ 
2 οὕτως 
74. 3. καιρὸν καὶ 
93. I ποῦ οὖν τις 
96. 1 μιαρὰς καὶ (om. τε) 
2 μέθας τε καὶ 
125. 4 εὐαρεστείτω τῷ Θεῷ 
 ἐνδελεχησμοῦ 
143. 12 ἀλλὰ ἡ πρόσκλισις 
156. 3 καλῶς (om. καὶ) 
5 πρὸς ἀνάμνησιν 








rien 





Gaerne aie ew. ΤΑΣ 


ne 
' 








TRANSLATIONS. 





THE. EPISTLE ΟΥ̓ CLEMENT 


TO 


THE CORINTHIANS. 






















HE Church of God which sojourneth in Rome to the 
5. Church of God which sojourneth in Corinth, to them 
yhich are called and sanctified by the will of God through 
ur Lord Jesus Christ. Grace to you and peace from ΑἹ- 
Hhighty God through Jesus Christ be multiplied. 

τ. By reason of the sudden and repeated calamities and 
feverses which are befalling us, brethren, we consider that we 
ave been somewhat tardy in giving heed to the matters of 
ispute that have arisen among you, dearly beloved, and to 
e detestable and unholy sedition, so alien and strange to 
e elect of God, which a few headstrong and self-willed 
ersons have kindled to such a pitch of madness that your 
ame, once revered and renowned and lovely in the sight of 
1] men, hath been greatly reviled. For who that had sojourned 
mong you did not approve your most virtuous and stedfast 
aith ?. Who did not admire your sober and forbearing piety in 
hrist ? Who did not publish abroad your magnificent disposi- 
on of hospitality? Who did not congratulate you on your 
erfect and sound knowledge? For ye did all things without 
ἡ 26 pect of persons, and ye walked after the ordinances of God, 





272 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 























young too ye enjoined modest and seemly thoughts: ane 
the women ye charged to perform all their duties in a blame 
less and seemly and pure conscience, cherishing their owr 
husbands, as is meet ; and ye taught them to keep in the le 
of obedience, and to manage the affairs of their household if 
seemliness, with all discretion. 

2. And ye were all lowly in mind and free from arrogan ο, 
yielding rather than claiming submission, more glad to give than 
to receive, and content with the provisions which God supplie h 
And giving heed unto His words, ye laid them up diligently 
in your hearts, and His sufferings were before your eyes. 
Thus a profound and rich peace was given to all, and an 
insatiable desire of doing good. An abundant outpouring also 
of the Holy Spirit fell upon all; and, being full of holy counsel 
in excellent zeal and with a pious confidence ye stretched out 
your hands to Almighty God, supplicating Him to be propi- 
tious, if unwillingly ye had committed any sin. Ve had conflie 
day and night for all the brotherhood, that the number of Hi 
elect might be saved with fearfulness and intentness of mind 
Ye were sincere and simple and free from malice one towards 
another. Every sedition and every schism was abominable t 
you. Ye mourned over the transgressions of your neighbours 
ye judged their shortcomings to be your own. Ye repente 
not of any well-doing, but were ready unto every good vorl 
Being adorned with a most virtuous and honourable life, | 
performed all your duties in the fear of Him. The comma ἶ 
ments and the ordinances of the Lord were written on th 
tables of your hearts. 4 

3. All glory and enlargement was given unto you, at 
that was fulfilled which is written; My beloved ate and dr 
and was enlarged and waxed fat and kicked. Hence con 
jealousy and envy, [and] strife and sedition, persecution a 
~ tumult, war and captivity. So men were stirred up, the mé 
against the honourable, the ill-reputed against the highly-repv t 
the foolish against the wise, the young against the elder. τ 
this cause righteousness and peace stand aloof, while ¢ 





TO THE CORINTHIANS. 273 




























nan hath forsaken the fear of God, and become purblind 
1 the faith of Him, neither walketh in the ordinances of His 
mmandments nor liveth according to that which becometh 
hrist, but each goeth after the lusts of his evil heart, seeing 
at they have conceived an unrighteous and ungodly jealousy, 
rough which also death entered into the world. 

4. For so it is written, Aud it came to pass after certain 
ws that Cain brought of the fruits of the earth a sacrifice 
to God, and Abel he also brought of the firstlings of the sheep 
αἱ of their fatness. And God looked upon Abel and upon his 
its, but unto Cain and unto his sacrifices He gave no heed. 
nd Cain sorrowed exceedingly, and his countenance fell. And 
od said unto Cain, Wherefore art thou very sorrowful? and 
vefore did thy countenance fall? If thou hast offered aright 
a hast not divided aright, didst thou not sin? Hold thy peace. 
nto thee shall he turn, and thou shalt rule over him. And 
in said unto Abel his brother, Let us go over unto the plain. 
ad it came to pass, while they were in the plain, that Cain 
e up against Abel his brother and slew him. Ye see, brethren, 
lousy and envy wrought a brother’s murder. By reason of 


other. Jealousy caused Joseph to be persecuted even unto 
ath, and to come even unto bondage. Jealousy compelled 
ses to flee from the face of Pharaoh king of Egypt, while 
was said to him by his own countryman, Who made thee a 
lige or a decider over us? Wouldest thou slay me, even as 
terday thou slewest the Egyptian? By reason of jealousy 
ron and Miriam were lodged outside the camp. Jealousy 
ught Dathan and Abiram down alive to hades, because they 
de sedition against Moses the servant of God. By reason 
jealousy David was envied not only by aliens, but was 
secuted also by Saul [king of Israel]. 

5. But, to pass from the examples of ancient days, let us 
e to those champions who lived very near to our time. Let 
set before us the noble examples which belong to our 
eration. By reason of jealousy and envy the greatest and 
CLEM. II. 18 





- 








274 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 






























most righteous pillars of the Church were persecuted, and 
contended even unto death. Let us set before our eyes he 
good Apostles. There was Peter who by reason of unrighteous 
jealousy endured not one nor two but many labours, and thus 
having borne his testimony went to his appointed place of glory 
By reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointec 
out the prize of patient endurance. After that he had beer 
seven times in bonds, had been driven into exile, had been 
stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won the 
noble renown which was the reward of his faith, having taugh 
righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the 
farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne nis 
testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the world 
and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable 
pattern of patient endurance. ; 
6. Unto these men of holy lives was gathered a vast multi 
tude of the elect, who through many indignities and torture 
being the victims of jealousy, set a brave example among 
ourselves. By reason of jealousy women being persecuted, 8 
that they had suffered cruel and unholy insults +as Danaids < 
Dirce+, safely reached the goal in the race of faith, and receiv 
a noble reward, feeble though they were in body. Jealous I 
hath estranged wives from their husbands, and changed a 
saying of our father Adam, 7his now ts bone of my bones 1) 
flesh of my flesh. Jealousy and strife have overthrown ore; 
cities and uprooted great nations. ἡ 
7. These things, dearly beloved, we write, not only 
admonishing you, but also as putting ourselves in remembra 
For we are in the same lists, and the same contest awaiteth F 
Wherefore let us forsake idle and vain thoughts; and let 
conform to the glorious and venerable rule which hath be 
handed down to us; and let us see what is good and v h 
pleasant and what is acceptable in the sight of Him that ms 
us. Let us fix our eyes on the blood of Christ and un 
stand how precious it is unto His Father, because b 
shed for our salvation it won for the whole world the ἃ 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 275 




























of repentance. Let us review all the generations in turn, 
nd learn how from generation to generation the Master hath 
iven a place for repentance unto them that desire to turn 
Him. Noah preached repentance, and they that obeyed 
Were saved. Jonah preached destruction unto the men of 
ineveh ; but they, repenting of their sins, obtained pardon of 
70d by their supplications and received salvation, albeit they 
Were aliens from God. 
| 8. The ministers of the grace of God through the Holy 
Ppirit spake concerning repentance. Yea and the Master of the 
niverse Himself spake concerning repentance with an oath; 
Wor, as 7 live, saith the Lord, I desire not the death of the sinner, 
» much as his repentance ; and He added also a merciful judg- 
Pent: Repent ye, O house of Israel, of your iniquity; say unto 
e sons of My people, Though your sins reach from the earth 
om unto the heaven, and though they be redder than scarlet and 
Wacker than sack-cloth, and ye turn unto Me with your whole heart 
d say Father, I will give ear unto you as unto an holy people. 
nd in another place He saith on this wise, Wash, be ye 
ean. Put away your iniquities from your souls out of My sight. 
ase from your iniquities ; learn to do good; seek out judgment ; 
Bend him that is wronged: give judgment for the orphan, and 
ecute righteousness for the widow; and come and let us reason 
gether, saith He; and though your sins be as crimson, I will 
Bake them white as snow; and though they be as scarlet, I will 
ake them white as wool. And if ye be willing and will hearken 
0 Me, ye shall cat the good things of the earth; but tf ye be not 
ling, neither hearken unto Me,a sword shall devour you; for 
“We mouth of the Lord hath spoken these things. Seeing then that 
desireth all His beloved to be partakers of repentance, He 
nfirmed it by an act of His almighty will. 
9. Wherefore let us be obedient unto His excellent and 
orious will; and presenting ourselves as suppliants of His 
srcy and goodness, let us fall down before Him and betake 
rs lves unto His compassions, forsaking the vain toil and the 
ife and the jealousy which leadeth unto death, Let us fix 
; 18—2 































276 S. CLEMENT OF ROME ᾿ 4 


our eyes on them that ministered perfectly unto His excelle ἵ 
glory. [εξ us set before us Enoch, who being found righteous 
in obedience was translated, and his death was not found 
Noah, being found faithful, by his ministration preached regene: 
ration unto the world, and through him the Master saved ne 
living creatures that entered into the ark in concord. ᾿ 
10. Abraham, who was called the ‘friend,’ was found faithf , 

in that he rendered obedience unto the words of God. 
through obedience went forth from his land and from his 
kindred and from his father’s house, that leaving a scanty la t 
and a feeble kindred and a mean house he might inherit the 
promises of God. For He saith unto him; Go forth from ty 
land and from thy kindred and from thy fathers house unto 
land which I shall show thee, and I will make thee into a g 
nation, and I will bless thee and will magnify thy name, and thor 
shalt be blessed. And I will bless them that bless thee, and I wil 
curse them that curse thee; and in thee shall all the tribes of th 
earth be blessed. And again, when he was parted from Lot, 
said unto him; Look up with thine eyes, and behold from th 
place where thou now art, unto the north and the south and th 
sunrise and the sea; for all the land which thou seest, I will g 7 
it unto thee and to thy seed for ever ; and I will make thy seed a 
the dust of the earth. If any man can count the dust of the eart 
then shall thy seed also be counted. And again He saith 
God led Abraham forth and said unto him, Look up unto t 
heaven and count the stars, and see whether thou canst count the 
So shall thy seed be, And Abraham believed God, and it w 
reckoned unto him for righteousness. For his faith and hospital 
a son was given unto him in old age, and by obedience | 
offered him a sacrifice unto God on one of the mountains wh: 
a 

He showed him. : . 
11. For his hospitality and godliness Lot was saved fr 
Sodom, when all the country round about was judged by 
and brimstone; the Master having thus foreshown that 
forsaketh not them which set their hope on Him, but app oin 
unto punishment and torment them which swerve aside. © 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 277 



























When his wife had gone forth with him, being otherwise-minded 
nd not in accord, she was appointed for a sign hereunto, so 
What she became a pillar of salt unto this day, that it might 
)6 known unto all men that they which are double-minded 
#ind they which doubt concerning the power of God are set for 
‘judgment and for a token unto all the generations. 
12. For her faith and hospitality Rahab the harlot was 
aved. For when the spies were sent forth unto Jericho by 
oshua the son of Nun, the king of the land perceived that 
ey were come to spy out his country, and sent forth men to 
eize them, that being seized they might be put to death. So 
he hospitable Rahab received them and hid them in the upper 
hamber under the flax-stalks. And when the messengers 
ΜΓ the king came near and said, The spies of our land entered 
r unto thee: bring them forth, for the king so ordereth: then 
e answered, The men truly, whom ye seek, entered in unto 
2, but they departed forthwith and are journeying on the way; 
nd she pointed out to them the opposite road. And she 
aid unto the men, Of a surety I perceive that the Lord your 
od delivereth this city unto you; for the fear and the dread of 
4 ts fallen upon the inhabitants thereof. When therefore it shall 
Wome to pass that ye take it, save me and the house of my father. 
And they said unto her, /¢ shall be even so as thou hast spoken unto 
Whensoever therefore thou perceivest that we are coming, thou 
talt gather all thy folk beneath thy roof, and they shall be saved ; 
7 as many as shall be found without the house shall perish. 
ind moreover they gave her a sign, that she should hang out 
‘om her house a scarlet thread, thereby showing beforehand 
γαῖ through the blood of the Lord there shall be redemption 
“@nto all them that believe and hope on God. Ye see, dearly 
eloved, not only faith, but prophecy, is found in the woman. 
_ 13. Let us therefore be lowly-minded, brethren, laying 
side all arrogance and conceit and folly and anger, and let 
s do that which is written. For the Holy Ghost saith, Le¢ 
Ζ the wise man boast in his wisdom, nor the strong in his 
wvength, neither the rich in his riches; but he that boasteth let 































278. S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


him boast in the Lord, that he may seck Him out, and do judg 
ment and righteousness ; most of all remembering the words o 
the Lord Jesus which He spake, teaching forbearance and long: 
suffering: for thus He spake; Have mercy, that ye may γέ σι 
mercy; forgive that it may be forgiven to you. As ye do, δ 
Shall it be done to you. As ye give, so shall it be given unto 
As ye judge, so shall ye be judged. As ye show kindness, so shal 
kindness be showed unto you. With what measure ye mete, 
shall be measured withal to you. With this commandment an 
these precepts let us confirm ourselves, that we may walk it 
obedience to His hallowed words, with lowliness of mind. Fe 
the holy word saith, Upon whom shall I look, save upon hin 
that ws gentle and quiet and feareth Mine oracles ? 

14. Therefore it is right and proper, brethren, that wi 
should be obedient unto God, rather than follow those whi 
in arrogance and unruliness have set themselves up as leadet 
in abominable jealousy. For we shall bring upon us no com 
mon harm, but rather great peril, if we surrender ourselve 
recklessly to the purposes of men who launch out into strif 
and seditions, so as to estrange us from that which is righ 
Let us be good one towards another according to the con 
passion and sweetness of Him that made us. For it is wri en 
The good shall be dwellers in the land, and the innocent shall | 
left on it; but they that transgress shall be destroyed utterly " 
zt. And again He saith; 7 saw the ungodly lifted up on. 
and exalted as the cedars of Lebanon. And I passed by, ai 
behold he was not; and I sought out his place, and I fou a 
not. Keep innocence and behold uprightness; for there is 
remnant for the peaceful man. a 

15. Therefore let us cleave unto them that practise pea 
with godliness, and not unto them that desire peace with ¢ 
simulation. For Hesaithinacertain place; Ths people honou τ 
Me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; and a 
They blessed with their mouth, but they cursed with their ἢ 
And again He saith, They loved Him with their mouth, 
with their tongue they lied unto Him, and their heart 7 4 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 279 




























right with Him, neither were they stedfast in Hs covenant. For 

this cause Let the deceitful lips be made dumb, which speak iniquity 

gainst the righteous. And again; May the Lord utterly destroy 

Δ the deceitful lips, the tongue that speaketh proud things, even 

em that say, Let us magnify our tongue; our lips are our own; 

ho ts lord over us? For the misery of the needy and for the 

caning of the poor I will now arise, saith the Lord. I will set 

ἢ 27,2 in safety ; [ will deal boldly by him. 

16. For Christ is with them that are lowly of mind, not 

With them that exalt themselves over the flock. The sceptre 

ΤΥ the majesty] of God, even our Lord Jesus Christ, came not 

hh the pomp of arrogance or of pride, though He might have 

Jone so, but in lowliness of mind, according as the Holy Spirit 

pake concerning Him. For He saith; Lord, who believed our 
Report? and to whom was the arm of the Lord revealed? We 

nounced Him in His presence. As a child was He, as a root in 
thirsty ground. Thereis no form in Him, netther glory. And 
We beheld Him, and He had no form nor comeliness, but His form 
| mean, lacking more than the form of men. He was a man of 
vipes and of towl,and knowing how to bear infirmity: for His 
γε ts turned away. He was dishonoured and held of no account. 
76 beareth our sins and suffereth pain for our sakes: and we 
counted Him to be in toil and in stripes and in affliction. And 
76 was wounded for our sins and hath been afflicted for our 
uquities. The chastisement of our peace is upon Him. With 
715 bruises we were healed. We all went astray like sheep, 
man went astray in his own path: and the Lord delivered 
Zim over for our sins. And He openeth not His mouth, because 
We ts afficted. As a sheep He was led to slaughter; and as a 
wmb before his shearer is dumb, so openeth He not His mouth. 
We Hits humiliation His judgment was taken away. His genera- 
who shall declare? For His life is taken away from the 
4; For the iniquities of my people He ἐς come to death, 
Bind I will give the wicked for His burial, and the rich for 
is death; for He wrought no iniquity, neither was guile found 
2 His mouth. And the Lord desireth to cleanse Him from 
if 








280 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


























His stripes. If ye offer for sin, your soul shall see a long-livea 
seed. And the Lord desireth to take away from the toil of His 
soul, to show Him light and to mould Him with understand- 
ing, to justify a Fust One that is a good servant unto many. 
And fle shall bear their sins. Therefore He shall inherit many, 
and shall divide the spoils of the strong; because His soul was 
delivered unto death, and He was reckoned among the transgres- 
sors; and He bare the sins of many, and for their sins was He 
delivered up. And again He Himself saith; But 7 am a worm 
and no man, a reproach of men and an outcast of the people. All 
they that beheld me mocked at me; they spake with their lips; 
they wagged their heads, saying, He hoped on the Lord; let 
Him deliver him, or let Him save him, for He desireth him. 
Ye see, dearly beloved, what is the pattern that hath been 
given unto us; for, if the Lord was thus lowly of mind, what 
should we do, who through Him have been brought under the 
yoke of His grace? 

17. Let us be imitators also of them which went about in 
goatskins and sheepskins, preaching the coming of Christ 
We mean Elijah and Elisha and likewise Ezekiel, the pro- 
phets, and besides them those men also that obtained a goo 
report. Abraham obtained an exceeding good report and wa 
called the friend of God; and looking stedfastly on the gle ; 
of God, he saith in lowliness of mind, But 7 am dust and as es 
Moreover concerning Job also it is thus written; And ) 
was righteous and unblameable, one that was true and honoure 
God and abstained from all evil. Vet he himself accuset 
himself saying, Vo man is clean from filth; no, not though Mi 
life be but for a day. Moses was called faithful in all H 
house, and through his ministration God judged Egypt wi 
the plagues and the torments which befel them. Howbe 
he also, though greatly glorified, yet spake no proud words, b 
said, when an oracle was given to him at the bush, Who am 
that Thou sendest me? Nay, I am feeble of speech and slow 
tongue. And again he saith, But J am smoke from the pot. — 

18. But what must we say of David that obtained a go 


a 
we 
Ν᾿ 


oa 
hoe 






























TO THE CORINTHIANS. 281 


Heport? of whom God said, / have found a man after My 
weart, David the son of Fesse: with eternal mercy have I 
nointed him. Yet he too saith unto God; Have mercy upon 
we, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to 
Whe multitude of Thy compassions, blot out mine iniquity. Wash 
me yet more from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my 
nm. For I acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin is ever 
yefore me. Against Thee only did I sin, and I wrought evil in 
hy sight; that Thou mayest be justified in Thy words, and 
nayest conquer in Thy pleading. For behold, in iniquities was 
Γ conceived, and in sins did my mother bear me. For behold 
Thou hast loved truth: the dark and hidden things of Thy 
visdom hast Thou showed unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with 
Wyssop, and I shall be made clean. Thou shalt wash me, and I 
hall become whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear 
joy and gladness. The bones which have been humbled shall 
gjoice. Turn away Thy face from my sins, and blot out all 
yine iniquities. Make a clean heart within me, Ὁ God, and 
enew a right spirit in mine inmost parts. Cast me not away 
rom Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me. 
estore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and strengthen me with 
princely spirit. I will teach sinners Thy ways, and godless 
nm shall be converted unto Thee. Deliver me from bloodguilti- 
ess, O God, the God of my salvation. My tongue shall rejoice 
n Thy righteousness. Lord, Thou shalt open my mouth, and 
w lips shall declare Thy praise. For, if Thou hadst desired 
urifice, | would have given it: in whole burnt-offerings Thou 
ult have no pleasure. A sacrifice unto God is a contrite spirit ; 
contrite and humbled heart God will not despise. 

19. The humility therefore and the submissiveness of so 
any and so great men, who have thus obtained a good report, 
ath through obedience made better not only us but also the 
‘Benerations which were before us, even them that received His 
racles in fear and truth. Seeing then that we have been par- 
ikers of many great and glorious doings, let us hasten to re- 
urn unto the goal of peace which hath been handed down to 





282 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 
























us from the beginning, and let us look stedfastly unto he 
Father and Maker of the whole world, and cleave unto His 
splendid and excellent gifts of peace and benefits. Let 
behold Him in our mind, and let us look with the eyes of 
our soul unto His long-suffering will. Let us note how free 
from anger He is towards all His creatures. a 
20. The heavens are moved by His direction and obey Him 
in peace. Day and night accomplish the course assigned to th em 
by Him, without hindrance one to another. The sun and the- 
moon and the dancing stars according to His appointment circle 
in harmony within the bounds assigned to them, without any 
swerving aside. The earth, bearing fruit in fulfilment of His will 
at her proper seasons, putteth forth the food that supplieth 
abundantly both men and beasts and all living things which 
are thereupon, making no dissension, neither altering anything 
which He hath decreed. Moreover, the inscrutable depths of th : 
abysses and the unutterable statutes of the nether regions are 
constrained by the same ordinances. The basin of the boundless 8 
sea, gathered together by His workmanship into its reservoirs, 
passeth not the barriers wherewith it is surrounded; but eve 
as He ordered it, so it doeth. For He said, So far shalt thou 
come, and thy waves shall be broken within thee. The ocean which 
is impassable for men, and the worlds beyond it, are directec 
by the same ordinances of the Master. The seasons of sprit 
and summer and autumn and winter give way in successi 
one to another in peace. The winds in their several quarter 
at their proper season fulfil their ministry without disturbaga 
and the everflowing fountains, created for enjoyment and health 
without fail give their breasts which sustain the life of “a 
Yea, the smallest of living things come together in concord ant 
peace. All these things the great Creator and Master of h 
universe ordered to be in peace and concord, doing good ᾿ 
all things, but far beyond the rest unto us who have 
refuge in His compassionate mercies through our Lord 
Christ, to whom be the glory and the majesty for ever and ὃ 
Amen. i 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 283 



























21. Look ye, brethren, lest His benefits, which are many, 
urn unto judgment to all of us, if we walk not worthily of 
im, and do those things which are good and well-pleasing in 
is sight with concord. For He saith in a certain place, The 
spirit of the Lord ts a lamp searching the closets of the belly. Let 
s see how near He is, and how that nothing escapeth Him of 
ur thoughts or our devices which we make. It is right there- 
fore that we should not be deserters from His will. Let us rather 
ive offence to foolish and senseless men who exalt themselves 
nd boast in the arrogance of their words, than to God. Let us 
Fear the Lord Jesus [Christ], whose blood was given forus. Let 
s reverence our rulers; let us honour our elders; let us instruct 
pur young men in the lesson of the fear of God. Let us guide 
pur women toward that which is good: let them show forth 
eir lovely disposition of purity; let them prove their sincere 
ffection of gentleness ; let them make manifest the moderation 
of their tongue through their silence ; let them show their love, 
jhot in factious preferences, but without partiality towards all 
hem that fear God, in holiness. Let our children be par- 
akers of the instruction which is in Christ: let them learn how 
owliness of mind prevaileth with God, what power chaste love 
ath with God, how the fear of Him is good and great and 
aveth all them that walk therein in a pure mind with holiness. 
Wor He is the searcher out of the intents and desires; whose 
breath is in us, and when He listeth, He shall take it away. 
22. Now all these things the faith which is in Christ con- 
irmeth : for He Himself through the Holy Spirit thus inviteth 
5: Come, my children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the 
car of the Lord. What man is he that desireth life and 
οὐδέ to see good days? Make thy tongue to cease from evil, 
ma thy lips that they speak no guile. Turn aside from evil 
ma do good. .Seek peace and ensue tt. The eyes of the Lord 
“Were over the righteous, and His ears are turned to their prayer. 
Wut the face of the Lord is upon them that do evil, to destroy 
y ir memorial from the earth. The righteous cried out, and 
Ye Lord heard him, and delivered him from all his troubles. 



























284 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


Many are the troubles of the righteous, and the Lord shall a a 
liver him from them all. Then again; Many are the stripes yf 
the sinner, but them that set their hope on the Lord mercy sl all 
compass about. ; 

23. The Father, who is pitiful in all things, and ready 
to do good, hath compassion on them that fear Him, and kindly 
and lovingly bestoweth His favours on them that draw nig ἣ 
unto Him with a single mind. Wherefore let us not be 
double-minded, neither let our soul indulge in idle humours 
respecting His exceeding and glorious gifts. Let this scrip- 
ture be far from us where He saith; Wretched are the doul p= 
minded, which doubt in their soul, and say, These things we did 
hear in the days of our fathers also, and behold we have grown ὁ i, 
and none of these things hath befallen us. Ye fools, compare your= 
selves unto a tree; take a vine. First it sheddeth its leaves, then 
a shoot cometh, then a leaf, then a flower, and after these t 
sour berry, then a full ripe grape. Ye see that in a little 
time the fruit of the tree attaineth unto mellowness. Of a 
truth quickly and suddenly shall His will be accomplished, th 
scripture also bearing witness to it, saying; He shall come quickly 
and shall not tarry; and the Lord shall come suddenly into Fit 
temple, even the Holy One, whom ye expect. a 

24. Let us understand, dearly beloved, how the Master 
continually showeth unto us the resurrection that shall be he e 
after; whereof He made the Lord Jesus Christ the firstfi it 
when He raised Him from the dead. Let us behold, dear 
beloved, the resurrection which happeneth at its proper sea οἱ 
Day and night show unto us the resurrection. The night fe et 
asleep, and day ariseth ; the day departeth, and night comet 
on. Let us mark the fruits, how and in what manner ¢ 
sowing taketh place. The sower goeth forth and casteth in 
the earth each of the seeds; and these falling into the ear 
dry and bare decay: then out of their decay the mighti ess. 
the Master’s providence raiseth them up, and from being 0 
they increase manifold and bear fruit. 4 

25. Let us consider the marvellous sign which is seen 


ΕΝ 
μάντι... 






























TO THE CORINTHIANS. _ 285 


he regions of the east, that is, in the parts about Arabia. 
here is a bird, which is named the phcenix. This, being 
he only one of its kind, liveth for five hundred years; and 
hen it hath now reached the time of its dissolution that it 
hould die, it maketh for itself a coffin of frankincense and myrrh 
nd the other spices, into the which in the fulness of time 
entereth, and so it dieth. But, as the flesh rotteth, a certain 
orm is engendered, which is nurtured from the moisture of 
e dead creature and putteth forth wings. Then, when it is 
‘rown lusty, it taketh up that coffin where are the bones of its 
arent, and carrying them journeyeth from the country of 
rabia even unto Egypt, to the place called the City of the 
sun; and in the day time in the sight of all, flying to the 
Itar of the Sun, it layeth them thereupon; and this done, it 
Jetteth forth to return. So the priests examine the registers 
f the times, and they find that it hath come when the five 
undredth year is completed. 

26. Do we then think it to be a great and marvellous thing, 
the Creator of the universe shall bring about the resurrection 
f them that have served Him with holiness in the assurance 
f a good faith, seeing that He showeth to us even by a bird 
e magnificence of His promise? For He saith in a certain 
lace; And Thou shalt raise me up, and I will praise Thee; and 
went to rest and slept, I was awaked, for Thou art with me. 
And again Job saith; And Thou shalt raise this my flesh which 
ath endured all these things. 

27. With this hope therefore let our souls be bound unto 
im that is faithful in His promises and that is righteous in 
is judgments. He that commanded not to lie, much more 
hall He Himself not lie: for nothing is impossible with God 
ave to lie. Therefore let our faith in Him be kindled within 
s, and let us understand that all things are nigh unto Him. 
By a word of His majesty He compacted the universe; and by 
word He can destroy it. Who shall say unto Him, What 
vast Thou done? or who shall resist the might of His strength? 
Nhen He listeth, and as He listeth, He will do all things ; and 


























286 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


nothing shall pass away of those things that He hath decrees 
All things are in His sight, and nothing escapeth His counse 
seeing that The heavens declare the glory of God, and the fi e 
mament proclaimeth His handiwork. Day uttereth word unt ) 
day, and night proclaimeth knowledge unto night; and there 
are neither words nor speeches, whose voices are not heard. at 

28. Since therefore all things are seen and heard, let is 
fear Him, and forsake the abominable lusts of evil works, 
that we’ may be shielded by His mercy from the coming 
judgments. For where can any of us escape from His strong 
hand? And what world will receive any of them that desert 
from His service? For the holy writing saith in a <a 
place; Where shall I go, and where shall I be hidden from Thy 
face? If I ascend into the heaven, Thou art there; if I depart 
into the farthest parts of the earth, there is T. hy right hand ; Ψ 
I make my bed in the depths, there is Thy Spirit. Whither ther 
shall one depart, or where shall one flee, from Him that 
embraceth the universe? 

29. Let us therefore approach Him in holiness of soul, 
lifting up pure and undefiled hands unto Him, with love towards 
our gentle and compassionate Father, who made us an elect 
portion unto Himself. For thus it is written: When the Mi 081 
High divided the nations, when He dispersed the sons of Adam, 
He fixed the boundaries of the nations according to the number 
of the angels of God. His people Facob became the portion 
of the Lord, and Israel the measurement of His inherita we 
And in another place He saith; Behold, the: Lord taketh fo 
Himself a nation out of the midst of the nations, as a man taketh 
the firstfruits of his threshing-floor; and the holy of ‘oll 
shall come forth from that nation. i 

30. Seeing then that we are the special portion of a Hi 
God, let us do all things that pertain unto. holiness, forsakit 
evil-speakings, abominable and impure embraces, drunkenness 
and tumults and hateful lusts, abominable adultery, hated 
pride; For God, He saith, resisteth the proud, but giveth gre 
to the lowly. Let us therefore cleave unto those to wh 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 287 






























ace is given from God. Let us clothe ourselves in con- 
ord, being lowly-minded and temperate, holding ourselves aloof 
om all backbiting and evil speaking, being justified by works 
d not by words. For He saith; He that saith much shall 
zar also again. Doth the ready talker think to be righteous ? 
lessed is the offspring of woman that liveth but a short time. 
6 not thou abundant in words. Let our praise be with God, 
nd not of ourselves: for God hateth them that praise them- 
elves. Let the testimony to our well-doing be given by 
ers, as it was given unto our fathers who were righteous, 
oldness and arrogance and daring are for them that are ac- 
rsed of God; but forbearance and humility and gentleness 
e with them that are blessed of God. 
31. Let us therefore cleave unto His blessing, and let us see 
hat are the ways of blessing. Let us study the records of the 
ings that have happened from the beginning. Wherefore was 
τ father Abraham blessed? Was it not because he wrought 
ghteousness and truth through faith? Isaac with confidence, 
knowing the future, was led a willing sacrifice. Jacob with 
mility departed from his land because of his brother, and went 
Τηΐο Laban and served; and the twelve tribes of Israel were 
ven unto him. 
32. If any man will consider them one by one in sin- 
rity, he shall understand the magnificence of the gifts that are 
liven by Him. For of Jacob are all the priests and levites who 
inister unto the altar of God; of him is the Lord Jesus as 
oncerning the flesh; of him are kings and rulers and governors 
1 the line of Judah; yea, and the rest of his tribes are held in 
Ὁ small honour, seeing that God promised saying, Thy seed 
tall be as the stars of heaven. They all therefore were glorified 
d magnified, not through themselves or their own works or 
e righteous doing which they wrought, but through His will. 
nd so we, having been called through His will in Christ Jesus, 
> not justified through ourselves or through our own wisdom 
understanding or piety or works which we wrought in holi- — 
ess of heart, but through faith, whereby the Almighty God 





288 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 



























justified all men that have been from the beginning; to whom 
be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. | 

33. What then must we do, brethren? Must we idly 
abstain from doing good, and forsake love? May the Master 
never allow this to befal us at least; but let us hasten with 
instancy and zeal to accomplish every good work, For the 
Creator and Master of the universe Himself rejoiceth in His 
works. For by His exceeding great might He established the 
heavens, and in His incomprehensible wisdom He set them in 
order. And the earth He separated from the water that sur- 
roundeth it, and He set it firm on the sure foundation of His 
own will; and the living creatures which walk upon it He com- 
manded to exist by His ordinance. Having before created the 
sea and the living creatures therein, He enclosed it by His own 
power. Above all, as the most excellent and exceeding great 
work of His intelligence, with His sacred and faultless hands 
He formed man in the impress of His own image. For thus 
saith God; Let us make man after our image and after our like- 
ness. And God made man; male and female made He them. 
So having finished all these things, He praised them and blessed 
them and said, Jncrease and multiply. We have seen that all 
the righteous were adorned in good works. Yea, and so the 
Lord Himself having adorned Himself with works rejoiced. 
Seeing then that we have this pattern, let us conform ourselves 
with all diligence to His will; let us with all our strength wo: " 
the work of righteousness. | 

34. The good workman receiveth the bread of his work with 
boldness, but the slothful and careless dareth not look his em- 
ployer in the face. It is therefore needful that we should bi 
zealous unto well-doing, for of Him are all things: since He fore 
warneth us saying, Behold, the Lord, and His reward ts before H 
face, to recompense each man according to his work. He exhort 
eth us therefore to believe on Him with our whole heart, an 
to be not idle nor careless unto every good work. Let our bo: : 
and our confidence be in Him: let us submit ourselves t 
His will; let us mark the whole host of His angels, how the 






























TO THE CORINTHIANS. 289 


and by and minister unto His will. For the scripture saith, 
Ten thousand times ten thousands stood by Him, and thousands of 
ousands ministered unto Him: and they cried aloud, Holy, holy, 
oly ts the Lord of Sabaoth,; all creation ts full of His glory. 
ea, and let us ourselves then, being gathered together in con- 
ord with intentness of heart, cry unto Him as from one mouth 
arnestly that we may be made partakers of His great and 
Florious promises. For He saith, Eye hath not seen, and ear hath 
fot heard, and it hath not entered into the heart of man, what 
reat things He hath prepared for them that patiently await Him. 
35. How blessed and marvellous are the gifts of God, dearly 
eloved! Life in immortality, splendour in righteousness, truth in 
oldness, faith in confidence, temperance in sanctification! And 
ll these things fall under our apprehension. What then, think 
e, are the things preparing for them that patiently await Him ? 
he Creator and Father of the ages, the All-holy One Himself 
oweth their number and their beauty. Let us therefore con- 
end, that we may be found in the number of those that patiently 
ait Him, to the end that we may be partakers of His promised 
ifts. But how shall this be, dearly beloved? If our mind be fixed 
rough faith towards God; if we seek out those things which 
e well pleasing and acceptable unto Him; if we accomplish 
ch things as beseem His faultless will, and follow the way of 
th, casting off from ourselves all unrighteousness and ini- 
ity, covetousness, strifes, malignities and deceits, whisperings 
d backbitings, hatred of God, pride and arrogance, vainglory 
d inhospitality. For they that do these things are hateful to 
od; and not only they that do them, but they also that consent 
to them. For the scripture saith; But unto the sinner said 
, Wherefore dost thou declare Mine ordinances, and takest My 
nant upon thy mouth? Yet thou didst hate instruction, and 
ast cast away My words behind thee. If thou sawest a thief, thou 
dst keep company with him, and with the adulterers thou didst 
2 thy portion. Thy mouth multiplied wickedness, and thy tongue 
ove deceit. Thou sattest and spakest against thy brother, and 
rainst the son of thy mother thou didst lay a stumbling-block. 
 CLEM. II. 19 


290 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


























These things thou hast done, and I kept silence. Thou thoughte. , 
unrighteous man, that I should be like unto thee. I will conviet 
thee, and will set thee face to face with thyself. Now understand 
ye these things, ye that forget God, lest at any time He seize you a $ 
a lion, and there be none to deliver. The sacrifice of praise sha ] 
glorify Me, and there is the way wherein I will show him the ; 
salvation of God. ; 

36. This is the way, dearly beloved, wherein we found ou 
salvation, even Jesus Christ the High-priest of our offerings, th 
Guardian and Helper of our weakness. Through Him let us 
look stedfastly unto the heights of the heavens; through Hin Ἢ 
we behold as in a mirror His faultless and most exceller 
visage; through Him the eyes of our hearts were opene 1: 
through Him our foolish and darkened mind springeth uj 
unto [His marvellous] light; through Him the Master willed 
that we should taste of the immortal knowledge; Who being 1) 
brightness of His majesty is so much greater than angels, 
He hath inherited a more excellent name. For so it is writte 1; 
Who maketh His angels spirits and His ministers a flame Ὁ 
fire; but of His Son the Master said thus; Zhou art My Son 
7 this day have begotten Thee. Ask of Me, and I will give The 
the Gentiles for Thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth υ 
Thy possession, And again He saith unto Him; Szt Thou on 
My right hand, until I make Thine enemies a footstool for ἡ 
feet. Who then are these enemies? ‘They that are wicked an 
resist His will. τ 

37. Let us therefore enlist ourselves, brethren, with all oat 
estness in His faultless ordinances. Let us mark the soldie 
that are enlisted under our rulers, how exactly, how readily, ἢ nc 
submissively, they execute the orders given them. All are ἢ 
prefects, nor rulers of thousands, nor rulers of hundred ἢ 
rulers of fifties, and so forth; but each man in his own ra 
executeth the orders given by the king and the governors. 2 
great without the small cannot exist, neither the small wit 
the great. There is a certain mixture in all things, and the 
is utility. Let us take our body as an example. The I 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 201 


without the feet is nothing; so likewise the feet without the 
head are nothing: even the smallest limbs of our body, are 
necessary and useful for the whole body: but all the members 
conspire and unite in subjection, that the whole body may be 
saved. 

38. So in our case let the whole body be saved in Christ 
esus, and let each man be subject unto his neighbour, ac- 
ording as also he was appointed with his special grace. Let 

Bnot the strong neglect the weak; and let the weak respect the 
@strong. Let the rich minister aid to the poor; and let the poor 
give thanks to God, because He hath given him one through 
hom his wants may be supplied. Let the wise display his 
isdom, not in words, but in good works. He that is lowly 
in mind, let him not bear testimony to himself, but leave testi- 
ony to be borne to him by his neighbour. He that is pure in 
e flesh, let him be so, and not boast, knowing that it is Another 
ho bestoweth his continence upon him. Let us consider, 
brethren, of what matter we were made; who and what manner 
of beings we were, when we came into the world; from what a 
sepulchre and what darkness He that moulded and created us 
brought us into His world, having prepared His benefits afore- 
mand ere ever we were born. Seeing therefore that we have all 
these things from Him, we ought in all things to give thanks to 
im, to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
39. Senseless and stupid and foolish and ignorant men 
eer and mock at us, desiring that they themselves should be 
xalted in their imaginations. For what power hath a mortal ? 
D what strength hath a child of earth? For it is written; There 
as no form before mine eyes; only I heard a breath and a 
| What then? Shall a mortal be clean in the sight of the 
ad; or shall a man be unblameable for his works? seeing 
hat He is distrustful against His servants, and noteth some 
ἷ Υ ersity against His angels. Nay, the heaven is not clean in 
Tis sight. Away then, ye that dwell in houses of clay, whereof, 
wen of the same clay, we ourselves are made. He smote them 


τ 
tke a moth, and from morn to even they are no more. Because 


19—2 












if 
a 
+ 
f 
ἃ 


εἴ 


292 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 




































they could not succour themselves, they perished. He breathe 
upon them and they died, because they had no wisdom. But call 
thou, if perchance one shall obey thee, or if thou shalt see one 
the holy angels. For wrath killeth the foolish man, and eny 
slayeth him that ts gone astray. And I have seen fools throwt ὴ 
out roots, but forthwith their habitation was eaten up. Far he 
their sons from safety. May they be mocked at the gates of 
infertors, and there shall be none to deliver them. For the thing ; 
which are prepared for them, the righteous shall eat; but they 
themselves shall not be delivered from evils. . 
40. Forasmuch then as these things are manifest beforehand, 
and we have searched into the depths of the Divine knowledge, 
we ought to do all things in order, as many as the Master hath 
commanded us to perform at their appointed seasons. Now he 
offerings and ministrations He commanded to be performed 
with care, and not to be done rashly or in disorder, but at fi od 
times and seasons. And where and by whom He would have 
them performed, He Himself fixed by His supreme will: tha 
all things being done with piety according to His good pleasur 
might be acceptable to His will. They therefore that mak 
their offerings at the appointed seasons are acceptable ane 
blessed: for while they follow the institutions of the Maste 
they cannot go wrong. For unto the high-priest his prope 
services have been assigned, and to the priests their prop 
office is appointed, and upon the levites their proper mi 
trations are laid. The layman is bound by the layman 
ordinances. 4 
41. Let each of you, brethren, in his own order give 
unto God, maintaining a good conscience, and not transgresst 
the appointed rule of his service, but acting with all seemline 
Not in every place, brethren, are the continual daily sa 
offered, or the freewill offerings, or the sin offerings and { 
trespass offerings, but in Jerusalem alone. And even there’ 
offering is not made in every place, but before the sanctv ry 
the court of the altar; and this too through the high-pri est. 
the aforesaid ministers, after that the victim to be offered 
































TO THE CORINTHIANS. 293 


been inspected for blemishes. They therefore who do any thing 
contrary to the seemly ordinance of His will receive death as 
the penalty. Ye see, brethren, in proportion as greater know- 
ledge hath been vouchsafed unto us, so much the more are we 
Jexposed to danger. 

42. The Apostles received the Gospel for us from the Lord 
Jesus Christ ; Jesus Christ was sent forth from God. So then 
®Christ is from God, and the Apostles are from Christ. Both 
therefore.came of the will of God in the appointed order. Having 
herefore received a charge, and having been fully assured through 
he resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ and confirmed in the 
ord of God with full assurance of the Holy Ghost, they went 
orth with the glad tidings that the kingdom of God should 
Hcome. So preaching everywhere in country and town, they ap- 
Ppointed their first-fruits, when they had proved them by the 
BSpirit, to be bishops and deacons unto them that should believe. 
And this they did in no new fashion; for indeed it had been 
ritten concerning bishops and deacons from very ancient 
@times ; for thus saith the scripture in a certain place, J wi// 
appoint their bishops in righteousness and their deacons in faith. 

43. And what marvel, if they which were entrusted in Christ 
ith such a work by God appointed the aforesaid persons? 
seeing that even the blessed Moses who was a faithful servant 
m all Fis house recorded for a sign in the sacred books all 
hings that were enjoined upon him. And him also the rest of 
he prophets followed, bearing witness with him unto the laws 
at were ordained by him. For he, when jealousy arose con- 
cerning the priesthood, and there was dissension among the 
tribes which of them was adorned with the glorious name, com- 
manded the twelve chiefs of the tribes to bring to him rods 
scribed with the name of each tribe. And he took them and 
tied them and sealed them with the signet rings of the chiefs of 
the tribes, and put them away in the tabernacle of the testimony 
on the table of God. And having shut the tabernacle he sealed 
he keys, and likewise also the doors. And he said unto them, 
Brethren, the tribe whose rod shall bud, this hath God chosen to be 


294 5, CLEMENT ΟΕ ROME 








































᾿ ἢ 


priests and ministers unto Him. Now when morning came, he 
called together all Israel, even the six hundred thousand me ᾿ 
and showed the seals to the chiefs of the tribes, and opened the: 
tabernacle of the testimony, and drew forth the rods. And 6 
rod of Aaron was found not only with buds, but also bearir 4 
fruit. What think ye, dearly beloved? Did not Moses know 
beforehand that this would come to pass? Assuredly he 
knew it. But that disorder might not arise in Israel, he did 
thus, to the end that the Name of the true and only God migh 
be glorified : to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. ~ 

44. And our Apostles knew through our Lord Jesus Christ 
that there would be strife over the name of the bishop’s offi 6. 
For this cause therefore, having received complete foreknow- 
ledge, they appointed the aforesaid persons, and afterwards they. 
provided a continuance, that if these should fall asleep, other 
approved men should succeed to their ministration. Those 
therefore who were appointed by them, or afterward by other 
men of repute with the consent of the whole Church, and ha e 
ministered unblameably to the flock of Christ in lowliness οἱ 
mind, peacefully and with all modesty, and for long time hav 
borne a good report with all—these men we consider to be um 
justly thrust out from their ministration. For it will be no ligh 
sin for us, if we thrust out those who have offered the gifts of 
the bishop’s office unblameably and holily. Blessed are thos 
presbyters who have gone before, seeing that their depa pur 
was fruitful and ripe: for they have no fear lest any one shoul 
remove them from their appointed place. For we see that y 
have displaced certain persons, though they were living hona 1 
ably, from the ministration which they had +respected+ blam« 
lessly. i‘ 

45. Be ye contentious, brethren, and jealous about ἢ 
things that pertain unto salvation. Ye have searched t 
scriptures, which are true, which were given through the Ho 
Ghost ; and ye know that nothing unrighteous or counterfeit 
written in them. Ye will not find that righteous persons hi 
been thrust out by holy men. Righteous men were persecu 


ΤῈ 
μεν 


' TO THE CORINTHIANS. 295 





































but it was by the lawless; they were imprisoned, but it was by 
the unholy. They were stoned by transgressors: they were slain 
by those who had conceived a detestable and unrighteous jea- 
lousy. Suffering these things, they endured nobly. For what 
must we say, brethren? Was Daniel cast into the lions’ den by 
them that fear God? Or were Ananias and Azarias and 
@Misael shut up in the furnace of fire by them that professed 
Bthe excellent and glorious worship of the Most High? Far be 
this from our thoughts. Who then were they that did these 
Wthings? Abominable men and full of all wickedness were 
stirred up to such a pitch of wrath, as to bring cruel suffering 
upon them that served God in a holy and blameless purpose, 
not knowing that the Most High is the champion and pro- 
tector of them that in a pure conscience serve His excellent 
Name: unto whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. But 
they that endured patiently in confidence inherited glory and 
honour; they were exalted, and had their names recorded by 
God in their memorial for ever and ever. Amen. 
46. To such examples as these therefore, brethren, we 
also ought to cleavé. For it is written; Cleave unto the saints, 
or they that cleave unto them shall be sanctified. And again 
He saith in another place; Wzth the guiltless man thou shalt 
be guiltless, and with the elect thou shalt be elect, and with the 
WBerooked thou shalt deal crookedly. Wet us therefore cleave to the 
‘Beguiltless and righteous: and these are the elect of God. Where- 
Wfore are there strifes and wraths and factions and divisions and 
war among you? Have we not one God and one Christ and 
‘one Spirit of grace that was shed upon us? -And is there not 
one calling in Christ? Wherefore do we tear and rend asunder 
the members of Christ, and stir up factions against our own 
body, and reach such a pitch of folly, as to forget that we are 
members one of another? Remember the words of Jesus our 
Lord: for He said, Woe unto that man. It were good for him 


of Mine elect. It were better for him that a mill-stone were 
anged about him, and he cast into the sea, than that he should 


























296 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


pervert one of Mine elect. Your division hath perverted many 
it hath brought many to despair, many to doubting, and all 
of us to sorrow. And your sedition still continueth. J 

47. Take up the epistle of the blessed Paul the Apostle, 
What wrote he first unto you in the beginning of the Gospel? 
Of a truth he charged you in the Spirit concerning himself 
and Cephas and Apollos, because that even then ye had made 
parties. Yet that making of parties brought less sin upon you; 
for ye were partisans of Apostles that were highly reputed, 
and of a man approved in their sight. But now mark ye, who 
they are that have perverted you and diminished the glory of 
your renowned love for the brotherhood. It is shameful, dearl y 
beloved, yes, utterly shameful, and unworthy of your conduct 
in Christ, that it should be reported that the very sted- 
fast and ancient Church of the Corinthians, for the sake of 
one or two persons, maketh sedition against its presbyters. 
And this report hath reached not only us, but them also which 
differ from us, so that ye even heap blasphemies on the Name 
of the Lord by reason of your folly, and moreover create peri 
for yourselves. if 

48. Let us therefore root this out quickly, and let us 
fall down before the Master, and entreat Him with tears, tha 
He may show Himself propitious, and be reconciled unto us, am 
may restore us to the seemly and pure conduct which belonget 
to our love of the brethren. For this is a gate of righteous 
ness opened unto life, as it is written; Open me the gates 6 
righteousness, that I may enter in thereby and praise the Lor. L 
This ἐς the gate of the Lord; the righteous shall enter in therely 
Seeing then that many gates are opened, this is that gate whi 
is in righteousness, even that which is in Christ, whereby a 
are blessed, that have entered in and direct their path i 
holiness and righteousness, performing all things without cor 
fusion. Let a man be faithful, let him be able to expout 
a deep saying, let him be wise in the discernment of word 
let him be strenuous in deeds, let him be pure; for so mut 
the more ought he to be lowly in mind, in proportion as_ 


ἐξ Τὰ" " 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 297 





































seemeth to be the greater; and he ought to seek the common 
advantage of all, and not his own. 

49. Let him that hath love in Christ fulfil the command- 
ments of Christ. Who can declare the bond of the love of 
God? Who is sufficient to tell the majesty of its beauty? 
} The height, whereunto love exalteth, is unspeakable. Love 
joineth us unto God; Jove covereth a multitude of sins; love 
endureth all things, is long-suffering in all things. There is 
#nothing coarse, nothing arrogant in love. Love hath no di- 
visions, love maketh no seditions, love doeth all things in con- 
§cord. In love were all the elect of God made perfect ; without 
love nothing is well-pleasing to God: in love the Master took 
Jus unto Himself; for the love which He had toward us, Jesus 
Christ our Lord hath given His blood for us by the will of God, 
and His flesh for our flesh, and His life for our lives. 

50. Ye see, dearly beloved, how great and marvellous 
a thing is love, and there is no declaring its perfection. Who is 
sufficient to be found therein, save those to whom God shall 
vouchsafe it? Let us therefore entreat and ask of His mercy, 
that we may be found blameless in love, standing apart from the 
factiousness of men. All the generations from Adam unto this day 
have passed away: but they that by God’s grace were perfected in 
love dwell in the abode of the pious; and they shall be made 
manifest in the visitation of the kingdom of God. For it is 
written: Enter into the closet for a very little while, until Mine 
anger and My wrath shall pass away, and I will remember a good 
day, and will raise you from your tombs. Blessed were we, dearly 
beloved, if we should be doing the commandments of God in 
concord of love, to the end that our sins may through love be 
forgiven us. For it is written; Blessed are they whose iniqutties 
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to 
whom the Lord shall impute no sin, neither is guile in his mouth. 
This declaration of blessedness was pronounced upon them that 
have been elected by God through Jesus Christ our Lord, to 
whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

51. For all our transgressions therefore which we have com- 








































208 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


mitted through any of the wiles of the adversary, let us entreat 
that we may obtain forgiveness. Yea and they also, who set them- 
selves up as leaders of faction and division, ought to look to the 
common ground of hope. For such as walk in fear and love desire 
that they themselves should fall into suffering rather than their 
neighbours; and they pronounce condemnation against them- 
selves rather than against the harmony which hath been handed 
down to us nobly and righteously. For it is good for a man 
to make confession of his trespasses rather than to harden his 
heart, as the heart of those was hardened who made seditio 
against Moses the servant of God; whose condemnation was 
clearly manifest, for they went down to hades alive, and death 
shall be their shepherd. Pharaoh and his host and all the rulers 
of Egypt, their chariots and their horsemen, were overwhelmed 
in the depths of the Red Sea, and perished for none other reason” 
but because their foolish hearts were hardened, after that the 
signs and the wonders had been wrought in the land of Egypt i 
by the hand of Moses the servant of God. 4 

52. The Master, brethren, hath need of nothing at all. 
He desireth not anything of any man, save to confess unto 
Him. For the elect David saith ; 7 will confess unto the Lord, 
and it shall please Him more than a young calf that groweth 
horns and hoofs. Let the poor see it, and rejoice. And again 
He saith; Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows 
to the Most High: and call upon Me in the day of thine afflic- 
tion, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me. Foi 
a sacrifice unto God ts a broken spirit. Ἷ ἔ 

53. For ye know, and know well, the sacred scriptures 
dearly beloved, and ye have searched into the oracles of od 
We write these things therefore to put you in remembrance 
When Moses went up into the mountain and had spent fort 
days and forty nights in fasting and humiliation, God sa! 
unto him; Moses, Moses, go down quickly hence, for My peof 
whom thou leddest forth from the land of Egypt have wro σ 
iniquity : they have transgressed quickly out of the way which th 
didst command unto them: they have made for themselves molt 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 299 































images. And the Lord said unto him; 7 have spoken. unto thee 
once and twice, saying, 7 have seen this people, and behold it ts 
stiff-necked. Let Me destroy them utterly, and I will blot out 
their name from under heaven, and I will make of thee a nation 
creat and wonderful and numerous more than this. And Moses 
said; Nay, not so, Lord. Forgive this people their sin, or blot 
Wme also out of the book of the living. O mighty love! O un- 
Hsurpassable perfection! The servant is bold with his Master ; 
he asketh forgiveness for the multitude, or he demandeth that 
himself also be blotted out with them. 

54. Who therefore is noble among you? Who is com- 
passionate? Who is fulfilled with love? Let him say; If by 
reason of me there be faction and strife and divisions, I retire, 
I depart, whither ye will, and I do that which is ordered by 
the people : only let the flock of Christ be at peace with its duly 
appointed presbyters. He that shall have done this, shall win 
for himself great renown in Christ, and every place will receive 
him: for the earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof. Thus 
have they done and will do, that live as citizens of that kingdom 
of God which bringeth no regrets. 

55. But, to bring forward examples of Gentiles also; many 
kings and rulers, when some season of pestilence pressed upon 
them, being taught by oracles have delivered themselves over to 
death, that they might rescue their fellow citizens through their 
own blood. Many have retired from their own cities, that they 
might have no more seditions. We know that many among our- 
selves have delivered themselves to bondage, that they might 
fansom others. Many have sold themselves to slavery, and re- 
ceiving the price paid for themselves have fed others. Many 
women being strengthened through the grace of God have 
performed many manly deeds. The blessed Judith, when the 
city was beleaguered, asked of the elders that she might be 
suffered to go forth into the camp of the aliens. So she 
exposed herself to peril and went forth for love of her country 
and of her people which were beleaguered; and the Lord de- 
livered Holophernes into the hand of a woman. To no less 





300 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 































peril did Esther also, who was perfect in faith, expose herself, that 
she might deliver the twelve tribes of Israel, when they were on: 
the point to perish. For through her fasting and her humiliation 
she entreated the all-seeing Master, the God of the ages; and 
He, seeing the humility of her soul, delivered the people for 
whose sake she encountered the peril. a 

56. Therefore let us also make intercession for them that 
are in any transgression, that forbearance and humility may 
be given them, to the end that they may yield not unto us, but 
unto the will of God. For so shall the compassionate remem- 
brance of them with God and the saints be fruitful unto them, 
and perfect. Let us accept chastisement, whereat no man ought 
to be vexed, dearly beloved. The admonition which we give one 
to another is good and exceeding useful; for it joineth us unto the 
will of God. For thus saith the holy word; Zhe Lord hath 
indeed chastened me, and hath not delivered me over unto death, 
For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom He receiveth. For the righteous, it is said, shall chasten 
me in mercy, and shall reprove me; but let not the +mercyt of sin= 
ners anoint my head. And again He saith; Blessed is the man 
whom the Lord hath reproved, and refuse not thou the admonition 
of the Almighty. For He causeth pain, and He restoreth again: 
He hath smitten, and His hands have healed. Six times shall 
Hle rescue thee from afflictions: and at the seventh no ew 
shall touch thee. In famine He shall deliver thee from death, 
and in war He shall release thee from the arm of the sword 
And from the scourge of the tongue shall He hide thee, and thot 
shalt not be afraid when evils approach. Thou shalt.laugh at Mi 
unrighteous and wicked, and of the wild beasts thou shalt no 
be afraid. For wild beasts shall be at peace with thee. The 
shalt thou know that thy house shall be at peace: and the abod 
of thy tabernacle shall not go wrong, and thou shalt know tha 
thy seed is many, and thy children as the plenteous herbage ¢ 
the field. And thou shalt come to the grave as ripe corn 
in due season, or as the heap of the threshing floor ga her 
together at the right time. Ye see, dearly beloved, how gre 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 301 





























protection there is for them that are chastened by the Master: 
for being a kind father He chasteneth us, to the end that we 
may obtain mercy through His holy chastisement. 

57. Ye therefore that laid the foundation of the sedition, 
submit yourselves unto the presbyters, and receive chastisement 
unto repentance, bending the knees of your heart. Learn to 
submit yourselves, laying aside the arrogant and proud stub- 
bornness of your tongue. For it is better for you to be found 
Blittle in the flock of Christ and to have your name on God’s 
roll, than to be had in exceeding honour and yet be cast 
out from the hope of Him. For thus saith the All-virtuous 
Wisdom ; Behold I will pour out for you a saying of My breath, 
and I will teach you My word. Because I called and ye obeyed 
not, and I held out words and ye heeded not, but made My coun- 
sels of none effect, and were disobedient unto My reproofs ; there- 
ore 7 also will laugh at your destruction, and will rejoice over you 
when ruin cometh upon you, and when confusion overtaketh you 
suddenly, and your overthrow is at hand like a whirlwind, or 
when anguish and beleaguerment come upon you. For it shall 
be, when ye call upon Me, yet will I not hear you. Evil men shall 
seek Me, and shall not find Me: for they hated wisdom, and 
chose not the fear of the Lord, neither would they give heed unto 
My counsels, but mocked at My reproofs. Therefore they shall 
eat the fruits of their own way, and shall be filled with their 
own ungodliness. For because they wronged babes, they shall be 
Slain, and inquisition shall destroy the ungodly. But he that 
heareth Me shall dwell safely trusting in hope, and shall be quiet 
om fear of all evil. 

58. Let us therefore be obedient unto His most holy 
and glorious Name, thereby escaping the threatenings which 
were spoken of old by the mouth of Wisdom against them 
which disobey, that we may dwell safely, trusting in the most 
holy Name of His majesty. Receive our counsel, and ye 
shall have no occasion of regret. For as God liveth, and the 
Lord Jesus Christ liveth, and the Holy Spirit, who are the 
faith and the hope of the elect, so surely shall he, who with 
Le 








302 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 































lowliness of mind and instant in gentleness hath without regret: 
fulness performed the ordinances and commandments that are 
given by God, be enrolled and have a name among the number 
of them that are saved through Jesus Christ, through whom s 
the glory unto Him for ever and ever. Amen. ἡ 

59. But if certain persons should be disobedient unto the 
words spoken by Him through us, let them understand that 
they will entangle themselves in no slight transgression and 
danger; but we shall be guiltless of this sin. And we will 
ask, with instancy of prayer and supplication, that the Creator 
of the universe may guard intact unto the end the number 
that hath been numbered of His elect throughout the whole 
world, through His beloved Son Jesus Christ, through whom 
He called us from darkness to light, from ignorance to the ful 
knowledge of the glory of His Name. ; 

[Grant unto us, Lord,] that we may set our hope on Th 
Name which is the primal source of all creation, and open the 
eyes of our heart, that we may know Thee, who alone abia $1 
Highest in the high, Holy in the holy; who layest low the inso- 
lence of the proud ; who scatterest the imaginings of nations; whe 
settest the lowly on high, and bringest the lofty low ; who makesi 
rich and makest poor; who killest and makest alive ; who alon 
art the Benefactor of spirits and the God of all flesh; who 
lookest into the abysses, who scannest the works of man; the 
Succour of them that are in peril, the Saviour of them that an 
in despair ; the Creator and Overseer of every spirit ; who m 1 
tipliest the nations upon earth, and hast chosen out from a 
men those that love Thee through Jesus Christ, Thy belove 
Son, through whom Thou didst instruct us, didst sanctif 
us, didst honour us. We beseech Thee, Lord and Master, t 
be our help and succour. Save those among us who are i 
tribulation; have mercy on the lowly; lift up the fa er 
show Thyself unto the needy; heal the ungodly; convert fl 
wanderers of Thy people; feed the hungry; release ο 
prisoners; raise up the weak; comfort the [αἰπί- πραγ. 1 
all the Gentiles know that Thou art God alone, and Je 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 303 

































qChrist is Thy Son, and we are Thy people and the sheep of Thy 
pasture. 
} 60. Thou through Thine operations didst make manifest 
ithe everlasting fabric of the world. Thou, Lord, didst create 
he earth. Thou that art faithful throughout all generations, 
ighteous in Thy judgments, marvellous in strength and ex- 
Pcellence, Thou that art wise in creating and prudent in esta- 
Pblishing that which Thou hast made, that art good in the 
§things which are seen and faithful with them that trust on 
hee, pitiful and compassionate, forgive us our iniquities and 
four unrighteousnesses and our transgressions and shortcomings. 
Lay not to our account every sin of Thy servants and Thine 
Phandmaids, but cleanse us with the cleansing of Thy truth, 
Jand guide our steps to walk in holiness and righteousness 
and singleness of heart, and to do such things as are good 
Wand well-pleasing nm Thy sight and in the sight of our rulers. 
HYea, Lord, make Thy face to shine upon us in peace for our 
good, that we may be sheltered dy Thy mighty hand and 
delivered from every sin dy Thine uplifted arm. And deliver 
s from them that hate us wrongfully. Give concord and 
peace to us and to all that dwell on the earth, as Thou gavest 
to our fathers, when they called on Thee in faith and truth 
ith holiness, [that we may be saved,] while we render obedi- 
ence to Thine almighty and most excellent Name, and to our 
‘rulers and governors upon the earth, 
61. Thou, Lord and Master, hast given them the power 
of sovereignty through Thine excellent and unspeakable might, 
Wthat we knowing the glory and honour which Thou hast 
given them may submit ourselves unto them, in nothing re- 
sisting Thy will. Grant unto them therefore, O Lord, health, 
‘peace, concord, stability, that they may administer the go- 
ernment which Thou hast given them without failure. For 
hou, O heavenly Master, King of the ages, givest to the 
sons of men glory and honour and power over all things that 
are upon the earth. Do Thou, Lord, direct their counsel ac- 
CO rding to that which is good and well-pleasing in Thy sight, 


































304 S. CLEMENT OF ROME 


that, administering in peace and gentleness with godliness the 
power which Thou hast given them, they may obtain Thy 
favour. O Thou, who alone art able to do these things, and 
things far more exceeding good than these for us, we praise | 
Thee through the High-priest and Guardian of our souls, Jesus 
Christ, through whom be the glory and the majesty unto 
Thee both now and for all generations and for ever and eve q 
Amen. 4 

62. As touching those things which befit our religion and 
are most useful for a virtuous life to such as would guide 
[their steps] in holiness and righteousness, we have written fully 
unto you, brethren. For concerning faith and repentance and 
genuine love and temperance and sobriety and patience we 
have handled every argument, putting you in remembran 2, 
that ye ought to please Almighty God in righteousness and 
truth and long-suffering with holiness, laying aside malice and 
pursuing concord in love and peace, being instant in gentle- 
ness; even as our fathers, of whom we spake before, pleased 
Him, being lowly-minded towards their Father and God and 
Creator and towards all men. And we have put you in mind of 
these things the more gladly, since we knew well that we were 
writing to men who are faithful and highly accounted and have 
diligently searched into the oracles of the teaching of God. 4 

63. Therefore it is right for us to give heed to so great and 
so many examples, and to submit the neck, and occupying 
place of obedience to take our side with them that are the 
leaders of our souls, that ceasing from this foolish dissension we 
may attain unto the goal which lieth before us in truthfuln 588, 
keeping aloof from every fault. For ye will give us great joy 
and gladness, if ye render obedience unto the things written by 
us through the Holy Spirit, and root out the unrighteous ange 
of your jealousy, according to the entreaty which we have mad 
for peace and concord in this letter. And we have also sen 
faithful and prudent men that have walked among us fi 
youth unto old age unblameably, who shall also be witne ᾿ 
between you and us. And this we have done that ye nig 


i 


TO THE CORINTHIANS. 305 




















iknow that we have had, and still have, every solicitude that 
e should be speedily at peace. 

64. Finally may the All-seeing God and Master of spirits 
nd Lord of all flesh, who chose the Lord Jesus Christ, and us 
hrough Him for a peculiar people, grant unto every soul that is 
alled after His excellent and holy Name faith, fear, peace, 
| patience, long-suffering, temperance, chastity and soberness, that 
hey may be well-pleasing unto His Name through our High- 
riest and Guardian Jesus Christ, through whom unto Him be 
lory and majesty, might and honour, both now and for ever 
ind ever. Amen. 

65. Now send ye back speedily unto us our messengers 
laudius Ephebus and Valerius Bito, together with Fortunatus 

Iso, in peace and with joy, to the end that they may the 
ποτε quickly report the peace and concord which is prayed 
Yor and earnestly desired by us, that we also may the more 
$peedily rejoice over your good order. 

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you and with all 
en in all places who have been called by God and through 
im, through whom is glory and honour, power and greatness 
jhnd eternal dominion, unto Him, from the ages past and for 
ver and ever. Amen. 











CLEM. II. 20 











| 











AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 




















RETHREN, we ought so to think of Jesus Christ, as 

of God, as of the Judge of quick and dead. And 

we ought not to think mean things of our Salvation: for 
when we think mean things of Him, we expect also to receive 
mean things. And they that listen as concerning mean things’ 
do wrong; and we ourselves do wrong, not knowing whence 
and by whom and unto what place we were called, and 
how many things Jesus Christ endured to suffer for our 
sakes. What recompense then shall we give unto Him? 
or what fruit worthy of His own gift to us? And how 
many mercies do we owe to Him! For He bestowed th 
light upon us; He spake to us, as a father to his sons; Hi 
saved us, when we were perishing. What praise then shall w 
give to Him? or what payment of recompense for those thing 
which we received ? we who were maimed in our understanding 
and worshipped stocks and stones, gold and silver and bronzi 
the works of men; and our whole life was nothing else bu 
death. While then we were thus wrapped in darkness an 
oppressed with this thick mist in our vision, we recovered ov 
sight, putting off by His will the cloud wherein we were wrappe 
For He had mercy on us, and in His compassion saved τὶ 
having beheld in us much error and perdition, even when y 


AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 307 


had no hope of salvation, save that which came from Him. For 
He called us, when we were not, and from not being He willed 
s to be. | 
2. Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not. Break out and cry, 
Whou that travailest not; for more are the children of the desolate 
han of her that hath the husband. In that He said, Rejoice, thou 
barren that bearest not, He spake of us: for our Church was 
Warren, before that children were given unto her. And in that 
e said, Cry aloud, thou that travailest not, He meaneth this ; 
Let us not, like women in travail, grow weary of offering up our 
Prayers with simplicity to God. Again, in that He said, For 
σ children of the desolate are more than of her that hath the 
Wusband, He so spake, because our people seemed desolate and 
Forsaken of God, whereas now, having believed, we have become 
more than those who seemed to have God. Again another 
cripture saith, 7 came not to call the righteous, but sinners. He 
eaneth this; that it is right to save them that are perishing. 
or this indeed is a great and marvellous work, to establish, not 
hose things which stand, but those which are falling. So also 
hrist willed to save the things which were perishing. And He 
aved many, coming and calling us when we were even now 
erishing. 

3. Seeing then that He bestowed so great mercy on us; 
rst of all, that we, who are living, do not sacrifice to these dead 
ods, neither worship them, but through Him have known the 
ather of truth. What else is this knowledge to Himward, but 

Jot to deny Him through whom we have known Him? Yea, 
We Himself saith, Whoso confesseth Me, Him will I confess 
Wore the Father. This then is our reward, if verily we shall 
‘nfess Him through whom we were saved. But wherein do 
e confess Him? When we do that which He saith and are not 
isobedient unto His commandments, and not only honour Him 
With our lips, but with our whole heart and with our whole mind. 
ow He saith also in Isaiah, This people honoureth Me with their 
s, but their heart is far from Me. 







20—2 














qe a eS ον 














308 AN ANCIENT HOMILY 



























4. Let us therefore not only call Him Lord, for this will not 
save us: for He saith, Wot every one that saith unto Me, Lord 
Lord, shall be saved, but he that doeth righteousness. So thei . 
brethren, let us confess Him in our works, by loving one another, 
by not committing adultery nor speaking evil one against 
another nor envying, but being temperate, merciful, kindly. 
And we ought to have fellow-feeling one with another and not 
to be covetous. By these works let us confess Him, and not 
by the contrary. And we ought not rather to fear men but 
God. For this cause, if ye do these things, the Lord said, 
Though ye be gathered together with Me in My bosom, and do not 
My commandments, I will cast you away and will say unto you, 
Depart from Me, I know you not whence ye are, ye workers ¢ 
iniquity. q 

5. Wherefore, brethren, let us forsake our sojourn in this 
world and do the will of Him that called us, and let us not be 
afraid to depart out of this world. For the Lord saith, Ye sh a 
be as lambs in the midst of wolves. But Peter answered and sai 
unto Him, What then, if the wolves should tear the lambs? Je su 
said unto Peter, Let not the lambs fear the wolves after they ar 
dead; and ye also, fear ye not them that kill you and are not abi 
to do anything to you; but fear him that after ye are dead 
power over soul and body, to cast them into the gehenna of fit 
And ye know, brethren, that the sojourn of this flesh in thi 
world is mean and for a short time, but the promise of Christ — 
great and marvellous, even the rest of the kingdom that shall 
and of life eternal. What then can we do to obtain them, bi 
walk in holiness and righteousness, and consider these world 
things as alien to us, and not desire them? For when we d 2s 
to obtain these things we fall away from the righteous path, — 

6. But the Lord saith, Vo servant can serve two masters. 
we desire to serve both God and mammon, it is unprofitable 
us: For what advantage is it, if a man gain the whole world ὁ 
forfeit his soul? Now this age and the future are two en em 
The one speaketh of adultery and defilement and avarice 


BY AN UNKNOWN AUTHOR. 309 



























deceit, but the other biddeth farewell to these. We cannot 
ttherefore be friends of the two, but must bid farewell to the one 
and hold companionship with the other. Let us consider that 
}t is better to hate the things which are here, because they are 
ean and for a short time and perishable, and to love the things 
hich are there, for they are good and imperishable. For, if we 
do the will of Christ, we shall find rest; but if otherwise, then 
othing shall deliver us from eternal punishment, if we should 
disobey His commandments. And the scripture also saith in 
zekiel, Though Noah and $0b and Daniel should rise up, they 
hall not deliver their children in the captivity. But if even such 
Fighteous men as these cannot by their righteous deeds deliver 
Fheir children, with what confidence shall we, if we keep not our 
aptism pure and undefiled, enter into the kingdom of God? 
Ur who shall be our advocate, unless we be found having holy 
jand righteous works? 
7. So then, my brethren, let us contend, knowing that the 
ontest is nigh at hand, and that, while many resort to the cor- 
Fuptible contests, yet not all are crowned, but only they that 
ave toiled hard and contended bravely. Let us then contend 
hat we all may be crowned. Wherefore let us run in the 
traight course, the incorruptible contest. And let us resort to 
in throngs and contend, that we may also be crowned. And 
we cannot all be crowned, let us at least come near to the 
rown. We ought to know that he which contendeth in the 
orruptible contest, if he be found dealing corruptly with it, is 
irst flogged, and then removed and driven out of the race-course. 
hat think ye? What shall be done to him that hath dealt 
corruptly with the contest of incorruption? For as concerning 
‘hem that have not kept the seal, He saith, Their worm shall not 
6, and their fire shall not be quenched, and they shall be for a 
pectacle unto all flesh. 
_ 8. While we are on earth, then, let us repent: for we are 
Πὰν under the craftsman’s hand. For in like manner as the 
notter, if he be making a vessel, and it get twisted or crushed in 

















310 AN ANCIENT HOMILY 




























his hands, reshapeth it again; but if he have once put it into the 
fiery oven, he shall no longer mend it: so also let us, while we 
are in this world, repent with our whole heart of the evil thing ᾿ 
which we have done in the flesh, that we may be saved by the 
Lord, while we have yet time for repentance. For after that we 
have departed out of the world, we can no more make confessio! ᾿ 
there, or repent any more. Wherefore, brethren, if we shall hay 8 
done the will of the Father and kept the flesh pure and guardec : 
the commandments of the Lord, we shall receive life eterna 4 
For the Lord saith in the Gospel, 717. ye kept not that which | 
little, who shall give unto you that which is great? For I say 
unto you that he which is faithful in the least, is faithful also in 
much. So then He meaneth this, Keep the flesh pure and 
seal unstained, to the end that we may receive life. 4 
9. And let not any one of you say that this flesh is ot 
judged neither riseth again. Understand ye. In what were yé 
saved? In what did ye recover your sight? if ye were not in 
this flesh. We ought therefore to guard the flesh as a temple οἱ 
God: for in like manner as ye were called in the flesh, ye shal 
come also in the flesh. If Christ the Lord who saved us, being 
first spirit, then became flesh, and so called us, in like manne 
also shall we in this flesh receive our reward. Let us therefo 
love one another, that we all may come unto the kingdom 0 
God. While we have time to be healed, let us place ourselves I 
the hands of God the physician, giving Him a recompenst 
What recompense? Repentance from a sincere heart. For F | 
discerneth all things beforehand and knoweth what is in ou 
heart. Let us therefore give unto Him eternal praise, not fror 
our lips only, but also from our heart, that He may receive us ¢ 
sons. For the Lord also said, These are My brethren, whic 6 
the will of My Father. Γ 
10. Wherefore, my brethren, let us do the will of the Fath 
which called us, that we may live; and let us the rather p rs 
virtue, but forsake vice as the forerunner of our sins, and let 
flee from ungodliness, lest evils overtake us. For if we be d 


mis 




























BY AN UNKNOWN AUTHOR. 311 


gent in doing good, peace will pursue us. For for this cause is 
Ja man unable to attain happiness, seeing that they call in the 
#fears of men, preferring rather the enjoyment which is here than 
the promise which is to come. For they know not-how great 
torment the enjoyment which is here bringeth, and what delight 
Jthe promise which is to come bringeth. And if verily they were 
doing these things by themselves alone, it had been tolerable: 
Pbut now they continue teaching evil to innocent souls, not 
Pknowing that they shall have their condemnation doubled, both 
emselves and.their hearers. 

11, Let us therefore serve God in a pure heart, and we 
hall be righteous; but if we serve Him not, because we believe 
ot the promise of God, we shall be wretched. For the word of 
prophecy also saith: Wretched are the double-minded, that doubt 
Wen their heart and say, These things we heard of old in the days 
of our fathers also, yet we have waited day after day and have 
een none of them. Ye fools! compare yourselves unto a tree; 
take a vine. First it sheddeth its leaves, then a shoot cometh, after 
his a sour berry, then a full ripe grape. So likewise My people 
ad tumults and afflictions: but afterward they shall receive good 
things. Wherefore, my brethren, let us not be double-minded 
but endure patiently in hope, that we may also obtain our 
eward. For faithful is He that promised to pay to each man 
e recompense of his works. If therefore we shall have wrought 
ighteousness in the sight of God, we shall enter into His 
ingdom and shall receive the promises which ear hath not 
heard nor eye seen, neither hath tt entered into the heart of man. 
12, Let us therefore await the kingdom of God betimes in 
love and righteousness, since we know not the day of God’s 
appearing. For the Lord Himself, being asked by a certain 
“person when His kingdom would come, said, When the two shall 
be one, and the outside as the inside, and the male with the female, 
neither male nor female. Now the two are one, when we speak 
truth among ourselves, and in two bodies there shall be one 
soul without dissimulation. And by the outside as the inside He 




















312 AN ANCIENT HOMILY 





























meaneth this: by the inside He meaneth the soul and by the 
outside the body. Therefore in like manner as_ thy body. 
appeareth, so also let thy soul be manifest in its good works, 
And by the male with the female, neither male nor female, A : 
meaneth this; that a brother seeing a sister should have no 
thought of her as of a female, and that a sister seeing a brothe 
should not have any thought of him as of amale. These things 
if ye do, saith He, the kingdom of my Father shall come. 
13. Therefore, brethren, let us repent forthwith. Let us Ὁ " 
sober unto that which is good: for we are full of much folly and 
wickedness. Let us wipe away from us our former sins, and let 
us repent with our whole soul and be saved. And let us not be 
found men-pleasers. Neither let us desire to please one another 
only, but also those men that are without, by our righteousness, 
that the Name be not blasphemed by reason of us. For the Lord 
saith, Every way My Name ἐς blasphemed among all the Gentiles ἢ 
and again, Woe unto him by reason of whom My Name ἐς blas- 
phemed. Wherein is it blasphemed? In that ye do not the 
things which I desire. For the Gentiles, when they hear from 
our mouth the oracles of God, marvel at them for their beauty 
and greatness ; then, when they discover that our works are n¢ 
worthy of the words which we speak, forthwith they be 
themselves to blasphemy, saying that it is an idle story and a 
delusion. For when they hear from us that God saith, 72 as m 
thank unto you, if ye love them that love you, but this is tham 
unto you, tf ye love your enemies and them that hate you; whe 
they hear these things, I say, they marvel at their exceedin, 
goodness; but when they see that we not only do not lov 
them that hate us, but not even them that love us, they la g 
us to scorn, and the Name is blasphemed. “@ 
14. Wherefore, brethren, if we do the will of God οἱ 
Father, we shall be of the first Church, which is spiritual, wl 
was created before the sun and moon; but if we do not the w 
of the Lord, we shall be of the scripture that saith, My house τὶ 
made a den of robbers. So therefore let us choose rather to be 


























BY AN UNKNOWN AUTHOR. 313 


#the Church of life, that we may be saved. And I do not sup- 
Hpose ye are ignorant that the living Church is the body of 
WChrist: for the scripture saith, God made man, male and female. 
he male is Christ and the female is the Church. And the Books 
and the Apostles plainly declare that the Church existeth not 
now for the first time, but hath been from the beginning: for she 
as spiritual, as our Jesus also was spiritual, but was manifested 
n the last days that He might save us. Now the Church, 
Wbeing spiritual, was manifested in the flesh of Christ, thereby 
showing us that, if any of us guard her in the flesh and 
Wdefile her not, he shall receive her again in the Holy Spirit: 
or this flesh is the “counterpart and copy of the spirit. No 
an therefore, when he hath defiled the copy, shall receive the 
original for his portion. This therefore is what He meaneth, 
brethren ; Guard ye the flesh, that ye may partake of the spirit. 
WBut if we say that the flesh is the Church and the spirit is Christ, 
hen he that hath dealt wantonly with the flesh hath dealt wan- 
Htonly with the Church. Such an one therefore shall not partake 
tof the spirit, which is Christ. So excellent is the life and immor- 
ality which this flesh can receive as its portion, if the Holy 
Spirit be joined to it. No man can declare or tell those things 
hich the Lord hath prepared for His elect. 

15. Now I do not think that I have given any mean counsel 
especting continence, and whosoever performeth it shall not 
epent thereof, but shall save both himself and me his coun- 
sellor. For it is no mean reward to convert a wandering and 
Derishing soul, that it may be saved. For this is the recompense 
hich we are able to pay to God who created us, if he that 
peaketh and heareth both speak and hear with faith and love. 
st us therefore abide in the things which we believed, in 
‘ighteousness and holiness, that we may with boldness ask of 
x0d who saith, Whiles thou art still speaking, I will say, Behold, 
lam here. ¥or this word is the token of a great promise: for 
he Lord saith of Himself that He is more ready to give than 
ne that asketh to ask. Seeing then that we are partakers of so 











ee 
Lure 


314 AN ANCIENT HOMILY 













great kindness, let us not grudge ourselves the obtaining of 0 
many good things. For in proportion as the pleasure is ¢ eat 
which these words bring to them that have performed them, Ὁ. 
also is the condemnation great which they bring to them that 
have been disobedient. j 

16. Therefore, brethren, since we have found no small 
opportunity for repentance, seeing that we have time, let s 
turn again unto God that called us, while we have still One . 
that receiveth us. For if we bid farewell to these enjoyments 
and conquer our soul in refusing to fulfil its evil lusts, we shall b 7 
partakers of the mercy of Jesus. But ye know that the day of: 
judgment cometh even now as a burning oven, and the powers @ f 
the heavens shall melt, and all the earth as lead melting on ἊΜ 
fire, and then shall appear the secret and open works of men 
Almsgiving therefore is a good thing, even as repentance foul 
sin. Fasting is better than prayer, but almsgiving than bo ιν 
And love covereth a multitude of sins, but prayer out of ἃ goe ᾿ 
conscience delivereth from death. Blessed is every man that 
is found full of these. For almsgiving lifteth off the burdil 
of sin. at 

17. Let us therefore repent with our whole heart, lest any 
of us perish by the way. For if we have received commands, 
that we should make this also our business, to tear men away 
from idols and to instruct them, how much more is it wrong 
that a soul which knoweth God already should perish! Ther - 
fore let us assist one another, that we may also lead the weak 
upward as touching that which is good, to the end that we all 
may be saved: and let us convert and admonish one anothe! 
And let us not think to give heed and believe now only, whil 
we are admonished by the presbyters; but likewise when Mv 
have departed home, let us remember the commandments of th 
Lord, and not suffer ourselves to be dragged off the other w. 
by our worldly lusts; but coming hither more frequently, let 
strive to go forward in the commands of the Lord, that we ἃ 


[κυ 


having the same mind may be gathered together unto life. — 


BY AN UNKNOWN AUTHOR. 315 



























the Lord said, 7 come to gather together all the nations, tribes, and 
anguages. Herein He speaketh of the day of His appearing, 
hen He shall come and redeem us, each man according to his 
works. Axd the unbelievers shall see His glory and His might: 
and they shall be amazed when they see the kingdom of the 
world given to Jesus, saying, Woe unto us, for Thou wast, and 
we knew it not, and believed not; and we obeyed not the 
presbyters when they told us of our salvation. And Their 
worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched, and they 
Wshall be for a spectacle unto all flesh. Ue speaketh of that day of 
Jjudgment, when men shall see those among us that:-lived ungodly 
lives and dealt falsely with the commandments of Jesus Christ. 
But the righteous, having done good and endured torments and 
Whated the pleasures of the soul, when they shall behold them 
@that have done amiss and denied Jesus by their words or by 
τεμεῖν deeds, how that they are punished with grievous torments 
in unquenchable fire, shall give glory to God, saying, There will 
be hope for him that hath served God with his whole heart. 
18. Therefore let us also be found among those that give 
@thanks, among those that have served God, and not among the 
ungodly that are judged. For I myself too, being an utter sinner 
Jand not yet escaped from temptation, but being still amidst the 
Bengines of the devil, do my diligence to follow after righteousness, 
that I may prevail so far at least as to come near unto it, while 
‘Ui fear the judgment to come. 

19. Therefore, brothers and sisters, after the God of truth 
hath been heard, I read to you an exhortation to the end that 
ye may give heed to the things which are written, so that ye 
may save both yourselves and him that readeth in the midst of 
you. For I ask of you 85. ἃ reward that ye repent with your 
Bwhole heart, and give salvation and life to yourselves. For 
doing this we shall set a goal for all the young who desire to 
toil in the study of piety and of the goodness of God. And let 
us not be displeased and vexed, fools that we are, whensoever 
any one admonisheth us and turneth us aside from unrighteous- 





316 AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 
























ness unto righteousness. For sometimes while we do evil things, 
we perceive it not by reason of the double-mindedness and un- 
belief which is in our breasts, and we ave darkened in our under= 
) standing by our vain lusts. Let us therefore practise righteousnes: 
| that we may be saved unto the end. Blessed are they that obey 
these ordinances. Though they may endure affliction for a short 
| 
| 
| 





time in the world, they will gather the immortal fruit of the 
| resurrection. Therefore let not the godly be grieved, if he be 
| miserable in the times that now are: a blessed time awaiteth 
him. He shall live again in heaven with the fathers, and shall 
| have rejoicing.throughout a sorrowless eternity. Ἷ 
| 20. Neither suffer ye this again to trouble your mind, that 
| we see the unrighteous possessing wealth, and the servants of 
God straitened. Let us then have faith, brothers and sisters, 
We are contending in the lists of a living God; and we are 
trained by the present life, that we may be crowned with he 
future. No righteous man hath reaped fruit quickly, but waiteth 
for it. For if God had paid the recompense of the righteous 
speedily, then straightway we should have been training ourselves 
in merchandise, and not in godliness; for we should seem to be 
righteous, though we were pursuing not that which is godly, b 
ἢ that which is gainful. And for this cause Divine judgment ove - 
taketh a spirit that is not just, and loadeth it with chains. 

To the only God invisible, the Father of truth, who s 
forth unto us the Saviour and Prince of immortality, throug 
whom also He made manifest unto us the truth and the heaven} 
life, to Him be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 








IT. 
HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 

























HE PERSONALITY and life of Hippolytus are beset with 
thorny and perplexing questions on all sides. Of what country 
was he a native? Where and how did he spend his early life? Under 
what influences was he brought in his boyhood and adolescence? Was 
he a simple presbyter or a bishop? If the latter, what was his see? 
Of the works ascribed or attributed to him, how many are genuine? 
What were his relations to the Roman See? Was he guilty of heresy 
Yor of schism? If the one or the other, what was the nature of the 
differences which separated him? Was this separation temporary or 
permanent? Was he a confessor or a martyr, or both or neither? 
at was the chronology of his life and works? More especially, at 
what date did he die? Has there, or has there not, been some con- 
fusion between two or three persons bearing the same name? What 
explanation shall we give of the architectural and other monumental 
records connected with his name? 

These questions started up, like the fabled progeny of the dragon’s 
@teeth—a whole army of historical perplexities confronting us suddenly 
Band demanding a solution—when less than forty years ago the work 
entitled Philosophumena was discovered and published to the world. 
© most of these questions I shall address myself in the dissertation 
hich follows. The position and doings of Hippolytus are not uncon- 
mected with the main subject of these volumes. In the first place; 
whereas the internal history of the Church of Rome is shrouded in 
thick darkness from the end of the first century to the beginning of the 
ird, from the age of Clement to the age of Hippolytus—scarcely a 
here and there penetrating the dense cloud—at this latter moment 
the scene is suddenly lit up with a glare—albeit a lurid glare—of light. 
Then again; we have some reason for believing that the earliest 
western list of the Roman bishops may have been drawn up by Hip- 

















318 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 













polytus himself, and it is almost absolutely certain that the first con- 

tinuator of this list, in whose work the earliest notice of Hippolytus 
occurs outside his own writings, was a contemporary (see above, 
Pp. 255, Ρ. 259 sq). ‘The questions asked above have not indeed i 
very many cases any immediate connexion with the matters with which h 
we are directly concerned; but they hang very closely together one 
with another, and this seemed a fit opportunity of placing before the 
reader the results, however briefly, yet with some sort of completeness, 
of the investigations and discoveries which have been stimulated by the 
publication of the Philosophumena. ἡ 


§ 1. 
ANCIENT REFERENCES TO HIPPOLYTUS. 


Following the course which I have pursued in other cases, I s all 
here gather together the ancient documentary evidence and traditions 
relating to Hippolytus, considering that I shall best consult the con= 
venience of my readers as well as my own, by so doing. At the head 
of these are placed the references from Hippolytus himself to his own’ 
life and writings. In so doing I shall take the liberty of assuming pro- 
visionally the Hippolytean authorship of several writings, deferring the 
reasons for so assigning them till the proper occasion. ‘The cross-refer- 
ences from the one to the other in these writings are the most impo te 
ant and unsuspicious evidence of authorship. I shall also include some 
notices of Gaius the Roman presbyter, a contemporary of Hippolytus; 
because the two are frequently confused in ancient authorities—s¢ 
much so as to arouse the suspicion that Gaius was only another name 
for Hippolytus, and that he had no distinct personality. This va 1 
also I shall discuss presently. | 

These notices will be cited in the discussions which follow as AR 
with the number and letter, and (where necessary) the page. 


& " 


1. Hrppotytus [c. a.D. 230]. 

(a) Refutatio Haeresium i. prooem. (p. 2, Miller). 

Οὐδένα μῦθον τῶν wap’ Ἕλλησι νενομισμένων παραιτητέον. πιστὰ γι 
καὶ τὰ ἀσύστατα αὐτῶν δόγματα ἡγητέον διὰ τὴν ὑπερβάλλουσαν τῶν αἷρι 
τικῶν μανίαν, ot διὰ τὸ σιωπᾶν ἀποκρύπτειν τε τὰ ἄρρητα ἑαυτῶν pve nip 
ἐνομίσθησαν πολλοῖς Θεὸν σέβειν: ὧν καὶ πάλαι μετρίως τὰ δόγματα ἐξεθ 
pba ov κατὰ λεπτὸν ἐπιδείξαντες, ἀλλ᾽ ἁδρομερῶς peli ped: ag 
Frgespavos τὰ ἄρα αὐτῶν εἰς φῶς ἄγειν, ὅπως Ov yarn ἡμῶν ὁ 
μένων τὰ δόξαντα αὐτοῖς wae wii μήποτε καὶ τὰ ἄρρητα ἐξει " 
ἀθέους ἐπιδείξωμεν, παύσωνταί [τι] τῆς ἀλογίστου γνώμης καὶ ἀθεμίτου πὸ 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 319 


































> 2 > ee δὰ Ν , > ἈΝ ‘x ε , > 4 
σεως. GAN ἐπεὶ ὁρῶ μὴ δυσωπουμένους αὐτοὺς τὴν ἡμετέραν ἐπιείκειαν 
mde λογιζομένους, ὡς Θεὸς μακροθυμεῖ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν βλασφημούμενος, ὅπως ἢ 
ἰδεσθέντες μετανοήσωσιν ἢ ἐπιμείναντες δικαίως κριθῶσι, βιασθεὶς πρόειμι 
δ ΓΕ A Ν 3 ’ , a \ ¢ 3 91 '2 x NAP 

δείξων αὐτῶν τὰ ἀπόρρητα μυστήρια...ταῦτα δὲ ἕτερος οὐκ ἐλέγξει ἢ τὸ ἐν 

» ld Ν bid a Φ / , ε > , , 
κκλησίᾳ παραδοθὲν ἅγιον πνεῦμα, οὗ τυχόντες πρότεροι οἱ ἀπόστολοι μετέ- 
δοσαν τοῖς ὀρθῶς πεπιστευκόσιν: ὧν ἡμεῖς διάδοχοι τυγχάνοντες τῆς τε 
ὑτῆς χάριτος μετέχοντες ἀρχιερατείας τε καὶ διδασκαλίας καὶ φρουροὶ τῆς 
κκλησίας λελογισμένοι οὐκ ὀφθαλμῷ νυστάζομεν οὐδὲ λόγον ὀρθὸν 
νιωπώμεν «.7.X. 


Π This extract is taken from the text οἵ Diel’s Doxographi Graeci (Berolin. 1879) ; 
he remaining extracts, from the edition of Duncker and Schneidewin. 


(6) Ref. Haer. vi. 42 (p. 202). 
‘ Ν Ν ε ΄ , 3 a / - 
Καὶ γὰρ καὶ ὁ μακάριος πρεσβύτερος Ἑϊρηναῖος παρρησιαίΐτερον τῷ 
/ ‘ 4 a , ἈΝ > , ses ε 
έγχῳ προσενεχθεὶς τὰ τοιαῦτα λούσματα καὶ ἀπολυτρώσεις ἐξέθετο, adpo- 
ερέστερον εἰπὼν ἃ πράσσουσιν, οἷς ἐντυχόντες τινὲς αὐτῶν ἤρνηνται οὕτως 
, 2\ 9 a ‘ , \ \. ea , > 
ἀρειληφέναι, ἀεὶ ἀρνεῖσθαι μανθάνοντες. διὸ φροντὶς ἡμῖν γεγένηται ἀκρι- 
Béorepov ἐπιζητῆσαι καὶ ἀνευρεῖν λεπτομερῶς, ἃ καὶ ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ λουτρῷ 
αραδιδόασι κ.τ.λ. 


(c) Ref. Haer. vi. 55 (p. 221 sq). 

“A παρατιθέναι μοι οὐκ ἔδοξεν, ὄντα φλυαρὰ καὶ ἀσύστατα, ἤδη τοῦ paKa- 
, , > ΄, - Ν ΄, Ν / 2 A 
lov πρεσβυτέρου Eipyvaiov δεινῶς καὶ πεπονημένως τὰ δόγματα αὐτῶν διε- 
, ? 2 Ν > α 3 , 4 2 4 
ἔγξαντος, παρ᾽ ov καὶ αὐτῶν ἐφευρήματα [παρειλήφαμεν] ἐπιδεικνύντες 
ὑτοὺς ΙΤυθαγορείου φιλοσοφίας καὶ ἀστρολόγων περιεργίας ταῦτα σφετερι- 
apévous ἐγκαλεῖν Χριστῷ ταῦτα παραδεδωκέναι. 


(4) Ref. Haer. ix. 6, 7 (p. 278 sq). 
Πολλοῦ τοίνυν τοῦ περὶ πασῶν αἱρέσεων γενομένου ἡμῖν ἀγῶνος μηθέν ye 
, A , a“ ε Ζ » ’ὔ > la 
νεξέλεγκτον καταλιποῦσι, περιλείπεται viv ὁ μέγιστος ἀγών, ἐκδιηγήσασθαι 
‘ ὃ , Ν 249 € σὰ 2 , δ΄. «Ὁ ὡς. > a“ Ν 
at διελέγξαι τὰς ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐπαναστάσας αἱρέσεις, δι ὧν τινες ἀμαθεῖς καὶ 
oAunpol διασκεδαννύειν ἐπεχείρησαν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, μέγιστον τάραχον κατὰ 
ἄντα τὸν κόσμον ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς πιστοῖς ἐμβάλλοντες. δοκεῖ γὰρ ἐπὶ τὴν 
PXNYVOV τῶν κακῶν γενομένην γνώμην ὁρμήσαντας διελέγξαι, τίνες αἱ ταύτης 
χαί, ὅπως εὔγνωστοι αἱ ἐκφυάδες αὐτῆς ἅπασι γενόμεναι καταφρονηθώσι. 
Τεγένηταί τις ὀνόματι Nontos, τῷ γένει Suvpvaios. οὗτος εἰσηγήσατο 
ρεσιν ἐκ τῶν Ἡρακλείτου δογμάτων: οὗ διάκονος καὶ μαθητὴς γίνεται ᾿Ἐπέ 
" a a Gry. ¥ 
ονός τις τοὔνομα, Os TH Ῥώμῃ ἐπιδημήσας ἐπέσπειρε τὴν ἄθεον γνώμην. ᾧ 
΄ , \ ΄ κ ΄ > , rage ΄ 9 ΄ 
evoas Κλεομένης, καὶ βίῳ καὶ τρόπῳ ἀλλότριος τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἐκρά- 
uve τὸ δόγμα, κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ Ζεφυρίνου διέπειν νομίζοντος τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, 
. ἰδ , Ν > δοῦ & a , ΄ ΄ 
ς ἰδιώτου καὶ αἰσχροκερδοῦς- [ὃς] τῷ κέρδει προσφερομένῳ πειθόμενος 
Sper τοῖς προσιοῦσι τῷ Κλεομένει μαθητεύεσθαι, καὶ αὐτὸς ὑποσυρό- 


a Pa 


——o= 5 





| 





a = 








320 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 



























a U > A Ν δοῦν te , A lal a 
μενος τῷ χρόνῳ ἐπὶ Ta αὐτὰ ὥρμητο, συμβούλου καὶ συναγωνιστοῦ τῶν Ka 
Ν a Ὁ a . 
ὄντος αὐτῷ Καλλίστου, οὗ τὸν βίον καὶ τὴν ἐφευρεθεῖσαν αἵρεσιν per’ οὐ πολ 
ΕἸ ’ -“ 
ἐκθήσομαι. τούτων κατὰ διαδοχὴν διέμεινε τὸ διδασκαλεῖον κρατυνόμ, 

7 a a ‘ 
καὶ ἐπαῦξον διὰ τὸ συναίρεσθαι αὐτοῖς τὸν Zedupivov καὶ τὸν Κάλλιστον, 
4 ε “Ὁ 4 , > ‘ , > , ; 
καίτοι ἡμῶν μηδέποτε συγχωρησάντων, ἀλλὰ πλειστάκις ἀντικαθεσταε 
‘ > ‘ Ν , , / Ν > la hd 
πρὸς αὐτοὺς καὶ διελεγξάντων καὶ ἄκοντας βιασαμένων τὴν ἀλήθειαν po. 
δι ἃ Ν Ν 4 id , Ne Ν an > 4 , ε « Ἵ 
yet" οἵ πρὸς μὲν ὧραν αἰδούμενοι καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς ἀληθείας συναγόμενοι ὦμο 
3 
γουν, μετ᾽ οὗ πολὺ δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν αὐτὸν βόρβορον ἀνεκυλίοντο. 
(e) Ref. Haer. ix. 8 (p. 280). 
᾿Αλλ᾽ εἰ καὶ πρότερον ἔκκειται ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐν τοῖς λόσυ ον ἡ δόξα 
Ἡρακλείτου, ἀλλά γε δοκεῖ προδαναπαροχϑηήγαι καὶ νῦν, ὅπως διὰ τοῦ 
ovos ἐλέγχου φανερῶς διδαχθῶσιν of τούτου νομίζοντες Χριστοῦ εἶναι μαθη- 
τάς, οὐκ ὄντας, ἀλλὰ τοῦ σκοτεινοῦ. 


(f) Ref. Haer. ix. 11—13 (p. 284 sq). 

Ταύτην τὴν αἵρεσιν ἐκράτυνε Κάλλιστος, ἀνὴρ ἐν κακίᾳ mavoun yas 
ποικίλος πρὸς πλάνην, θηρώμενος τὸν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς θρόνον. τὸν Zepupim OV, 
ἄνδρα ἰδιώτην καὶ ἀγράμματον καὶ ἀπειρὸν τῶν ars aire ὅρων, ὃν 
πείθων δόμασι καὶ ἀπαιτήσεσιν αἀἰτειρημέναις ἦγεν εἰς ὃ ἐβένλάτο, Ἀ ὄντα ὃ pe 
λύστην καὶ φιλάργυρον, ἔπειθεν ἀεὶ στάσεις ἐμβαλεῖν ἃ ἀναμέσον τῶν ἀδελφών, 
αὐτὸς τὰ ἀμφότερα μέρη ὕστερον κερκωπείοις λόγοις πρὸς ἑαυτοῦ φιλί 


, Ν Cal . > , ’ὔ σ cal .¥ θ᾽ ‘a 
κατασκευάζων, καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἀλήθειαν [λέγων ὅμοια] φρονοῦσι ποτὲ κατ᾽ ἰδία 
τὰ ὅμοια φρονεῖν [λέγων] ἠπάτα, πάλιν δ᾽ αὖ τοῖς τὰ Σαβελλίου ὁμοίως, δὶ 
καὶ αὐτὸν ἐξέστησε δυνάμενον κατορθοῦν. ἐν γὰρ τῷ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν παραινεῖσθ 
οὐκ ἐσκληρύνετο, ἡνίκα δὲ σὺν τῷ Καλλίστῳ ἐμόναζεν, ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀνεσείετ 

X ἵν 97 \ , es , ν 4 a εκ 
πρὸς τὸ δόγμα τὸ Κλεομένους ῥέπειν φάσκοντος τὰ ὅμοια φρονεῖν. ὃ 
τότε μὲν τὴν πανουργίαν αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἐνόει, αὖθις δὲ ἔγνω, ὡς διηγήσομαι μεῖ 
οὐ πολύ. αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Ζεφυρῖνον προάγων δημοσίᾳ ἔπειθε λέγειν: ᾿Εγὼ oft 
A 4 Ἀ > ~ ‘ Ν > a @¢ a7 Ν Ν 
ἕνα Θεὸν Χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν, καὶ πλὴν αὐτοῦ ἕτερον οὐδένα γενητὸν καὶ mat 
τόν: ποτὲ δὲ λέγων: Οὐχ ὁ Πατὴρ ἀπέθανεν, ἀλλὰ ὁ Υἱός: οὕτως ἄπαυστι 
τὴν στάσιν ἐν τῷ λαῷ διετήρησεν: οὗ τὰ νοήματα γνόντες ἡμεῖς οὐ συνεχ 

a s\ ἢ a | , | “ > ὕὔ a > 3 ’ὔ ν 
ροῦμεν, ἐλέγχοντες καὶ ἀντικαθιστάμενοι ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀληθείας" ὃς εἰς ἀπόνο 

fal a -“ a“ ” 3 ,Ψ' 
χωρῶν διὰ τὸ πάντας αὐτοῦ τῇ ὑποκρίσει συντρέχειν, ἡμᾶς δὲ οὔ, ἀπεκα; 
can , 9 a A ’, Ν > cal 3 a 37 ͵ὔ νΝ γ 
ἡμᾶς διθέους, ἐξεμῶν παρὰ βίαν τὸν ἐνδομυχοῦντα αὐτῷ ἰόν. τούτου τὸν 
δοκεῖ ἡμῖν ἀγαπητὸν ἐκθέσθαι, ἐπεὶ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν Χρόνον ἡμῖν 
ὅπως διὰ τοῦ φανῆναι τοῦ τοιούτου τὴν ἀναστροφὴν «ὐενέγνωσνην καὶ 7 
τοῖς νοῦν ἔχουσιν εὐήθης geet: ἡ διὰ τούτου ἐπικεχειρημένη αἵρεσις," 
ἐμαρτύρησεν ἐπὶ Φουσκιανοῦ ἐπάρχου ὄντος Ῥώμης: ὁ δὲ τρόπος τῆς « 
μαρτυρίας τοιόσδε ἦν" 
Οἰκέτης ἐτύγχανε Καρποφόρου τινὸς ἀνδρὸς πιστοῦ ὄντος ἐκ 
fal 2) 
σαρος οἰκίας. τούτῳ ὁ Καρποφόρος, ate δὴ ὡς πιστῷ, χρῆμα OvK 


a 


































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 321 


ig > \ 7” , , > , 
ατεπίστευσεν, ἐπαγγειλάμενος κέρδος προσοίσειν ἐκ πραγματείας τραπεζι- 
so ‘ , > / 3 a ΄ a a, ® 
uns’ Os λαβὼν τράπεζαν ἐπεχείρησεν ἐν τῇ λεγομένῃ πισκινῇ πουπλικῇ, ᾧ 
ὐκ ἡλώ θῇ “Ἢ , 9 56 ε \ a Ν ἰδ ἣν a 
ὀλίγαι παραθῆκαι τῷ χρόνῳ ἐπιστεύθησαν ὑπὸ χηρῶν καὶ ἀδελφῶν προ- 
΄ a e 
χήματι τοῦ Καρποφόρου. ὁ δὲ ἐξαφανίσας τὰ πάντα ἠπόρει. ov ταῦτα 
, ? wa a 
pagavros οὐκ ἔλιπεν ὃς ἀπαγγείλῃ τῷ Καρποφόρῳ: ὁ δὲ ἔφη ἀπαιτεῖν 
4 > > a a Ν ε , ‘ ‘ ‘ “a / 
ous Tap αὐτοῦ. ταῦτα συνιδὼν ὁ Κάλλιστος καὶ τὸν παρὰ τοῦ δεσπότου 
, ὃ ε , : ey ‘ ‘ ; \ ‘ , a 
νδυνον ὑφορώμενος, ἀπέδρα τὴν φυγὴν κατὰ θάλασσαν ποιούμενος" ὃς 
, ey) “ “-“ 
ρὼν πλοῖον ἐν τῷ Πόρτῳ ἕτοιμον πρὸς ἀναγωγήν, ὅπου ἐτύγχανε πλέον, 
ἔβη πλευσόμενος. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ οὕτως λαθεῖν δεδύνηται: οὐ γὰρ ἔλιπεν ὃς 
tal ’ Ν 4 ε Ν > ‘ ‘ ‘ y 
αγγείλῃ τῷ Καρποφόρῳ τὸ γεγενημένον. ὁ δὲ ἐπιστὰς κατὰ τὸν λιμένα 
o a a > 
εἰρᾶτο ἐπὶ τὸ πλοῖον ὁρμᾶν κατὰ [τὰ] μεμηνυμένα: τοῦτο δὲ ἦν ἑστὸς ἐν 
ἔσῳ τῷ λιμένι. τοῦ δὲ πορθμέως βραδύνοντος ἰδὼν πόρρωθεν ὁ Κάλλιστος 
ἣν ὃ , a > a λ , Ν Ν ε Ν λῆ φθ 9 φ (ὃ a 
εσπότην, ὧν ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ Kal γνοὺς ἑαυτὸν συνειλῆφθαι, ἠφείδησε τοῦ 
. \ om” Le] ΄ ΜΝ ε ‘ 3 Ν ΄ ε Ν 
ν καὶ ἔσχατα ταῦτα λογισάμενος ἔρριψεν ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν. οἱ δὲ 
a , > ‘ ΄ »” »Ἥ ἃ > , a Ν oS 
Dra καταπηδήσαντες εἰς τὰ σκάφη ἄκοντα αὐτὸν ἀνείλοντο, τῶν δὲ ἀπὸ 
"» “ tX , J Ἀ A a ὃ / ὃ 6 Ν 3 ’ 6 > 
Ws γῆς μεγάλα βοώντων" καὶ οὕτως τῷ δεσπότῃ παραδοθεὶς ἐπανήχθη εἰς 
, ε ’ a ε ,ὔ > , , , Ν ’ ε 
ν Ῥώμην, ὃν ὁ δεσπότης εἰς πίστρινον κατέθετο. χρόνου δὲ διελθόντος, ὡς 
‘ 
pBaiver γίνεσθαι, προσελθόντες ἀδελφοὶ παρεκάλουν τὸν Καρποφόρον, 
, “ -“ 
ὡς ἐξαγάγῃ τῆς κολάσεως τὸν δραπέτην, φάσκοντες αὐτὸν ὁμολογεῖν ἔχειν 
’ “ > 4 ε . ’ ε > ’ A Ν 297 
pa τισι χρῆμα ἀποκείμενον. ὁ δὲ Kaprodopos, ws εὐλαβής, τοῦ μὲν ἰδίου 
eyev ἀφειδεῖν, τῶν δὲ παραθηκῶν φροντίζειν---πολλοὶ γὰρ αὐτῷ ἀπεκλαίοντο 
ὡ 7 nn “a 
YOVTES, OTL τῷ αὐτοῦ προσχήματι ἐπίστευσαν τῷ Καλλίστῳ, ἃ πεπιστεύκει- 
ν---καὶ πεισθεὶς ἐκέλευσεν ἐξαγαγεῖν αὐτόν. ὁ δὲ μηδὲν ἔχων ἀποδιδόναι, 
Α ὰ > , Ν ’ Ἀ A “~ , ’ 
i πάλιν ἀποδιδράσκειν μὴ δυνάμενος διὰ τὸ φρουρεῖσθαι, τέχνην θανάτου 
, 
ἤενόησε, καὶ σαββάτῳ σκηψάμενος ἀπιέναι ὡς ἐπὶ χρεώστας, ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ 
ν συναγωγὴν τῶν Ἰουδαίων συνηγμένων, καὶ στὰς κατεστασίαζεν αὐτῶν. 
δὲ θέ ε 3 3 δὰ, 32 ΄, | ‘ ‘ > ΄ 
€ καταστασιασθέντες ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ἐνυβρίσαντες αὐτὸν καὶ πληγὰς ἐμφορή- 
ντες ἔσυρον ἐπὶ τὸν Φουσκιανὸν ἔπαρχον ὄντα τῆς πόλεως. ἀπεκρίναντο 
, -“ ’ en A , ’ , > 
τάδε: Ῥωμαῖοι συνεχώρησαν ἡμῖν τοὺς πατρῴους νόμους δημοσίᾳ ἀναγι- 
e oi Ν eo , ec a , > 
Kew, οὗτος δὲ ἐπεισελθὼν ἐκώλυε καταστασιάζων ἡμῶν, φάσκων εἶναι 
’ fal fal a 
ἱστιανός. τοῦ δὲ Φουσκιανοῦ πρὸ βήματος τυγχάνοντος καὶ τοῖς ὑπ᾽ ἼἸου- 
[4 / Ν a ,ὔ > - ᾽ ” ε > 
wv λεγομένοις κατὰ τοῦ Καλλίστου ἀγανακτοῦντος, οὐκ ἔλιπεν ὁ ἀπαγ- 
ς τῷ Καρποφόρῳ τὰ πρασσόμενα. ὁ δὲ σπεύσας ἐπὶ τὸ βῆμα τοῦ 
> ’ , 4 ,ὔ Ν \ > “ ‘4 > / > 
χου ἐβόα: Δέομαι, κύριε Φουσκιανέ, μὴ σὺ αὐτῷ πίστευε, οὐ γάρ ἐστι 
, lal 
tavos, ἀφορμὴν δὲ ζητεῖ θανάτου χρήματά pov πολλὰ ἀφανίσας, ws 
’΄ Led - "ῷ ‘4 ε Ν a“ Ul ε -“ - 
είξω. τῶν δὲ Ιουδαίων ὑποβολὴν τοῦτο νομισάντων, ὡς ζητοῦντος τοῦ 
, a a , 
opdpov ταύτῃ TH προφάσει ἐξελέσθαι αὐτόν, μᾶλλον ἐπιφθόνως κατε- 
δε δὲ...» ε Ν Ν ae | 2A ΄ > ἔδ > 
ν τοῦ érdpxov. ὁ δὲ κινηθεὶς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν, μαστιγώσας αὐτὸν ἔδωκεν εἰς 
A ΄ 
ν Σαρδονίας. μετὰ χρόνον δὲ ἑτέρων ἐκεὶ ὄντων μαρτύρων, θελήσασα 
4 ΝΜ » Ν Ν 
αρκία ἔργον τι ἀγαθὸν ἐργάσασθαι, οὖσα φιλόθεος παλλακὴ Κομόδου, 
Ν 
καλεσαμένη τὸν μακάριον Οὐΐκτορα, ὄντα ἐπίσκοπον τῆς ἐκκλησίας κατ᾽ 
CLEM. II. 21 

















π΄ 5.-ρ-τ-- “τ ν-- 





Νὰ tein DS etl κει 


322 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 




























ἐκεῖνο οὔ, ἐπηρώ ives εἶεν ἐν Sapdovia μά > δὲ πά ἣν 
vo καιροῦ, ἐπηρώτα, τίνες εἶεν ἐν Sapdovia μάρτυρες. ὃ δὲ πάντων ἂν 
\ & De oP Ν ’, 
δοὺς τὰ ὀνόματα, τὸ τοῦ Καλλίστου οὐκ ἔδωκεν, εἰδὼς τὰ τετολμημένα 
> > 3 U a 
αὐτοῦ. τυχοῦσα οὖν τῆς ἀξιώσεως 7 Mapxia παρὰ τοῦ Κομόδου, δίδωσι 
> ΄ 4 ἐ 
ἀπολύσιμον ἐπιστολὴν Ὑακίνθῳ τινὶ σπάδοντι πρεσβυτέρῳ, ὃς λαβὼν διέ 
‘ lal lel “a 
πλευσεν εἰς τὴν Σαρδονίαν, καὶ ἀποδοὺς τῷ κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τῆς χώρας 
τροπεύοντι ἀπέλυσε τοὺς μάρτυρας πλὴν τοῦ Καλλίστου. ὃ δὲ yovum 
\ ΄ , a 
καὶ δακρύων ἱκέτευε καὶ αὐτὸς τυχεῖν ἀπολύσεως. δυσωπηθεὶς οὖν ὁ ‘Yak 
3 -“" Ν > , 
Bos ἀξιοῖ τὸν éxitporov......, φάσκων θρέψας εἶναι Μαρκίας, τασσό 
‘ 
αὐτῷ τὸ ἀκίνδυνον" ὁ δὲ πεισθεὶς ἀπέλυσε καὶ τὸν Κάλλιστον. οὗ παραγ 
seta ὁ Οὐΐκτωρ πάνυ ἤχθετο ἐπὶ τῷ γεγονότι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ lorem ἦν, 
ἡσύχασε: φυλασσόμενος δὲ τὸν ὑπὸ πολλῶν ὄνειδον (οὐ γὰρ ἦν μακρὰν τὰ 
ε» year. λ , z. δὲ \ a ΄ > , οἰ 
vm αὐτοῦ τετολμημένα), ἔτι δὲ καὶ τοῦ Καρποφόρου ἀντιπίπτοντος, πέμπι 
a A ,ὔ > > 4 Φὶ Ψ ϑι. ὦ as , a 
αὐτὸν καταμένειν ἐν Ἀνθείῳ, ὁρίσας αὐτῷ Ῥηνιαῖόν, Ἐΐ ἐκτροφῆς. μεθ᾽ ο 
κοίμησιν Βϑέβανε συνδράμενον αὐτὸν σχὼν πρὸς τὴν κατάστασιν τ 
κλήρου, ἐτίμησε τῷ ἰδίῳ κακῷ, καὶ τοῦτον μεταγαγὼν ἀπὸ τοῦ ᾿Ανθείου εἰς 
ς | 
κοιμητήριον κατέστησεν. ᾧ ἀεὶ συνὼν καί, καθὼς φθάσας προεῖπον, ὑπο- 
, δῶν , 2 , , a \ ΄ ΄ ‘a 
κρίσει αὐτὸν θεραπεύων, ἐξηφάνισε μήτε κρῖναι τὰ λεγόμενα δυνάμενον μ' 
νοοῦντα τὴν τοῦ Καλλίστου ἐπιβουλήν, πάντα αὐτῷ πρὸς ἃ ἥδετο ὁμιλοῦ 
Ψ ‘ ‘ a 7 \ ΄, , e 3 a ny 
οὕτω μετὰ τὴν τοῦ Ζεφυρίνου τελευτὴν νομίζων τετυχηκέναι ov ἐθηρᾶτο, 
, ε A 48 
Σαβέλλιον ἀπέωσεν ws μὴ erences ὀρθῶς, δεδοικὼς ἊΣ καὶ vopiteey οὔτι 
δύνασθαι rein weary sie πρὸς τὰς ἀννυ στὰς κατηγορίαν, ὡς μὴ ἀλλοτρίως ω 
cone: ἣν οὖν “γόης καὶ ΜΌΝΟΥ καὶ ἐπὶ Χρόνῳ συνήρπασε πολλοῦ: 
ἔχων δὲ καὶ τὸν ἰὸν ἐγκείμενον ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ, καὶ εὐθέως μηδὲν φρονῶν, ἅμι 
\ “ “ κι 
δὲ καὶ αἰδούμενος τὰ ἀληθῆ 'λέγειν, διὰ τὸ δημοσίᾳ ἡμῖν ὀνειδίζοντα εἰπεῖ 
‘ a ἡ 
δίθεοί ἐστε, ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ Σαβελλίου συχνῶς κατηγορεῖσθαι « 
, \ , ΄ 2,08 ΄ , , ν ι 
παραβάντα τὴν πρώτην πίστιν, ἐφεῦρεν αἵρεσιν τοιάνδε, λέγων τὸν Ae 
δια, ev set Ν ΄ὔ > ν Ν ΄ 3 s Ae 
αὐτὸν εἶναι υἱόν, αὐτὸν Kal πατέρα ὀνόματι μὲν καλούμενον, ἕν δὲ ὃν 7 
ἕν, 
πνεῦμα ἀδιαίρετον" οὐκ ἄλλο εἶναι πατέρα, ἄλλο δὲ υἱόν, ἕν δὲ καὶ τὸ αὖτ 
ὑπάρχειν: καὶ τὰ πάντα γέμειν τοῦ θείου πνεύματος τά τε ἄνω καὶ κάτω" KE 
εἶναι τὸ ἐν τῇ παρθένῳ σαρκωθὲν πνεῦμα οὐχ ἕτερον παρὰ τὸν πατέρα, ἀλλ 
a Ν Ν διε Ν a if Ν 5» / 3 4 μὲ AX 
ἐν καὶ TO αὐτό. καὶ τοῦτο εἶναι τὸ εἰρημένον: οὐ πιστεύεις OTL ἐγὼ 
n ν᾿ δ 48 WaT eS ἊΝ aes \ BX ΄ “ 4 
τῷ πατρὶ Kal ὃ πατὴρ ἐν ἐμοί; τὸ μὲν yap βλεπόμενον, ὅπερ ἐσ 
ΕΣ fel = Ν ev Ἀ Ler a en Ν fol le} 4 
ἄνθρωπος, τοῦτο εἶναι TOV υἱόν, τὸ δὲ ἐν τῷ vid χωρηθὲν πνεῦμα τοῦτο εἶν 
Ν 4 3 ΄ , 2A δύ ’ ΄ pares τὶ ἐλλ᾽ ¢ ὃ 
τὸν πατέρα: οὐ γάρ, φησίν, ἐρῶ δύο θεούς, πατέρα καὶ υἱόν, ἀλλ᾽ ἕνα. ὁ γ 
ἐν αὐτῷ γενόμενος πατὴρ προσλαβόμενος τὴν σάρκα ἐθεοποίησεν 
ἑαυτῷ, καὶ ἐποίησεν ἕν, ὡς καλεῖσθαι πατέρα καὶ υἱὸν ἕνα θεόν, καὶ τοῦτι 
a , \ δύ θ t és Nt gat \ , νθέναι 
ὃν νιν Pe βένοσον. ναι Oud, ΜΑΣ Eanes τον rie [οι de de 
υἱῷ: οὐ yap θέλει mi ha τὸν πατέρα πεπονθέναι καὶ ἕν εἶναι πρόσω οι ᾧ 
ἐκφυγεῖν τὴν εἰς τὸν eer βλαυφημίαν ὁ ὁ ἀνόητος καὶ ποικίλος, 6 ἄνω κι 
σκεδάζων βλασφημίας, ἵνα μόνον κατὰ τῆς ἀληθείας λέγειν δοκῇ, ποτὲ 
’ Ἅ, ’ ᾿ ἊΝ» 
εἰς τὸ Σαβελλίου δόγμα ἐμπίπτων, ποτὲ δὲ εἰς τὸ Θεοδότου οὐκ aide 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 323 


































a ε , La , a ‘\ a 3 4 
τοιαῦτα ὁ γόης τολμήσας συνεστήσατο διδασκαλεῖον κατὰ τῆς ἐκκλησίας 
Ψ , ‘ a ‘ Ν ‘ ε ‘ “-“ > , A 
οὕτως διδάξας, καὶ πρῶτος τὰ πρὸς τὰς ἡδονὰς τοῖς ἀνθρώποις συγχωρεῖν 
> ΠΑΝ , a a. Ὁ > A > , ε ὕὔ ε ‘ i .Y 
ἐπενόησε, λέγων πᾶσιν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀφίεσθαι ἁμαρτίας. ὁ yap παρ᾽ ἑτέρῳ τινὶ 
΄ ἈΝ ’ ‘ 4 aA ε ΄ [2 3 ’ 
συναγόμενος καὶ λεγόμενος Χριστιανὸς εἴ τι ἂν ἁμάρτῃ, φασίν, οὐ λογίζεται 
3 ~~ 2 6 , > , “ "“" ,ὔ An = a ἢ > 
αὑτῷ ἡ ἁμαρτία, εἰ προσδράμοι τῇ τοῦ Καλλίστου σχολῇ. οὗ τῷ ὅρῳ ape- 
, Ν 4 “ ¥i 36S “a 4. 
σκόμενοι πολλοὶ συνείδησιν πεπληγότες ἅμα τε καὶ ὑπὸ πολλῶν αἱρέσεων 
/ 4 4,3 “ 
ἀποβληθέντες, τινὲς δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ καταγνώσει ἔκβλητοι τῆς ἐκκλησίας ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
an © 
γενόμενοι, προσχωρήσαντες αὐτοῖς ἐπλήθυναν τὸ διδασκαλεῖον αὐτοῦ. οὗτος 
3 , “ Ψ Μὰ ε ΄ > Ν Ν θ U Ν Cal 
ἐδογμάτισεν ὅπως εἰ ἐπίσκοπος ἁμάρτοι τι, εἰ Kal πρὸς θάνατον, μὴ δεῖν 
/ $4.4 4 4 2 6 Ν , \ ὃ [ 
κατατίθεσθαι. ἐπὶ τούτου ἤρξαντο ἐπίσκοποι καὶ πρεσβύτεροι καὶ διάκονοι 
δέ \ , ΄ 6 > , > δὲ , 3 λ , a 
fyapo. καὶ τρίγαμοι καθίστασθαι εἰς κλήρους: εἰ δὲ καί τις ἐν κλήρῳ ὧν 
a“ “ / ε Ν ε , ἈΝ 
γαμοίη, μένειν τὸν τοιοῦτον ἐν τῷ κλήρῳ ὡς μὴ ἡμαρτηκότα' ἐπὶ τούτῳ 
/ 39 aA + ek; Ν A 3 ΄ ε θέ Ν ’ ῖ ε ’, > 
φάσκων εἰρῆσθαι τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀποστόλου ῥηθέν: σὺ τίς εἶ ὁ κρίνων ad- 
΄ Ν a , ‘ a 
PAotrprov οἰκέτην; ἀλλὰ καὶ παραβολὴν τῶν ζιζανίων πρὸς τοῦτο ἔφη 
: 4 πὸ Ν ΄ , a , , > a » 
λέγεσθαι: ἄφετε τὰ ζιζάνια συναύξειν τῷ σίτῳ, τούτεστιν ἐν τῇ ἐκ- 
Xr ’ Ν ε , ἀλλ Ἁ Ν A B Ν a N a > ε / 
noia τοὺς ἁμαρτάνοντας. ἃ καὶ τὴν κιβωτὸν τοῦ Νῶε εἰς ὁμοίωμα 
΄ Ε] ΄, © Ν 4 Ν , Ν , Ν , ‘ 
κκλησίας ἔφη γεγονέναι, ἐν ἣ Kal κύνες Kal λύκοι Kal κόρακες Kal πάντα τὰ 
4, Φ-ι τ ΣῈ φ / a > > / ε ’,’ ΛΑ 
αθαρὰ καὶ ἀκάθαρτα: οὕτω φάσκων δεῖν εἶναι ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ ὁμοίως: καὶ ὅσα 
NBS > “ , Φ 
πρὸς τοῦτο δυνατὸς ἦν συνάγειν οὕτως ἡρμήνευσεν, οὗ οἱ ἀκροαταὶ ἡσθέντες 
a , , > , ε a“ Ν a e a 
τοῖς δόγμασι διαμένουσιν ἐμπαίζοντες ἑαυτοῖς τε καὶ πολλοῖς, ὧν τῷ διδασκα- 
} 4 , μὴ ἂ; ὃ ‘ Ν Xr θύ 4 a Ψ λ ὃ Ν Ν 
είῳ συρρέουσιν ὄχλοι. διὸ καὶ πληθύνονται γαυριώμενοι ἐπὶ ὄχλοις διὰ τὰς 
ἡδ , a > ΄ ε ΄ = , > δὲ ε a 
ovas, as ov συνεχώρησεν ὁ Χριστός: οὗ καταφρονήσαντες οὐδὲν ἁμαρτεῖν 
, , > Ν > tA a > a ‘ Ν Ἀ + 
ὠλύουσι, φάσκοντες αὐτὸν ἀφίεναι τοῖς εὐδοκοῦσι. καὶ γὰρ καὶ γυναιξὶν 
xa -“ > 
ἐπέτρεψεν, εἰ ἄνανδροι elev καὶ ἡλικίᾳ γε ἐκκαίοιντο ἀναξίᾳ ἢ ἑαυτῶν ἀξίαν μὴ 
4 a ὃ Ν Ν Fo a "Μ᾿ ¢ a a ce 
λοιντο καθαιρεῖν διὰ τὸ νομίμως γαμηθῆναι, ἔχειν ἕνα ὃν ἂν αἱρήσωνται 
a > 
κοιτον, εἴτε οἰκέτην εἴτε ἐλεύθερον, Kal τοῦτον κρίνειν ἀντὶ ἀνδρὸς μὴ 
tal ’ > 
oop γεγαμημένην. ἔνθεν ἤρξαντο ἐκεχειρεῖν πισταὶ λεγόμεναι ἀτοκίοις φαρ- 
κάκοις καὶ περιδεσμεῖσθαι πρὸς τὸ τὰ συλλαμβανόμενα καταβάλλειν, διὰ τὸ 
ἥτε ἐκ δούλου βούλεσθαι ἔχειν τέκνον μήτε ἐξ εὐτελοῦς, διὰ τὴν συγγένειαν 
U ε cn , »” 
αἱ ὑπέρογκον οὐσίαν. ὁρᾶτε εἰς ὅσην ἀσέβειαν ἐχώρησεν 6 ἄνομος μοιχείαν 
vas , > a 2 A , bai Se. | , a , ε ‘ ε 
ἃ φόνον ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ διδάσκων’ καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις τοῖς τολμήμασιν ἑαυτοὺς οἱ 
’, \ 2 , 3 a > “a , / 
ρυθριασμένοι καθολικὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἀποκαλεῖν ἐπιχειροῦσι, Kai τινες νομί- 
> lal Ul ’ὔ ld ’ 
ες εὖ πράττειν συντρέχουσιν αὐτοῖς. ἐπὶ τούτου πρώτως τετόλμηται δεύ- 
Θ al 
epov αὐτοῖς βάπτισμα. 
, = ΄ 
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὁ θαυμασιώτατος Κάλλιστος συνεστήσατο, οὗ διαμένει τὸ 
9 a ‘ Lal ’, a 
᾿δασκαλεῖον φυλάσσον ta ἔθη καὶ τὴν παράδοσιν, μὴ διακρῖνον τίσι δεῖ 
ie a a 5 Φ' -.“ , \ , T 29 Φ' Ν \ Ast - ἃ 
νωνεῖν, πᾶσι δ᾽ ἀκρίτως προσφέρον τὴν κοινωνίαν" ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ τὴν TOD ὀνό- 
᾿ Lal A ‘ / -“ ’ 
ατος μετέσχον ἐπίκλησιν καλεῖσθαι διὰ τὸν πρωτοστατήσαντα τῶν τοιούτων 
΄ 
Κάλλιστον Καλλιστιανοί. 
δ Τούτου κατὰ πάντα τὸν κόσμος διηχηθείσης τῆς διδασκαλίας, ἐνιδὼν τὴν 
ραγματείαν ἀνὴρ δόλιος καὶ ἀπονοίας γέμων, ᾿Αλκιβιάδης τις καλούμενος, 


21-.52 




















324 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 



















οἰκῶν ἐν ᾿Απαμείᾳ τῆς Συρίας, γοργότερον ἑαυτὸν καὶ εὐφνέστερον ἐν cup 
κρίνας τοῦ Καλλίστου, ἐπῆλθε τῇ Ῥώμῃ ves βίβλον twa, φάσκων ταύτην. ; 
ἀπὸ Σηρῶν τῆς Παρθίας παρειληφέναι τινὰ ἄνδρα δίκαιον Ἤλχασαΐ. 


(g) Ref. Haer. x. 1—5 (p. 310). 

1. Τάδε ἔνεστιν ἐν τῇ δεκάτῃ τοῦ κατὰ πασῶν αἱρέσεων ἐλέγχου" 

2. ἐπιτομὴ πάντων τῶν φιλοσόφων, 

3. dee πασῶν [τῶν] αἱρέσεων, 

4. καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσι, τίς ὁ τῆς ἀληθείας he . 

5. τὸν λαβύρινθον τῶν αἱρέσεων od βίᾳ ἐἰοβηξαντε ἀλλὰ μόνῳ, 
ἐλέγχῳ ἀληθείας δυνάμει διαλύσαντες, πρόσιμεν ἐπὶ τὴν τῆς ἀληθείας ἀπό- 
δειξιν κιτ.λ. 


(2) Ref. Haer. x. 6 (p. 311). 
Συμπεριλαβόντες τοίνυν τὰ πάντων τῶν παρ᾽ “Ἕλλησι were δόγμα ἐν 
τέσσαρσι βιβλίοις, τὰ δὲ τοῖς αἱρεσιάρχαις ἐν πέντε, νῦν τὸν περὶ ἀληθείαι ὃ 
λόγον ἐν ἃ ἐπιδείξομεν, ἀνακεφαλαιούμενοι πρῶτον τὰ πᾶσι δεδοκημένα. 


(¢) Ref. Haer. x. 30 (p. 331). 


Ἦσαν δὲ οὗτοι 6B ἔθνη, dv καὶ τὰ ὀνόματα ἐκτεθείμεθα ἐν ἑτέραις βίβλοις. 


(2) Ref. Haer. x. 32 (p. 334): 


Ei φιλομαθήσουσι καὶ τὰς τούτων οὐσίας καὶ Tas αἰτίας τῆς κατὰ πά 
μ' 

ὔ > / ΝΜ 3 , ε a ,ὔ ia 
δημιουργίας ἐπ ήτήσονσα, εἴσονται Shi, i loa βίβλῳ περιεχο 
ape τῆς τοῦ παντὸς οὐσίας" τὸ δὲ νῦν ἱκανὸν εἶναι ἐκθέσθαι τὰς a 
τίας, ἃς οὐ γνόντες Ἕλληνες κομψῷ τῷ λόγῳ τὰ μέρη τῆς κτίσεως ἐδόξασαι 


τὸν κτίσαντα ἀγνοήσαντες. 


(ἢ Ref. Haer. x. 34 (p. 338). 

Τοιοῦτος ὁ περὶ τὸ θεῖον ἀληθὴς λόγος, ὦ ὦ ἄνθρωποι Ἕλληνές τε καὶ Bép 
βαροι, Χαλδαῖοί τε καὶ ᾿Ασσύριοι, Αἰγύπτιοί τε καὶ Λίβυες, Ἰνδοί τε κι 
Αἰθίοπες, Κελτοί τε καὶ οἱ ean s Λατῖνοι, πάντες τε of τὴν Εὐρώτ' 1 
᾿Ασίαν τε καὶ Λιβύην κατοικοῦντες, οἷς Cures, ἡ ἐγὼ γίνομαι, φιλανθρώ Ὃ 
λόγον᾽ ὑπάρχων μαθητὴς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος, ὅπως προσδραμόντες διδαχθῆι 
παρ᾽ ἡμῶν, τίς ὁ ὄντως Θεός. 


2. CHAIR OF Hippotytus [c. A.D. 2365]. 


The date of the statue of Hippolytus will be discussed hereafte 
It is sufficient to say here that it must have been erected within a f 
years of his death. He is seated on a chair, of which the bas 
inscribed on the back and two sides. The inscription on the bai 
which is curved, is here marked A. It stands on the right-hand : 


Wa 
















HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 325 


of this curved back to one facing the same way as the statue, and is 
mutilated. The left-hand side of the back was without any inscription. 
he inscriptions on the right and left sides (the spectator still facing 
€ same way), which are straight, are here marked B, C, respectively. 
€ positions of the inscriptions may be seen from the engravings of 
‘Pthe chair in Fabricius 1. p. 36 sq. For the inscriptions themselves see 
Ὁ Boeckh-Kirchhoff Corp. Jnscr. Graec. 8613 (Iv. p. 280). 


A. 


[προς τους 1oyAa]ioyc 
[περι οιἰκονομ]ὰς 
[eic Toye p]aAmoye 
[eic THN er |ractpimy@on 
Ὑπὲρ TOY KATA IW 
ΔΝΗΝ 
EYAPPEAlOY Kal ἀπὸ 
KAAYYEWC 
περι YAPICMATOON 
ATIOCTOAIKH TIAPAAO 
cic 
XPONIKGON 
προς EAAHNAC 
KAl TIPOC TATWNA 
H KAl ΠΈΡΙ TOY TIANTOC 
TIPOTPETITIKOC TIPOC CE 
BHPEINAN 
ATIOAEIZIC ΧΡΌΝΩΝ 
TOY πδοχὰ 
KATA εν TO) TIINAKI 
@AAl IC TACAC TAC Γρὰ 
ac 
ΠΕΡΙ @Y Kal CapKoc 
ANACTACEWC 
ΠΕΡῚ TAPABOY Kat 
ΠΟΘΕΝ TO KAKON 
In 1, 2 the remaining letters might be part of -was or -μιας or -vias. In 1. 14 


is obviously an error for πλατωνα. In 1. 20 xara is apparently an error for 
ra τὰ and not for καθα (as taken by Kirchhoff). In 1. 21 if the first word is cor- 














326 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 
B. 


ETOYC ἃ BaciAelac AAEZANAPOY AYTOKPATOPOC ETE 
NETO H Al TOY πδοχὰ EIAOIC ATIpElAlaIC CABBATOD EM 
BOAIMOY MHNOC [ENOMENOY ECTAI TOIC €ZHC ETECIN KAO 
OC YTIOTETAKTAI EN TW TIINAKI ἘΓΈΝΕΤΟ AE EN TOIC TAP 
YHKOCIN KABG)C CECHMEIWTAI ATIONHCTIZECOAI AE 

Ael OY AN ENTIECH KYPIAKH 



























After this follow the tables for the calculation of the Passover ac- 
cording to a cycle of sixteen years. The times of the celebrations of 
the Passover mentioned in the Old Testament are noted by the side 
of the respective days from the eZoAoc down to the πάθος ypictoy. 
Seven cycles are given so as to exhibit the relations of the days of the 
week to the days of the month. 


δῷ 


ΕΤΕΙ AAEZANAPOY KAICAPOC 
τω ἃ APYH 
Al KYPIAKA TOY πδοχὰ KATA ETOC 
dl AE TIAPAKENTHCEIC AHAOYCI THN AICTIPOEz. 


Then follows a table in which the days of the month on which 
Easter Day falls are given for 112 (i.e. 16 x 7) years, Le. from A.D. 22 
to A.D. 333, calculated in accordance with the above cycle. The δὲς 
πρὸ ἐξ is the dissextum, and the παρακεντήσεις (‘marks in the margin’ 
here promised are omitted by the carelessness of the stone-cutter 
though the leap-years are marked in the previous table of cyel 
by SS. 

3. Evusrsius [c. A.D. 325]. 


(a) Histor. Eccles. ii. 25. 
Οὐδὲν δ᾽ ἧττον καὶ ἐκκληδιασειμος ἀνήρ, Τάϊος ὀνόματι, κατὰ Lepupive 
bebo incrps γεγονὼς ἐπίσκοπον" ὃς δὴ Πρόκλῳ τῆς κατὰ Φρύγας προΐστο ἐν 
γνώμης ἐγγράφως διαλεχϑεὶς αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα περὶ τῶν τόπων, ἔνθα τι 
εἰρημένων ἀποστόλων τὰ ἱερὰ σκηνώματα κατατέθειται, φησίν" 
Ἐγὼ δὲ τὰ τρόπαια τῶν ἀποστόλων xe δεῖξαι. ἐὰν γὰρ θ 
ἀπελθεῖν ἐπὶ τὸν Βατικανὸν ἢ ἐπὶ τὴν ὁδὸν τὴν Ὥστίαν, εὑρήσεις τὰ ’ 
παια τῶν ταύτην ἱδρυσαμένων τὴν ἐκκλησίαν. 
(6) Hist. Eccl. iii. 28. ae 
Κατὰ τοὺς δεδηλωμένους χρόνους ἑτέρας φῤευωΣ ἀρχηγὸν γενέσ' 
Κήρινθον πάραιλήφαμαν. Τάϊος, οὗ φωνὰν, ἤδη πρότερον παρατέθειμα 
τῇ φερομένῃ αὐτοῦ ζητήσει ταῦτα περὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ γράφει" : 


Laat 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 327 







᾿Αλλὰ καὶ Κήρινθος ὁ δ ἀποκαλύψεων ws ὑπὸ ἀποστόλου μεγάλου 
, ΄ or, a ε 94755 , 2 A , ΄ 
ἐγραμμένων τερατολογίας ἡμῖν ὡς du ἀγγέλων αὐτῷ δεδειγμένας ψευδό- 
evos ἐπεισάγει, λέγων μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν ἐπίγειον εἶναι τὸ βασίλειον 
Lol n Ἀ κα > / Ἁ ε “ > ε A Ἀ ’ 
οὔ Χριστοῦ, καὶ πάλιν ἐπιθυμίαις καὶ ἡδοναῖς ἐν Ἱερουσαλὴμ τὴν σάρκα 
, “ \ 3 Ν ΡΥ a a “- a 
τολιτευομένην δουλεύειν. καὶ ἐχθρὸς ὑπάρχων ταῖς γραφαῖς τοῦ Θεοῦ 
3 ‘ , 3 ΄ ε a , a ΄ , 
οιθμὸν χιλιονταετίας ἐν γάμῳ ἑορτῆς θέλων πλανᾶν λέγει γίνεσθαι. 











(¢) Hist. Eccl. iii. 31. 
<r is “ A , bx ed , > s , ‘ 

Καὶ ἐν τῷ Γαΐου δέ, οὗ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἐμνήσθημεν, διαλόγῳ Πρόκλος, 
\ a 3 a \ , Ν a“ ΄ Ν a 6 , > a 
pos ὃν ἐποιεῖτο τὴν ζήτησιν, περὶ τῆς Φιλίππου καὶ τῶν θυγατέρων αὐτοῦ 
ελευτῆς συνάδων τοῖς ἐκτεθεῖσιν οὕτω φησίν" 

Μετὰ τοῦτον δὲ προφήτιδες τέσσαρες al Φιλίππου γεγένηνται ἐν Ἵερα- 
¢ Lod Ν Ν > / ε / > Lad > ‘ > Lal Ἁ ε “Ὁ ‘4 
ὄλει TH κατὰ τὴν ᾿Ασίαν: ὁ τάφος αὑτῶν ἐστὶν ἐκεῖ, καὶ ὁ TOU πατρος 
LUTOV. 

(2) Hist. Eccl. vi. 20. 

Ν aA A 4 « 

Ἡκμαζον δὲ κατὰ τοῦτο πλείους λόγιοι καὶ ἐκκλησιαστικοὶ ἄνδρες," ὧν 
Ν > , a Ν > , , ΝΜ a ΄ om 
αἱ ἐπιστολάς, as πρὸς ἀλλήλους διεχάραττον, ἔτι viv σωζομένας εὑρεῖν 
»” A nw ΕἸ 

opov. at καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐφυλάχθησαν ἐν τῇ κατ᾽ Αἰλίαν βιβλιοθήκῃ πρὸς 
a , ‘ ae , 3 ’, > , > 4 
οὔ τηνικάδε τὴν αὐτόθι διέποντος ἐκκλησίαν ᾿Αλεξάνδρου ἐπισκευασθείσῃ, 
gd ἧς καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰς ὕλας τῆς μετὰ χεῖρας ὑποθέσεως ἐπὶ ταὐτὸ συνα- 

a ΄ “a 4 ‘\ > a Ν ’ 
ayetv δεδυνήμεθα. τοῦτων Βήρυλλος σὺν ἐπιστολαῖς καὶ συγγραμμάτων 
wadopovs φιλοκαλίας καταλέλοιπεν. ἐπίσκοπος δ᾽ οὗτος ἦν τῶν κατὰ 
7 » ’ὔ ε , Ν αν , RD XN ts.” 
ϑόστραν ᾿Αράβων: ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ Ἱππόλυτος, ἑτέρας που καὶ αὐτὸς mpo- 
ὡς ἐκκλησίας. ἦλθε δὲ εἰς ἡμᾶς καὶ Tatov λογιωτάτου ἀνδρὸς διάλογος 
ἫΝ , κ᾿ a \ , a ‘ , ie ε 
ὶ Ῥώμης κατὰ Ζεφυρῖνον πρὸς ἸΤρόκλον τῆς κατὰ Φρύγας αἱρέσεως ὑπερ- 

a - fal 
χοῦντα κεκινημένος, ἐν ᾧ τῶν Ov ἐναντίας THY περὶ TO συντάττειν καινὰς 
papas προπέτειάν τε καὶ τόλμαν ἐπιστομίζων τῶν τοῦ ἱεροῦ ἀποστόλον 

-“ al , ε ‘\ 

κατριῶν μόνων ἐπιστολῶν μνημονεύει, τὴν πρὸς Ἕ βραίους μὴ συναριθμήσας 
al a“ a « aA 
αἷς λοιπαῖς: ἐπεὶ καὶ εἰς δεῦρο παρὰ Ῥωμαίων τισὶν ov νομίζεται τοῦ 
















’ ’ 
ὅλου τυγχάνειν. 


(e) Hist. Ecc. vi. 22. 

Τότε δῆτα καὶ Ἱππόλυτος συντάττων μετὰ πλείστων ἄλλων ὑπομνημάτων 
τὸ περὶ τοῦ TACYA πεποίηται σύγγραμμα, ἐν ᾧ τῶν χρόνων ἀναγρα- 
ἣν ἐκθέμενος καί τινα κανόνα ἑκκαιδεκαετηρίδος περὶ τοῦ πάσχα προθεὶς ἐπὶ 
πρῶτον ἔτος ᾿Αλεξάνδρου αὐτοκράτορος τοὺς χρόνους περιγράφει. τῶν δὲ 
Trav αὐτοῦ συγγραμμάτων τὰ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλθέντα ἐστὶ τάδε εἰς THN 
Ξδήμερον, εἰς τὰ μετὰ τὴν €ZAFIMEPON, πρὸς MAPKI@Na, 
TO dcma, εἶς μέρη τοῦ ἰεζεκιήλ, περὶ τοῦ πάοχὰ, πρὸς 
&cac τὰς aipéceic: πλεῖστά τε ἄλλα καὶ παρὰ πολλοῖς εὕροις ἂν 

, 














328 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 

















4. LIBERIAN CHRONOGRAPHER [A.D. 354]. 4 

(2) Depositio Martyrum (see above, 1. p. 251). ἣ 
Idus Aug. Ypoliti in Tiburtina et Pontiani in Calisti. ᾿ 
There is reason to believe that this notice is not later than a.D. 3 Ὶ 
(see I. p. 250, 264) and may have been much earlier. 


(6) Catalogus Episcoporum (see above, I. p. 255). 
Eo tempore Pontianus episcopus et Yppolitus presbiter exoles sunt 
deportati in Sardinia in insula nociva, Severo et Quintiano cons 
[A-D. 235]. | 7 


This notice in all probability dates from about a.p. 255 (see I. p. 


263). a 
5. EPpmipHANtus [c. A.D. 375]. 

Haeres. XXxi. 35 (p. 205). 

Ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀρκεσθέντες τοῖς τε παρ᾽ ἡμῶν λεχθεῖσιν ὀλίγοις καὶ τοῖς ὑ 
τῶν τῆς ἀληθείας συγγραφέων τούτων λεχθεῖσί τε καὶ συνταχθεῖσι, 
ὁρῶντες ὅτι ἄλλοι πεπονήκασι, φημὶ δὲ Κλήμης καὶ Ἑϊρηναῖος καὶ Ἱππόλι 
καὶ ἄλλοι πλείους, οἱ καὶ θαυμαστῶς τὴν κατ᾽ αὐτῶν πεποίηνται ἀνατροπή 
od πάνυ τι τῷ καμάτῳ προσθεῖναι, ὡς προεῖπον, ἠθελήσαμεν, ἱκανωθέντες 
προειρημένοις ἀνδράσι κ.τ.λ. 


6, APOLLINARIS? [c. A.D. 370} 
Mai Script. Veter. Nov. Collect. τ. p. 173. 


᾿Απολιναρίου... Εὐσέβιος ὁ Παμφίλου καὶ Ἱππόλυτος ὁ ἁγιώτατος 
σκοπὸς Ῥώμης ἀπεικάζουσι τὴν προκειμένην τοῦ Ναβουχοδονόσορ ὅρασιν 1 
τοῦ προφήτου Δανιὴλ ὀπτασίᾳ. ὴ 

A comment on Daniel ii. 34 in a Catena; see Lagarde p. 171. Reasons wi 
given below (p. 431 54) for questioning the ascription to Apollinaris. 


7. Damasus [4.Ὁ. 366—384]. 
(a) Lnscriptio in Coemeterio Hippolyti. "ἢ 
HIPPOLYTVS FERTVR PREMERENT CVM JVSSA TYRANNI ὺ 
PRESBYTER IN SCISMA SEMPER MANSISSE NOVATI 
TEMPORE QVO GLADIVS SECVIT PIA VISCERA MATRIS 
DEVOTVS CHRISTO PETERET CVM REGNA PIORVM 
QVAESISSET POPVLVS VBINAM PROCEDERE POSSET 
CATHOLICAM DIXISSE FIDEM SEQVERENTVR VT OMNES 
SIC NOSTER MERVIT CONFESSVS MARTYR VT ESSET 
HAEC AVDITA REFERT DAMASVS PROBAT OMNIA CHRI 

































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 329 


This inscription is preserved in a S. Petersburg ms (formerly of 
Corbei, and afterwards of S. Germain des Prés) which contains a 
sylloge of inscriptions, and is described in Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 
1881, p.5sq. The sylloge is printed in De Rossi’s Zuscr. Christ. Urb. 
Rom. τι. p. 82, where also (p. 72 sq) it is described. A full account of 
this particular inscription, which appears on fol. 24 sq, is given in the 
same Bull. lc. p. 26 sq. It is headed kn gto Hppolite martyrae, and by 
an error of the scribe the last line of another inscription, belonging to 
@the martyr Gordianus (see pp. 14, 39), ‘Praesbiter ornavit renovans 
vicencius ultro’ has been attached to it. In 1425 the reigning Pope 
Martin V issued an order that marble and other materials might be 
taken from the desolate and ruined suburban churches to construct the 
Bpavement of S. John Lateran; and accordingly De Rossi has found 
and deciphered three fragments of this very Damasian inscription from 
@the cemetery of Hippolytus embedded in the pavement of this distant 
basilica. 


(ὁ) ILnscriptio altera in eodem Coemeterio. 


LAETA DEO PLEBS SANCTA CANAT QVOD MOENIA CRESCVNT 
ET RENOVATA DOMVS MARTYRIS [HIPP|OLITI 
O RNAMENTA OPERIS SVRGY[NT AVCTORE DAM|ASO 
NATVS QVI ANTISTES SEDIS A[POSTOLICAE] 
INCLITA PACIFICIS FACTA ES[T HAEC AVLA TRIVMPHIS] 
S ERVATVRA DECVS PERPETV[AMQUE FIDEM| 
HAEC OMNIA NOVA QUAEQVE VIDIS LE[O PRESBYTJER HORNAT, 


where the first six lines give an acrostich LEonis, and guaegue is 
contracted into qq in the inscription itself. Damasus is described as 
‘natus antistes,’ because his father had been ‘exceptor, lector, levita, 
sacerdos,’ as Damasus wrote in another inscription (Bud/. di Archeol. 
Crist. 1881, p. 48); and thus he himself was, as it were, born to his 
future high office in the Church. 

This inscription is given by De Rossi in the Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 
1883, p. 60 sq (comp. 20. 1882, p. 176). It was found in the vestibule 
leading to the crypt of S. Hippolytus. 


8. H1ERoNnyMus [A4.D. 378—400] 

| (a) DeVir. Mil. 59. 

Gaius sub Zephyrino, Romanae urbis episcopo, id est, sub Anto- 
nino, Severi filio, disputationem adversus Proculum, Montani sectato- 
, valde insignem habuit arguens eum temeritatis super nova pro- 
yhetia defendenda, et in eodem volumine epistulas quoque Pauli trede- 











330 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


























cim tantum enumerans quartam decimam, quae fertur ad Hebraeos, 
dicit non eius esse; sed apud Romanos usque hodie quasi Pauli apo- 
stoli non habetur. f 


(Ὁ) De Vir. Mil. 61. 


Hippolytus, cuiusdam ecclesiae episcopus—nomen quippe url ς 
scire non potui—in ratione paschae et temporum canone scripsit et usque 
ad primum annum Alexandri imperatoris sedecim annorum circulum, 
quem Graeci EKKAIAEKAETHPIAA vocant, repperit, et Eusebio, qui sup er 
eodem pascha decem et novem annorum circulum, id est, ἐννεακαιδεκαε Ὁ 
τηρίδα Composuit, occasionem dedit. Scripsit nonnullos in scripturas 
commentarios, e quibus haec repperi: cz Hexaemeron, in Exodum, ἢ 
Canticum Canticorum, in Genesim, in Zachariam, de Psalmis, in Esaia ! 
de Daniele, de Apocalypst, de Proverbiis, de Ecclesiaste, de Saul et Pythonissa, 
de Antichristo, de Resurrectione, contra Marcionem, de Pascha, adver. 
Omnes Hereses, et TPOCOMIAIAN de Laude Domini Salvatoris, in qua 
praesente Origene, se loqui in ecclesia significat. Huius aemulatione 
Ambrosius, quem de Marcionis heresi ad veram fidem correctum dixt- 
mus, cohortatus est Origenem in scripturas commentarios scribere, 
praebens ei septem et eo amplius notarios eorumque expensas et librari- 
orum parem numerum, quodque his maius est, incredibili studio cottidie 
ab eo opus exigens. Unde et in quadam epistula ἐργοδιώκτην eum 
Origenes vocat. ᾿ 


(c) £pist. xxxvi. 16 ad Damasum (I. p. 169, Vallarsi). 
Quoniam autem polliciti sumus et de eo quid significaret in figura 
adjungere, Hippolyti martyris verba ponamus, a quo et Victorinus 
noster non plurimum discrepat ; non quod omnia plenius executus sit 
sed quod possit occasionem praebere lectori ad intelligentiam latiorem; 
‘Isaac portat imaginem Dei Patris, Rebecca Spiritus Sancti, etc.’ 


δ 
After this follows a long quotation from Hippolytus in which the history of Esa 
and Jacob is figuratively explained. The letter was written A.D. 384. 


(4) £pist. xlviii. 19 ad Pammachium (1. p. 232, Vallarsi). 

Scilicet nunc enumerandum mihi qui ecclesiasticorum de i 
numero disputarent, Clemens, Hippolytus, Origenes, Dionysius, 
bius, Didymus, nostrorumque Tertullianus, Cyprianus, etc. 


Jerome is defending himself against a charge of misinterpretation affecting the o 
and even days in the account of the Creation in Genesis. This letter was writte 


393: ; 
() Zpist. Ιχχ. 4 δὰ Magnum (I. p. 429, Vallarsi). 
Hunc [Clementem] imitatus Origenes decem scripsit 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 331 





























hristianorum et philosophorum inter se sententias comparans...Scripsit 
t Miltiades contra Gentes volumen egregium. Hippolytus quoque et 
pollonius, Romanae urbis senator, propria opuscula condiderunt. 


Jerome is defending himself against the charge of desecrating theology by illustra- 
ons from secular literature. This letter was written A.D. 397- 


(5) . Zpist. \xxi. 6 ad Lucinium (1. p. 434, Vallarsi). 

De sabbatho quod quaeris, utrum ieiunandum sit; et de eucha- 
jstia, an accipienda quotidie, quod Romana ecclesia et Hispaniae 
bservare perhibentur, scripsit quidem Hippolytus vir disertissimus ; et 
arptim diversi scriptores e variis auctoribus edidere. 

This letter was written in the year following the preceding, A.D. 398. 


(g) Epis. \xxxiv. 7 (I. Ρ. 529). 

Nuper sanctus Ambrosius sic Hexaemeron illius [Origenis] compi- 
wit, ut magis Hippolyti sententias Basiliique sequeretur. 

This letter is assigned to A.D. 400. 


(2) Comm. in Daniel. ix. 24 (Vv. p. 689). 
Hippolytus autem de eisdem hebdomadibus opinatus est ita; 
eptem hebdomadas ante reditum populi ete.’ 


(¢) Comm. in Matt. i. praef. (vil. p. 7). 

Legisse me fateor ante annos plurimos in Matthaeum Origenis 
iginti quinque volumina...et Theophili Antiochenae urbis episcopi 
ommentarios; Hippolyti quoque martyris et Theodori Heracleotae, 


tc. 
This commentary was written A.D. 398. 


(4) Chronicon i. p. 179 (ed. Schone). 

Geminus presbyter Antiochenus et Hippolytus et Beryllus episcopus 
rabiae Bostrenus clari scriptores habentur. 

A notice under Ann. Abr. 2244, Alexandr. 6. 


9. Rurinus [t.D. 410]. 


Hist. Eccl. vi. 16. 

Unde et nos, ut fateamur quod verum est, totius huius operis 
— Postri et historiae conscribendae materiam sumpsimus. Erat ergo 
ἴεν caeteros et Beryllus scriptorum praecipuus, qui et ipse diversa 
puscula dereliquit. Episcopus hic fuit apud Bostram Arabiae urbem 
xximam. Erat nihilominus et Hippolytus, qui et ipse aliquanta 


cr pta dereliquit episcopus. 














332 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 





This passage corresponds to H. £. vi. 20 of Eusebius (see above, p. 327). 
rest of Rufinus’ translation may be passed over. This extract alone is given here, 
because its looseness has apparently been the occasion of much error respecting the 
see of Hippolytus. 


10. PRUDENTIUS [c. A.D. 407]. 
Peristephanon ; De Passione S. Hippolyti (p. 440.sq, ed. Dressel), 


Innumeros cineres sanctorum Romula in urbe 
Vidimus, O Christi Valeriane sacer. 
Incisos tumulis titulos et singula quaeris 
Nomina? difficile est ut replicare queam. 
5 Tantos iustorum populos furor inpius hausit, 
Cum coleret patrios Troia Roma deos. 
Plurima litterulis signata sepulcra loquuntur 
Martyris aut nomen aut epigramma aliquod. 
Sunt et muta tamen tacitas claudentia tumbas 
10 Marmora, quae solum significant numerum. 
Quanta virum iaceant congestis corpora acervis, 
Nosse licet, quorum nomina nulla legas. 
Sexaginta illic defossas mole sub una 
Relliquias memini me didicisse hominum ; 
15 Quorum solus habet comperta vocabula Christus, 
Utpote quos propriae iunxit amicitiae. 
Haec dum lustro oculis, et sicubi forte latentes 
Rerum apices veterum per monumenta sequor ; 
Invenio Hippolytum, qui quondam schisma Novati 
20 Presbyter attigerat, nostra sequenda negans, 
Usque ad martyrii provectum insigne tulisse 
Lucida sanguinei praemia supplicii. 
Nec mirere, senem perversi dogmatis olim 
Munere ditatum catholicae fidei. 
25 Cum iam vesano victor raperetur ab hoste, 
Exsultante anima carnis ad exitium, 
Plebis amore suae multis comitantibus ibat ; 
Consultus, quaenam secta foret melior, 
Respondit: Fugite, o miseri, exsecranda Novati 
30 Schismata ; catholicis reddite vos populis. 
Una fides vigeat, prisco quae condita templo est ; 
Quam Paulus retinet, quamque cathedra Petri. 
Quae docui, docuisse piget: venerabile martyr ‘ial 
Cerno, quod a cultu rebar abesse Dei. τῇ 

























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 333 


His ubi detorsit laevo de tramite plebem, 
Monstravitque sequi, qua via dextra vocat, 
Seque ducem recti, spretis anfractibus, idem 
Praebuit, erroris qui prius auctor erat: 
Sistitur insano rectori Christicolas tunc 
Ostia vexanti per Tiberina viros. 
Illo namque die Roma secesserat, ipsos 
Peste suburbanos ut quateret populos. 
Non contentus humum celsae intra moenia Romae 
Tingere iustorum caedibus assiduis. 
Ianiculum cum iam madidum, fora, Rostra, Suburram, 
Cerneret eluvie sanguinis affluere : 
Protulerat rabiem Tyrrheni ad littoris aram, 
Quaeque loca aequoreus proxima Portus habet. 
Inter carnifices et constipata sedebat 
Officia, exstructo celsior in solio. 
Discipulos fidei, detestandique rebelles 
Idolii, ardebat dedere perfidiae. 
Carcereo crinita situ stare agmina contra 
Iusserat, horrendis excrucianda modis. 
Inde catenarum tractus, hinc lorea flagra 
Stridere ; virgarum concrepitare fragor. 
Ungula fixa cavis costarum cratibus altos 
Pandere secessus et lacerare iecur. 
Ac iam lassatis iudex tortoribus ibat 
In furias, cassa cognitione fremens. 
Nullus enim Christi ex famulis per tanta repertus 
Supplicia, auderet qui vitiare animam. 
Inde furens quaesitor ait: Iam, tortor, ab unco 
Desine: si vana est quaestio, morte agito. 
Huic abscide caput; crux istum tollat in auras, 
Viventesque oculos offerat alitibus ; 
Has rape praecipites, et vinctos coniice in ignem: 
Sit pyra, quae multos devoret una reos. 
En Tibi, quos properes rimosae imponere cumbae, 
Pellere et in medii stagna profunda freti ; 
Quos ubi susceptos rabidum male suta per aequor 
- Vexerit, et tumidis caesa labarit aquis. 
Dissociata putrem laxent tabulata carinam, 
Conceptumque bibant undique naufragium. 
Squamea coenoso praestabit ventre sepulcrum 












80 







85 








go 











95 













Ioo 








105 







IIo 







115 








334 





EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 





Bellua consumptis cruda cadaveribus. 

Haec persultanti celsum subito ante tribunal 
Offertur senior nexibus implicitus. 

Stipati circum iuvenes clamore ferebant 
Ipsum Christicolis esse caput populis: 

Si foret exstinctum propere caput, omnia vulgi 
Pectora Romanis sponte sacranda deis. 

Insolitum lethi poscunt genus, et nova poenae 
Inventa, exemplo quo trepident alii. 

Ille supinata residens cervice, Quis, inquit, 
Dicitur? affirmant dicier Hippolytum. 

Ergo sit Hippolytus, quatiat, turbetque iugales, 
Intereatque feris dilaceratus equis. 

Vix haec ille: duo cogunt animalia freni 
Ignara, insueto subdere colla iugo: 

Non stabulis blandive manu palpata magistri, 
Imperiumque equitis ante subacta pati: 

Sed campestre vago nuper pecus e grege captum, 
Quod pavor indomito corde ferinus agit. 

Iamque reluctantes sociarant vincula bigas, 
Oraque discordi foedere nexuerant. 

Temonis vice funis inest, qui terga duorum 
Dividit, et medius tangit utrumque latus, 

Deque iugo in longum se post vestigia retro 
Protendens trahitur, transit et ima pedum. 

Huius ad extremum sequitur qua pulvere summo 
Cornipedum refugas orbita trita vias ; 

Crura viri innectit laqueus, nodoque tenaci 
Astringit plantas, cumque rudente ligat. 

Postquam composito satis instruxere paratu 
Martyris ad poenam verbera, vincla, feras: 

Instigant subitis clamoribus atque flagellis, 
Iliaque infestis perfodiunt stimulis. 

Ultima vox audita senis venerabilis haec est : 
Hi rapiant artus; tu rape, Christe, animam. 

Prorumpunt alacres, caeco et terrore feruntur, 
Qua sonus atque tremor, qua furor exagitant. 

Incendit feritas, rapit impetus, et fragor urget: 
Nec cursus volucer mobile sentit onus. 

Per silvas, per saxa ruunt: non ripa retardat 
Fluminis, aut torrens oppositus cohibet. 









































[20 


fis 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 


Prosternunt sepes et cuncta obstacula rumpunt : 
Prona, fragosa petunt ; ardua transiliunt. 

Scissa minutatim labefacto corpore frusta 
Carpit spinigeris stirpibus hirtus ager. 

Pars summis pendet scopulis; pars sentibus haeret ; 
Parte rubent frondes; parte madescit humus. 

Exemplar sceleris paries habet illitus, in quo 
Multicolor fucus digerit omne nefas. 

Picta super tumulum species liquidis viget umbris, 
Effigians tracti membra cruenta viri. 

Rorantes saxorum apices vidi, optime papa, 
Purpureasque notas vepribus impositas. 

Docta manus virides imitando effingere dumos 
Luserat et minio russeolam saniem. 

Cernere erat, ruptis compagibus, ordine nullo 
Membra per incertos sparsa iacere situs. 

Addiderat caros gressu lacrymisque sequentes, 
Devia quo fractum semita monstrat iter. 

Moerore attoniti atque oculis rimantibus ibant, 
Implebantque sinus visceribus laceris. 

Ile caput niveum complectitur, ac reverendam 
Canitiem molli confovet in gremio. 

Hic humeros truncasque manus et brachia et ulnas 
Et genua et crurum fragmina nuda legit. 

Palliolis etiam bibulae siccantur arenae, 
Nequis in infecto pulvere ros maneat. 

Siquis et in sudibus recalenti aspergine sanguis 
Insidet, hunc omnem spongia pressa rapit. 

Nec iam densa sacro quidquam de corpore silva 
Obtinet, aut plenis fraudat ab exsequiis. 

Cumque recensitis constaret partibus ille 
Corporis integri qui fuerat numerus, 

Nec purgata aliquid deberent avia toto 
Ex homine, extersis frondibus et scopulis : 

Metando eligitur tumulo locus; Ostia linquunt: 
Roma placet, sanctos quae teneat cineres. 

Haud procul extremo culta ad pomoeria vallo 
Mersa latebrosis crypta patet foveis. 

Huius in occultum gradibus via prona reflexis 
Ire per anfractus luce latente docet. 

Primas namque fores summo tenus intrat hiatu 


335 











336 


160 


170 


175 


180 


185 


1990 


195 


EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


Illustratque dies limina vestibuli. 

Inde, ubi progressu facili nigrescere visa est 
Nox obscura, loci per specus ambiguum, 

Occurrunt caesis immissa foramina tectis, . 
Quae iaciunt claros antra super radios. 

Quamlibet ancipites texant hinc inde recessus 
Arcta sub umbrosis atria porticibus : 

Attamen excisi subter cava viscera montis 
Crebra terebrato fornice lux penetrat. 

Sic datur absentis per subterranea solis 
Cernere fulgorem, luminibusque frui. 

Talibus Hippolyti corpus mandatur opertis, 
Propter ubi apposita est ara dicata Deo. 

Illa sacramenti donatrix mensa, eademque 
Custos fida sui martyris apposita, 

Servat ad aeterni spem vindicis ossa sepulcro, 
Pascit item sanctis Tibricolas dapibus. 

Mira loci pietas, et prompta precantibus ara 
Spes hominum placida prosperitate iuvat. 

Hic corruptelis animique et corporis aeger 
Oravi quoties stratus opem merui. 

Quod laetor reditu, quod te, venerande sacerdos, 
Complecti licitum est, scribo quod haec eadem, 

Hippolyto scio me debere; Deus cui Christus 
Posse dedit, quod quis postulet, annuere. 

Ipsa, illas animae exuvias quae continet intus, 
Aedicula argento fulgurat ex solido. 

Praefixit tabulas dives manus aequore laevi 
Candentes, recavum quale nitet speculum. 

Nec Pariis contenta aditus obducere saxis, 
Addidit ornando clara talenta operi. 

Mane salutatum concurritur: omnis adorat 
Pubis ; eunt, redeunt, solis adusque obitum. 

Conglobat in cuneum Latios simul ac peregrinos 
Permixtim populos relligionis amor. 

Oscula perspicuo figunt impressa metallo ; 
Balsama diffundunt; fletibus ora rigant. 

Iam cum se renovat decursis mensibus annus, 
Natalemque diem passio festa refert, 

Quanta putas studiis certantibus agmina cogi, 
Quaeve celebrando vota coire Deo? 





HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 337 


Urbs augusta suos vomit effunditque Quirites, 
po Una et patricios ambitione pari. 
Confundit plebeia phalanx umbonibus aequis 
Discrimen procerum, praecipitante fide. 
Nec minus Albanis acies se candida portis 
Explicat, et longis ducitur ordinibus. 
hs Exsultant fremitus variarum hinc inde viarum ; 
Indigena et Picens plebs et Etrusca venit ; 
Concurrit Samnitis atrox habitator et altae 
Campanus Capuae, iamque Nolanus adest. 
Quisque sua laetus cum coniuge, dulcibus et cum 
ο Pignoribus, rapidum carpere gestit iter. 
Vix capiunt patuli populorum gaudia campi, 
Haeret et in magnis densa cohors spatiis. 
Angustum tantis illud specus esse catervis 
Haud dubium est, ampla fauce licet pateat. 
#5 Stat sed iuxta aliud quod tanta frequentia templum 
Tunc adeat, cultu nobile regifico, 
Parietibus celsum sublimibus, atque superba 
Maiestate potens, muneribusque opulens, 
| Ordo columnarum geminus laquearia tecti 
ο Sustinet, auratis suppositus trabibus: 
Adduntur graciles tecto breviore recessus, 
Qui laterum seriem iugiter exsinuent. 
At medios aperit tractus via latior alti 
Culminis exsurgens editiore apice. 
5  Fronte sub adversa gradibus sublime tribunal 
Tollitur, antistes praedicat unde Deum. 
Plena laborantes aegre domus accipit undas, 
Arctaque confertis aestuat in foribus, 
Maternum pandens gremium, quo condat alumnos 
Ac foveat fetos accumulata sinus. 
Si bene commemini, colit hunc pulcherrima Roma 
Idibus Augusti mensis, ut ipsa vocat 
Prisco more diem quem te quoque, sancte magister, 
Annua festa inter dinumerare velim. 
Crede, salutigeros feret hic venerantibus ortus, 
Lucis honoratae praemia restituens. 
Inter solemnes Cypriani vel Celedoni, 
Eulaliaeque dies currat et iste tibi. 


























_ CLEM, II. 22 

















338 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


Sic te pro populo cuius tibi credita vita est, 
240 Orantem Christus audiat omnipotens. 
Sic tibi de pleno lupus excludatur ovili, 
Agna nec ulla tuum capta gregem minuat. 
Sic me gramineo remanentem denique campo 
Sedulus aegrotam pastor ovem referas. 
245 Sic, cum lacteolis caulas compleveris agnis, ¥ 
Raptus et ipse sacro sis comes Hippolyto. 


τι. Patrapius [c.. a.D. 421]. 
Hist. Lausiac. 148 (Patrol. Graec. Xxxi. p. 1251, Migne). 
Ἔν ἄλλῳ βιβλιδαρίῳ ἐπιγεγραμμένῳ Ἱππολύτου τοῦ γνωρίμου τι 
ἀποστόλων εὗρον δυήγημα, τοιοῦτον. ᾿ 
Ἐγενεστάτη τις καὶ ὡραιοτάτη παρθένος ὑπῆρχεν ἐν τῇ Κορίνθῳ kt) 
















12. THEODORET [A.D. 446]. 


(a) Dialogus i (tv. p. 54 sq, Schulze). 
τοῦ ἁγίου immoAytoy ἐπιοκόπου Kal μάρτυρος, ἐκ το 
λόγογ τοῦ eic τὸ Κύριος ποιμδίνει Me 
καὶ κιβωτὸς δὲ ἐκ ξύλων κ.τ.λ. : Ἵ 
τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ Adroy TOY εἰς τὸν EAKANAN καὶ τὴ 
ἂν νὰν. 4 
"Aye δή μοι, ὦ Σαμουήλ, κ-τ.λ. 4 
τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ λόγου τοῦ εἰς THN ἀρχὴν TOY ἠοδίου 
Αἰγύπτῳ μὲν τὸν κόσμον ἀπείκασε κ.τ.λ. ; 
(6) Dialogus ii (Iv. p. 130 56). Ὶ 
τοῦ ἁγίου ἱππολύτου ἐπιοκόπου κἂὶ μᾶρτυροο, ἐκ | T 
λόΓοΥ TOY εἰς THN τῶν TAAANT@N AIANOMHN. 
Τούτους δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἑτεροδόξους φήσειεν av τις γειτνιᾶν κ-τ.λ. 
τοῦ ayT of ἐκ THC πρὸς BACIAIAA τινὰ ἐπιοτολῆο. 
᾿Απαρχὴν οὖν τοῦτον λέγει τῶν κεκοιμημένων, ἅτε πρωτότοκον y 
νεκρῶν K.T.A, a 7 


THN ANNAN. st 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τρεῖς καιροὶ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ ὑυνανν εἰς 
σωτῆρα κοΟτιλ. 
























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 339 


τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ λόγου τοῦ εἰς THN @AHN THN Me- 
λην. 

ὋὉ τὸν ἀπολωλότα ἐκ γῆς πρωτόπλαστον ἄνθρωπον κ.τ.λ. 

TOY δὐτοῦ ἐκ τῆς ἑρμηνείὰδς τοῦ BO ψδλμοῦ. 

Οὗτος ὁ προελθὼν εἰς τὸν κόσμον Θεὸς καὶ ἄνθρωπος ἐφανερώθη κ.τ.λ. 
τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ λόγου εἶς τὸν KF YAAMON. 
Ἔρχεται ἐπὶ τὰς οὐρανίας πύλας, ἄγγελοι αὐτῷ συνοδεύουσι x.7.A. 

(c) Dialogus iii (ιν. p. 232 sq). 

τοῦ Arioy immoAytoy émickémoy Kal MApTypoc: ἐκ τῆς 
POC BaciAiAa TINA ἐπιοτολῆο. 

ee οὖν τοῦτον λέγει τῶν κἐκοιμημένων, ἅτε πρωτότοκον τῶν 
ρῶν «.7.A, 
TOY ὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ λόγου εἰς τοῦς AYo ληοτᾶο. 
᾿Αμφότερα παρέσχε τὸ τοῦ Κυρίου σῶμα τῷ κόσμῳ, αἷμα τὸ ἱερὸν καὶ 


\o¢ 
TO ἅγιον K.T.A. 


(@) Haereticae Fabulae ii. 3 (iv. p. 330). . 
κατὰ τούτου δὲ [τοῦ KypivOov] οὐ μόνον οἱ προρρηθέντες συνέγραψαν, 
ἃ σὺν ἐκείνοις καὶ Tdios καὶ Διονύσιος 6 τῆς ᾿Αλεξανδρέων ἐπίσκοπος. 
(Ὁ) Haereticae Fabulae ii. § (τιν. p. 331). 

καὶ Θεύδοτος δὲ ὁ Βυζάντιος 6 σκυτεὺς ταὐτὰ τούτῳ [τῷ ᾿Αρτέμωνι] 
ρονηκὼς ἑτέρας ἡγήσατο φρατρίας. τοῦτον δὲ ὁ τρισμακάριος Βίκτωρ 
ἧς Ῥώμης ἐπίσκοπος ἀπεκήρυξεν, ὡς παραχαράξαι πειραθέντα τῆς ἐκκλη- 
ἃς τὰ δόγματα. κατὰ τῆς τούτων αἱρέσεως ὁ CMIK poc συνεγράφη 
Βύρινθος, ὅν τινες ‘Opryévous ὑπολαμβάνουσι ποίημα, ἀλλ᾽ 6 χαρακτὴρ 
ἔγχει τοὺς λέγοντας. εἴτε δὲ ἐκεῖνος εἴτε ἄλλος συνέγραψε, τοιόνδε ἐν 
τῷ διηγεῖται διήγημα. Νατάλιον ἔφη τινά, κ-τ.λ. 

(f) Haereticae Fabulae iii. 1 (ιν. p. 340 sq). 

κατὰ τούτων [τῶν Νικολαϊτῶν] καὶ 6 προρρηθεὶς συνέγραψε Κλήμης καὶ 
ναῖος καὶ Ὠριγένης καὶ Ἱππόλυτος ἐπίσκοπος καὶ μάρτυρ. 

(9) Haereticae Fabulae iii. 3 Ary. Ρ. 342). 

Kata δὲ Πρόκλου τῆς φυγὴν αἱρέσεως [τῆς κατὰ Φρύγας] προστατεύ- 
Tos συνέγραψε Tdios, οὗ καὶ πρόσθεν ἐμνήσθημεν. 

(A) Δ ίρίοίαε 145 (ιν. p. 1252). 

kai οἱ τούτων πρεσβύτεροι ᾿Ιγνάτιος καὶ Πολύκαρπος καὶ Hipyvaios 
Ἰουστῖνος καὶ Ἱππόλυτος, ὧν οἱ πλείους οὐκ ἀρχιερέων προλάμπουσι 


t > λλ. ‘ νΝ a , - “ὦ ΄ 
“ον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν μαρτύρων διακοσμοῦσι χορόν. 





22—2 











340 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


















13. GELAsIuS [A.D. 492—496]. 


Bibl. Patr. viu. p. 704 (Lugdun.) : see Lagarde, p. go sq. 
HIPPOLYTI EPISCOPI ET MARTYRIS’ ARABUM METROPOLIS IN MEMORI. 
HAERESIUM}; 


‘Hic procedens in mundum Deus et homo apparuit etc.’ 


14. ANDREAS OF C#SAREA [6. A.D. 500 ἢ]. 


(a) Ln Apocalyps. Synops. (Cramer’s Catena, p. 176). 
Περὶ δὲ τοῦ θεοπνεύστου τῆς βίβλου ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις Βασίλειος καὶ Τρηγόριο 
ὁ θεῖος τὸν λόγον καὶ Κύριλλος καὶ Παπίας καὶ Εἰρηναῖος καὶ Μεθόδιος κι 
Ἱππόλυτος, οἱ ἐκκλησιαστικοὶ πατέρες, ἐχέγγυοι πιστώσασθαι. 


(6) Ln Apocalyps. xiii. τ. 

Tots δὲ ἁγίοις Μεθοδίῳ καὶ Ἱππολύτῳ καὶ ἑτέροις εἰς αὐτὸν 
ἀντίχριστον τὸ παρὸν foeler ἐξείληπται, ἐκ τῆς πολυταράχου τοῦ βίο 
τούτου θαλάσσης καὶ πολυκύμονος ἐξερχόμενον κ-τ.λ. ὴ 


Hippolytus is also quoted on xiii. 18 and on xvii. 10 (com 
Cramer’s Catena, p. 385). 


15. LIBER PONTIFICALIS [c. A.D. 530, A.D.?]. 


On the two recensions of the Liber Pontificalis and their respectiy 
dates see above, I. p. 303 sq. i 


A. Relating to S. Hippolytus. 4 
(a) Vita Pontiani [a.D. 230—235] 1. pp. 62, 145 (Duchesne). _ 
Eodem tempore Pontianus episcopus et Yppolitus presbiter exi 
sunt deputati ab Alexandro in Sardinia insula Bucina, Severo et Qu 
tiano consulibus. 
The same in both recensions, but ‘deportati’ for ‘deputati’ in the later (see ab 
I. Ρ. 255). " 
The date of the exile does not fall during the reign of Alexander, but of V 
minus. The text of the Liberian Catalogue has ‘insula nociva’ (see above, I. p. 2 
which is doubtless correct (see Duchesne’s note, p. 146) 5 but there was a 


‘ Bucina’ or ‘ Bucinna,’ one of the eaten Pliny WV. Z. iii. 8, § 92, Steph. E 
The latter however wrongly calls it a ‘ city’ of Sicily. 


(Ὁ) Vita Gregorii 717 [a.D. 731—741] 1. p. 419. 
Item in ecclesia beati Genesii martyris tectum noviter rest 
ubi et altare erexit in nomine salvatoris Domini Dei nostri etc. 


























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 241 


(c) Vita Hadriani [Δ.Ὁ. 772—795] 1. p. 511. 

Simul et cymiterium beati Yppoliti martyris juxta sanctum Lau- 

πίη, quae a priscis marcuerant temporibus, noviter restauravit. 
ari modo et ecclesiam beati Christi martyris Stephani, sitam juxta 

Fraedictum cymiterium sancti Yppoliti, similiter restauravit. 


(4) Vita Leonis III [a.p. 795—816] u. p. 12. 


Fecit autem hisdem almificus pontifex in basilica beati Yppoliti 
fhartyris in civitate Portuense vestes de stauraci duas, unam super 
orpus ejus et aliam in altare majore. 


(ὃ Vita Leonis IV |a.v. 847—855] 11. p. 115 sq. 


Ipse vero a Deo protectus et beatissimus papa multa corpora 
nctorum... infra hujus alme urbis moenia congregavit mirifice. Nam et 
prpora sanctorum martyrum 1111 Coronatorum sollerti cura inquirens 
#pperit; pro quorum desiderabili amore basilicam quae sanctorum fuerat 
omini consecrata... in splendidiorem pulcrioremque statum perduxit... 
brumque sacratissima corpora cum Claudio, Nicostrato... Ypolito 
idem, cum suis familiis numero ΧΥ͂ΠΙ... pariter sub sacro altare 
#condens locavit. 
ab. ΤΊ, p. 125. 
Obtulit et in ecclesia beati Ipoliti martiris, qui ponitur in insula 
fortuensi, que nuncupatur Arsis, vestem de fundato habentem gam- 
adias ex argento textas 1, vela de fundato numero III. 

There seems to be some confusion between this notice and the last in Dollinger 
38. We read of ‘insulam quae dicitur Assis (v./. Arsis), quod est inter Portum et 
ostia,’ Vita Silvestri 1. p. 184. The island between the two branches of the Tiber 


clearly meant; but why it was so called, does not appear; see Duchesne’s note, 
199. 


B. Relating to S. Laurentius. 
(a) Vita Silvestri |a.D. 314—335] 1. p. 181. 


Eodem tempore fecit [Constantinus Augustus] basilicam beato 
qurentio martyri via Tiburtina in agrum Veranum supra arenario 
yptae et usque ad corpus Laurenti martyris fecit gradus ascensionis et 
ensionis. In quo loco construxit absidam et exornavit marmoribus 
irphyreticis et desuper loci conclusit de argento, et cancellos de 
gento purissimo ornavit, qui pens. lib. 1, et ante ipsum locum in 
ypta posuit etc. 














342 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 






















cum columnis porphyreticis et ornavit platomis transendam, et alta 
et confessionem sancto martyri Laurentio de argento purissimo, per 
lib. L, cancellos argenteos supra platomas purphyreticas, pens. lib. cee, 
Absidam supra cancellos cum statua beati Laurenti ma 
argenteam, pens. lib. cc. 
Fecit autem basilicam sancto Laurentio, quod Valentinianus Auguste 
concessit, ubi et optulit etc. 


(c) Vita Pelagit 77 (a.v. 579—590] 1. p. 309. 
Hic fecit supra corpus beati Laurenti martyris basilicam a fuel 
mento constructam et tabulis argenteis exornavit sepulchrum ejus. 


(4) Vita Hadriani [a.p. 772—795] 1. p. 500. ) 
Fecit in aecclesia beati Laurenti martyris foris muros, scilicet ul 
sanctum elus corpus requiescit, vestem de stauracim; et in aeccles 5 
maiore aliam similiter fecit vestem. Nam et tectum eiusdem be 
Laurenti bassilicae maiore, qui iam distectus erat et trabes eius confracti 
noviter fecit. 


(δ) 2%. p. 504. 
In ecclesia vero beati Laurentii martyris atque levite foris mur 
huius civitatis Romae fecit vela etc. 


(f) “2. p. 595. ἢ 
Item ipse ter beatissimus praesul in basilica maiore, quae appe a 
sancte Dei genetricis, qui aderat iuxta basilicam sancti Lauren 
martyris adque levite ubi eius sanctum corpus requiescit, foris mu 
huius civitatis Romae, obtulit vela de stauracim etc. , 


(5) 20. p. 508. oil 
Immo et porticus quae ducit ad sanctum Laurentium foris m 
porta usque in eadem basilicam noviter construxit. Hic idem al 
ficus vates eandem basilicam sancti Laurentii martyris ubi ι 
eius corpus quiescit, adnexam basilicae maioris quam dudum ἰδὲ 
praesul construxerat, ultro citroque noviter restauravit. Immc 
aecclesiam sancti Stephani iuxta eas sitam, ubi corpus sancti | | 
episcopi et martyris quiescit, similiter undique renovavit una 
cymiterio beatae Cyriacae seu ascensum eius. 


wi 


(Δ) ib. p. 511. "Η 
Fecit autem idem praesagus antistes in confessione beati Lai 
foris muros imaginem ex auro purissimo in modum evangeli 
eiusdem beati Laurentii effigies continentem, etc. : 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 343 























16. CyRiLLUS oF SCYTHOPOLIS [c. A.D. 555]. 
Vita S. Euthymii p. 82 (Hippol. Of. 1. p. ix sq, Fabricius). 

Ἔτους πέμπτου ἑξηκοστοῦ τετρακοσιοστοῦ κατὰ τοὺς συγγραφέντας 
ρόνους ὑπὸ τῶν ἁγίων πατέρων Ἱππολύτου τοῦ παλαιοῦ καὶ γνωρίμου τῶν 
'ποστόλων καὶ ᾿ΕἘπιφανίου τοῦ Κυπριώτου κ.τ.λ. 

17. GREGORY oF TouRS [c. AD. 577]. 
Hist. Franc. i. 30 (1. p. 47 sq, ed. Arndt et Krusch). 


Sub Decio vero imperatore...Xystus Romanae ecclesiae episcopus 
Τὰ Laurentius archidiaconus et Hyppolitus ob dominici nominis confes- 
Jionem per martyrium consummati sunt. 


18. EusrraTius OF CONSTANTINOPLE [c. A.D. 578]. 


Adv. Psychopannychitas 19 (Hippol. Of. τι. p. 32, Fabricius). 


λέγει TOINYN ἱππόλγτος ὁ μᾶρτγο κὰἀὶ ἐπίοκοπος ῥώμης 
IN τῷ δεγτέρῳ λύγῳ εἶς τὸν AANIHA τοιδῦτὰ. 


> a a“ 
Tore μὲν οὖν συστὰς Alapias ἅμα τοῖς λοιποῖς δι᾿ ὕμνου κ-.τ.λ. 


Ig. STEPHANUS GOBARUS [c. A.D. 575—600?]. 
Photius Bibliotheca 232 (p. 291 B). 
Ἔτι δὲ ποίας ὑπολήψεις ἔσχεν “Immodvtos καὶ Exipavios περὶ Νικολάου 
οὔ ἑνὸς τῶν ζ΄ διακόνων καὶ ὅτι ἰσχυρῶς αὐτοῦ καταγινώσκουσιν, κ-τ.λ. 
Ὅτι Ἱππόλυτος καὶ Εἰρηναῖος τὴν πρὸς Ἑ βραίους ἐπιστολὴν Παύλου 
jx ἐκείνου εἶναί φασι. 
Τίνας ὑπολήψεις εἶχεν ὁ ἁγιώτατος Ἱππόλυτος περὶ τῆς τῶν Μοντανιστῶν 


ἱρέσεως, καὶ τίνας ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις τῆς Νύσσης Γρηγόριος. 


20. Leontius oF Byzantium [c. A.D. 620]. 

(a) De Sectis Act. iii. § 1 (Patrol. Graec, LXXXVI. p. 1213, Migne). 
᾿ Ἐγένοντο δὲ ἐν τοῖς χρόνοις τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς γεννήσεως τοῦ Χριστοῦ μέχρι 
ἧς βασιλείας Κωνσταντίνου διδάσκαλοι καὶ πατέρες οἵδε. ᾿Ιγνάτιος ὁ 
οφόρος, Εἰρηναῖος, ᾿Ιουστῖνος φιλόσοφος καὶ μάρτυς, Κλήμης καὶ 
ππόλυτος ἐπίσκοποι Ῥώμης, κιτιλ. 

(0) ¢. Nestorium et Eutychem Lib. i (ib. p. 1312). 
| τοῦ ἁγίου immoAytoy ἐπιοκόπου Kal μᾶρτυρος ἐκ TAN 

















344 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


21. CHRONICON PASCHALE [c. A.D. 630]. 












p. 12 sq (ed. Bonn.). 


ε > ’ Ν a 

Ἱππόλυτος τοίνυν ὁ τῆς εὐσεβείας μάρτυς, ἐπίσκοπος γεγονὼς τοῦ 
καλουμένου Πόρτου πλησίον τῆς Ῥώμης, EN τῷ πρὸς ἁπᾶοσδο TAC. 
AIpECEIC εὐντάγμδτι ἔγραψεν ἐπὶ λέξεως οὕτως. 

Ὁρῶ μὲν οὖν ὅτι φιλονεικίας τὸ ἔργον. λέγει yap οὕτως" ἐποίησε τὸ 
πάσχα 6 Χριστὸς τότε τῇ ἡμέρᾳ καὶ ἔπαθεν" διὸ κἀμὲ δεῖ, ὃν τρόπον ὁ 
Κύριος ἐποίησεν, οὕτω ποιεῖν: πεπλάνηται δὲ μὴ γινώσκων ὅτι ᾧ καιρῷ 
" ε Ἢ > \ \ , , e ν᾿ > 
ἔπασχεν 0 Χριστὸς οὐκ ἔφαγε τὸ κατὰ νόμον πάσχα, οὗτος yap ἦν τὸ 
πάσχα τὸ προκεκηρυγμένον καὶ τὸ τελειούμενον τῇ ὠρισμένῃ ἡμέρᾳ. 

καὶ πάλιν ὁ αὐτὸς EN τῷ πρώτῳ λόγῳ τοῦ περὶ τοῦ Arloy 
πάσχὰ ογγγράμμδτοο εἴρηκεν οὕτως" ' 

Οὐδὲ ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις οὐδὲ ἐν τοῖς ἐσχάτοις K.T.A. ! 

Wordsworth (pp. 51, 267) ascribes this passage to Peter of Alexandria, and so 
apparently did Bunsen (Wordsworth p. 51, Déllinger p. 19) in his earlier work, but 
his second edition (1854) he does not say anything of the kind (1. p. 420). Thé 
authorship of Peter of Alexandria could only be maintained on the supposition that 
the whole passage after the mention of his name (p. 4) is his; but this is impossible for 
two reasons; (1) The writer quotes from ‘the great Athanasius the luminary of th 
Alexandrian Church’ (p. 9), who was only a very little child when Peter flourished ; 
(2) He uses such language as ἀειπαρθένου καὶ κατὰ ἀλήθειαν θεοτόκου Μαρίας (p. το); 
which would be an anachronism in the mouth of Peter. A better case might be made 


out for Athanasius, but the author is probably the writer of the Chronicon Paschal 
himself. 


wf 
te 









fe 
᾿ 


22. CONCILIUM LATERANENSE [a.D. 649]. 
Labb. Conc. vil. p. 287 (ed. Coleti). 


τοῦ ἁγίου immoAytoy ἐπιοκόπου kai μάρτγρος ἐκ TOs 
περὶ θεολογίδο λόΓΟΥ. ᾿ 
Τὸ θέλειν ἔχει 0 Θεός, οὐ τὸ μὴ θέλειν, κ.τ.λ. 


ib. VIL. p. 293. . 

τοῦ ἁγίου immoAytoy ἐπιοκόπου Kal mMdptypoc ἐκ TA 
εἰς TO πᾶοχὰ ἐξηγήσεωσ. 

Ὅλος ἦν [ἐν] πᾶσι καὶ πανταχοῦ, γεμίσας δὲ τὸ πᾶν κ-τ.λ. 


ha 


23. ANASTASIUS APOCRISIARIUS [A.D. 665]. 


Epist. ad Theodos. Gangren. (Patrol. Lat. cXx1x. p. 664 sq, Migne 


Praeterea misi ad praesens cum hac epistola mea Deo honorabili 
vobis...rotulam habentem testimonia ex dictis sancti Hippolyti episc 


τ 
1 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 345 


























ortus Romani ac martyris Christi Dei nostri...Hunc quippe librum 
Byzantii nobis antequam passi fuissemus delatum, cum hunc totum 
ellemus transcribere, subito juxta consuetudinem suam insistentes 
dversarii latronum more rapuerunt, et non valuimus ex ipso plusquam 
jhaec octo testimonia tollere. 

TOY ἁγίου ἱππολύτου ἐπιοκόπου πόρτου, ἤγουν TOY λι- 
ENOC ῥώμης, κἂὶ MAPTYpOc τῆς ἀληθείδο, ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ 
Hpwnoc kal ἥλικος (ν. 1. ἡλικίωνος) τῶν AIPETIKAN περὶ 
E0AOriac KAl οἀρκώσεως KATA CTOIYEION λύόΓογ, οὗ ηὐ ἀρχή, 
Wyios, ἅγιος, ἅγιος Κύριος σαβαώθ, ἀσιγήτῳ φωνῇ βοῶντα τὰ σεραφὶμ τὸν 
Deov δοξάζωσι" 
᾿Απειροδυνάμῳ γὰρ θελήσει τοῦ Θεοῦ κιτ.λ.. 


24. ANASTASIUS SINAITA [c. A.D. 680]. 

(a) Hodegus 23 (Patrol. Graec. LXXXIXx. Ὁ. 301, Migne). 

IMMOAYTOY ἐπιοκόπογ ῥώμης ἐκ TOY περὶ aNAcTAcewc 
δὶ ἀφθδροίδο Adroy. 

"Egovra, φησίν, ἐν τῇ ἀναστάσει οἱ ἄνθρωποι κ.τ.λ. 

(ὁ) Quaestiones 41 (p. 592, Migne). 

ἱππολύτου ἐκ τοῦ εἰς TO ACMA ACMATON. 

Καὶ ποῦ πᾶσα ἡ πλουσία αὕτη γνῶσις ; ποῦ δὲ τὰ μυστήρια κ.τ.λ. 

(c) Quaestiones 48 (p. 604, Migne). 

IMMOAYTOY ἐκ TOY εἰς TON AANIHA. 

Τῶν yap σιδηρῶν κνημῶν τῶν viv ἐπικρατουσῶν ἐπὶ τὰ ἴχνη τῶν ποδῶν 
T.A. 

25. Psrupo-JoHN oF Damascus [c. A.D. 700 ?]. 

i (a) Sacra Parallela Rupef. (Op. τι. p. 787, Lequien). 
τοῦ ἁγίου ἱππολύτου ῥώμηο. 
ταῦτα δὲ κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην ἔχομεν διηγήσασθαι, ὅπως τὴν ὑπόνοιαν, K.T.A. 
(ὁ) Sacra Parallela Rupef. (Op. τι. p. 781). 
ἱππολύτου ἐπιοκόπου ῥώμης περὶ χριοτοῦ Kal τοῦ ANTI- 
DICTOY. 

ἀλλὰ τούτων ἐν προοιμίῳ εἰς δόξαν Θεοῦ εἰρημένων. 


26, GERMANUS OF CONSTANTINOPLE [c. A.D. 720]. 


_ Rerum Eccl. Contempl. (Patrol. Graec. xcvi. p. 417, Migne). 
Lotro καὶ Ἱππόλυτος Ῥώμης καὶ ὁ ἅγιος Κύριλλος λέγουσιν ἐν τοῖς 


he 


hia 
























fol , 3 fal fal . 
περὶ τοῦ ᾿Αντιχρίστου λόγοις αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ ἑξακισχιλιοστῷ πεντακοσίιοστ, 


| 
i 
| 346 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


, 
ἔτει τὴν μέλλουσαν παρουσίαν ἔσεσθαι. ; 


i See Overbeck Quaest. Hippol. p. 30 sq. 


\ Ν 
] 27. PsEUDO-CHRYSOSTOM [A.D. Ὁ]. 
i 


De Pseudo-prophetis (Chrysost. Op. vu. app. p. 79): 
Ποῦ Ἰγνάτιος τὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ οἰκητήριον; ποῦ ὁ Διονύσιος τὸ πετεινὸν 
οὐρανοῦ; ποῦ ἹἹππόλυτος ὁ γλυκύτατος καὶ εὐνούστατος; 


ia 


i 
} 

| This work is manifestly spurious. The reference to Dionysius the Areopagite in 
this very passage is a sufficient evidence. We have no means of ascertaining its date; 
| 


but it was evidently many generations later than Chrysostom. 


(a) Chronographia p. 674 (ed. Bonn.). 

ἽἹππόλυτος ἱερὸς φιλόσοφος ἐπίσκοπος Πόρτου τοῦ κατὰ τὴν Ῥώμην 
σφόδρα διαπρεπῶς ἤνθει ἐν τῇ κατὰ Χριστὸν φιλοσοφίᾳ, πλεῖστα ψυχωφε ; 
" συντάττων ὑπομνήματα. εἴς Te γὰρ THN EZAHMEPON KAl εἶς τὸ 
| META THN EZAHMEPON, εἶς πολλὰ TE τῶν προφητῶν, mAAICTE 
Ἰεζεκιὴλ KAI AANIHA τῶν μεγᾶλων, ἔτι μὴν εἶς TA ACMATA KA 
εἰς AAAAC πὰντοίὰς TAAAIAC Kal νέδο γράφᾶο, ἐν οἷς καὶ elt 
| THN ἐν πᾶτμῳ TOY θεολόγογ ATIOKAAYYIN, πρὸς μδρκίωνι 
Ϊ καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς AIPECEIC, καὶ τὸν ἐξκδιδεκδετηρικὸν ΤΟΥ͂ macy. 
κὰν ὀνὰ ἐξέθετο περιγράψας εἰς τὸ πρῶτον ἔτος ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοῦ Μαμμο 


§ 


28. Grorcius SyNcELLus [a.D. 792]. 
3 


τούτου, καὶ συντόμως φάναι θεοφραδὴς ποταμὸς τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ζώντων να μα! 


γέγονε, τὸν μαρτυρικὸν περιθέμενος στέφανον πρὸς τῷ τέλει. 


| (Ὁ) Chronographia p. 685 (ed. Bonn.). 4 
᾿ πάνυ γὰρ ὀλίγον περὶ τῶν κατὰ τούσδε τοὺς χρόνους ἱερῶν καὶ μακαρί 
πατέρων ἐπιμνησθείς, Κλήμεντος 'λεγομένου Στρωματέως, Ἱππολύτου 1 
i ἱερομάρτυρος, ᾿Αφρικανοῦ τοῦ ἱστορικοῦ, Διονυσίου τοῦ μεγάλου “A 


oe 


| 
1 δρείας, καὶ ἄλλων. 
᾿ ͵ 
| 29. NuicepHorRus [ A.D. 828]. 
᾿ A 
Antirrhetica ii. 13, (Spicil. Solesm. τ. Ὁ. (347): 
τοῦ ἁγίου ἹππολΥ Του ἐπιοκόπου πόρτογ κδὶ mapTy poe 
τοῦ KATA dad acai KAI HAIKI@NOC τῶν δἱρετικῶν rong Υ 
a ἡ ἀρχή" ἌΜΑ, ἅγιος, ἅγιος. . ΩΝ 
SS Τὸ γὰρ ἄπειρον κατ᾽ οὐδένα λόγον ἢ τρόπον K.T.d. oil 





HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 347 
































30. Grorcius HAmartTotus [ce. a.D. 810]. 


Chronicon iii. 134, Ὁ. 336 (Migne, Patrol. Graec. cx. p. 521). 

Οὐ μὴν δὲ ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ θεῖος Ἱππόλυτος Ῥώμης περὶ τοῦ κηρύγματος 
καὶ τῆς τελειώσεως τῶν ἀποστόλων διεξιὼν ἔφη" Ἰωάννης [δὲ] ὃ ἀδελφὸς 
Ἰακώβου κηρύσσων ἐν τῇ ᾿Ασίᾳ τὸν λόγον [τοῦ εὐαγγελίου] ἐξωρίσθη ἐν 
Πάτμῳ τῇ νήσῳ ὑπὸ Δομετιανοῦ βασιλέως Ῥώμης, κἀκεῖθεν πάλιν εἰς 
"Edecov ἐκ τῆς ἐξορίας ἀνακληθεὶς ὑπὸ Νερβᾶ καὶ τὸ κατ᾽ αὐτὸν εὐαγγέλιον 
συγγραψάμενος, ἔνθα καὶ τὴν ἀποκάλυψιν θεασάμενος ἐτελεύτησεν, οὗ τὸ 
λείψανον ζητηθὲν οὐχ εὑρέθη. 


31. Puorttus [c. Α.}. 850]. 
(a) Bibliotheca 48. 
a »” 
᾿Ανεγνώσθη Ἰωσήπου περὶ τοῦ TANTOC, ὃ ἐν ἄλλοις ἀνέγνων ἐπιγρα- 
a a U ” a n 
φόμενον περὶ τῆς TOY TANTOC AiTiac, ἐν ἄλλοις δὲ περὶ τῆς τοῦ 
‘ > ' ΝΜ Ν > Ν ’ , Ν 5 > lal 
TANTOC oyciac. ἔστι δὲ ἐν δυσὶ λογιδίοις. δείκνυσι δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖς 
πρὸς ἑαυτὸν στασιάζοντα Πλάτωνα, ἐλέγχει δὲ καὶ περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ ὕλης 
καὶ ἀναστάσεως ᾿Αλκίνουν ἀλόγως τε καὶ ψευδῶς εἰπόντα, ἀντεισάγει δὲ 
τὰς οἰκείας περὶ τούτων τῶν ὑποθέσεων δόξας, δείκνυσί τε πρεσβύτερον 
Ἑλλήνων πολλῷ τὸ ᾿Ιουδαίων γένος. δοξάζει δὲ συγκεῖσθαι τὸν ἄνθρωπον 
> ‘ ‘ lal Y £ , o» > , a \ Ν > , 
ἐκ πυρὸς καὶ γῆς καὶ ὕδατος, καὶ ἔτι ἐκ πνεύματος, ὃ καὶ ψυχὴν ὀνομάζει. 
περὶ οὗ πνεύματος αὐταῖς λέξεσιν οὕτω φησί. 
Τούτου τὸ κυριώτερον ἀνελόμενος ἅμα τῷ σώματι ἔπλασε, καὶ διὰ 
παντὸς μέλους καὶ ἄρθρου πορείαν αὐτῷ κατεσκεύασεν. ὃ τῷ σώματι 
. \ ‘ x , A SA a , 
συμπλασθὲν καὶ διὰ παντὸς διικνούμενον τῷ αὐτῷ εἴδει τοῦ βλεπομένου 
, , ‘ > ’ Ν , ε , Ν ἈΝ ’, 3 e 
σώματος τετύπωται, τὴν οὐσίαν δὲ ψυχρότερον ὑπάρχει πρὸς τὰ τρία, Sv ὧν 
τὸ σῶμα συνήρμοσται. 
Οὕτω μὲν οὖν ἀναξίως τῆς τε τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων περὶ ἀνθρώπου φυσιολογίας 
a 8 Ν a ” > a ‘ \ , > , , Ν 
ταῦτα εἰπὼν καὶ τῆς ἄλλης αὐτοῦ περὶ τοὺς λόγους ἀσκήσεως, διέξεισι καὶ 
Ν “ ’ a Ν / ~ a > a 
περὶ τῆς KoTpoyovias κεφαλαιωδῶς. περὶ μέντοι Χριστοῦ τοῦ ἀληθινοῦ 
-»ε - «ε Ε Lal eT ΒΑ Ὶ 3 / fol 
Θεοῦ ἡμών ws ἔγγιστα θεολογεῖ, κλῆσίν τε αὐτὴν ἀναφθεγγόμενος Χριστοῦ, 
καὶ τὴν ἐκ πατρὸς ἄφραστον γέννησιν ἀμέμπτως ἀναγράφων. Ὅ τινας 
ἴσως καὶ ἀμφιδοξεῖν, ὡς ᾿Ιωσήπου εἴη τὸ συνταγμάτιον, ἀναπείσειεν. οὐδὲν 
“δὲ τὸ τῆς φράσεως αὐτῷ πρὸς τὰ ὑπόλοιπα τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀποδεῖ, 
e a 
_Evpov δὲ ἐν παραγραφαῖς ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ λόγος Ἰωσήπου, ἀλλὰ Tatov 
τινὸς πρεσβυτέρου ἐν Ῥώμῃ διατρίβοντος, ὅν φασι συντάξαι καὶ τὸν Aa- 
, s a 
YPINOON’ οὗ Kat διάλογος φέρεται πρὸς Πρόκλον twa ὑπέρμαχον τῆς τῶν 
Ἰοντανιστῶν αἱρέσεως. ἀνεα λόφοι δὲ w pelip oe goatee τοῦ λόγου φασὶ 
ἔν 
ϊ μὴν ξωσήπον ἐπεγράψαι; τοὺς δὲ ᾿Ιουστίνου τοῦ μάρτυρος, ἄλλους δὲ 


, ὥσπερ καὶ τὸν Λαβύρινθόν τινες ἐπέγραψαν ᾿Ωριγένους. ἐπεὶ 
































348 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 




















“" a a 
Tatov ἐστὶ πόνημα τῇ ἀληθείᾳ τοῦ συντεταχότος τὸν Λαβύρινθον, ὡς καὶ 
αὐτὸς ἐν τῷ τέλει τοῦ Λαβυρίνθου διεμαρτύρατο ἑαυτοῦ εἶναι τὸν περὶ 
n n ‘ 8.5} , > 9 ¢ A > e ? > »” 
τῆς τοῦ TANTOC OYcIac λόγον. εἰ δ᾽ ἕτερος καὶ οὐχ οὗτός ἐστιν, οὕπω. 
μοι γέγονεν εὔδηλον. τοῦτον τὸν Tatov πρεσβύτερόν φασι γεγενῆσθαι τῆς 
κατὰ Ῥώμην ἐκκλησίας ἐπὶ Οὐίκτορος καὶ Ζεφυρίνου τῶν ἀρχιερέων, χειρο- 
τονηθῆναι δὲ αὐτὸν καὶ ἐθνῶν ἐπίσκοπον. συντάξαι δὲ καὶ ἕτερον λόγον 
/ n 
ἰδίως κατὰ τῆς ἀρτέμωνος aipécewc, Kal κατὰ πρόκλογ δὲ σπου, 
δαστοῦ Μοντανοῦ σπουδαίαν διάλεξιν συντεταχέναι, ἐν ἧ τρισκαίδεκα μόνας 
ἐπιστολὰς ἀριθμεῖται ἸΤαύλου, οὐκ ἐγκρίνων τὴν πρὸς Ἑ βραίους. 


(ὁ) Bibliotheca 121. 


c 
ἱππολύτου KATA AIPECEWN BIBAIAAPION. 
᾿Ανεγνώσθη βιβλιδάριον Ἱππολύτου: μαθητὴς δὲ Εἰρηναίου ὁ Ἵππό- 
λυτος. ἦν δὲ τὸ σύνταγμα κατὰ αἱρέσεων AP’, ἀρχὴν ποιούμενον Δοσι- 
θεανούς, καὶ μέχρι Νοητοῦ καὶ Νοητιανῶν διαλάμβανον. ταύτας δέ φησιν 
ἐλέγχοις ὑποβληθῆναι ὁμιλοῦντος Εἰρηναίου, ὧν καὶ σύνοψιν ὁ Ἵππόλυτος 
ποιούμενος τόδε τὸ βιβλίον φησὶ συντεταχέναι. τὴν δὲ φράσιν σαφής ἐστι, 
καὶ ὑπόσεμνος καὶ ἀπέριττος, εἰ καὶ πρὸς τὸν ᾿Αττικὸν οὐκ ἐπιστρέφεται, 
λόγον. λέγει δὲ ἄλλα τέ τινα τῆς ἀκριβείας λειπόμενα, καὶ ὅτι ἡ πρὸς 
Ἑβραίους ἐπιστολὴ οὐκ ἔστι τοῦ ἀποστόλου Παύλου. λέγεται δὲ οὗτος, 
\ a a a Vey 2 ͵΄ - ὃς ΄ , ᾿ 
καὶ προσομιλεῖν τῷ λαῷ κατὰ μίμησιν ριγένους, οὗ καὶ συνήθης μάλιστε 
Νν 9 Ἁ a , c an ε ‘ , Σὰ Ν ’,ὔ ε εἰ 
καὶ ἐραστὴς τῶν λόγων ὑπῆρχεν, ὡς καὶ προτρέψασθαι αὐτὸν τὴν θείαν ὑπο-, 
μνηματίσαι γραφήν, ἐγκαταστήσας αὐτῷ καὶ ὑπογραφέας ἑπτὰ ταχυγράφους 
%  g257 , 4 > , Φ ὦ Ν a , > ae 
Kal ἑτέρους τοσούτους γράφοντας εἰς κάλλος, ὧν ἦν καὶ τῆς δαπάνης αὐτὸς 
χορηγός" καὶ ταῦτα ὑπηρετούμενος αὐτῷ ἀπαιτεῖν αὐτὸν ἀπαραιτήτως τὸ ἔργον, 
ἐξ οὗ καὶ ἐργοδιδκτὴν ἐν μιᾷ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν παρὰ ᾿Ωριγένους κληθῆ αἰ; 
πλεῖστα δὲ καὶ οὗτος λέγεται συγγεγραφέναι. 


(ὼ Bibliotheca 202. | 
IMMOAYTOY ἐπιοκόποΥ Kal μάρτυρος eic TON AANTHA 
EPpMHNEIA* Kal λόγος περὶ χριοτοῦ Kal ANTIYPICTOY. 
᾿Ανεγνώσθη Ἱππολύτου ἐπισκόπου καὶ μάρτυρος ἑρμηνεία εἰς τὸν Δανιήλ 


ν ‘ 


‘ , Ν > a \ , Ν ‘ a 2 a 
κατὰ λέξιν μὲν οὐ ποιεῖται τὴν ἀνάπτυξιν, πλὴν τὸν νοῦν γε, ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν, 
> ΄ os > , ΚΣ δ πεν α 1: 
οὐ παρατρέχει" πολλὰ μέντοι ἀρχαιοτρόπως καὶ οὐκ εἰς τὸ ὕστερον διηκριβ. 
μένον καταλέγει. ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνων οὐκ ἂν εἴη δίκαιος λόγον ὑπέχειν" τοὺς γι 
3 4 ’ ’ > δί > a a , 
ἀρχὴν θεωρίας καπαβαλλοβένονς οὐ δίκας ἀπαιτεῖν τῶν παρειμένων, 
ἀγαπᾶν μάλιστα αὐτῆς τε τῆς hin the καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἂν καταλήψεως τ 
διασκοπουμένων προχωροίη. τὸ δὲ τὴν τοῦ ᾿Αντιχρίοψον παρουσίαν, a Ὁ 
καὶ ἡ τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ κόσμου τοῦδε συντέλεια ἵσταται, μήδε τοῖς pal: 
δεομένοις τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἀποκαλύψαντος, εἶτα αὐτῶν ταύτην πεντακοσ 
ἔτεσιν ἀπὸ Χριστοῦ ὑπαχθέντα περιγράψασθαι, ὡσανεὶ τῶν ἀπὸ πρώτης 





HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 349 


























κόσμου καταβολῆς ἑξακισχιλίων ἐτῶν συντελουμένων, καὶ τὴν διάλυσιν αὐτοῦ 
ἐφεστάναι, τοῦτο καὶ θερμοτέρας ἂν εἴη τοῦ προσήκοντος γνώμης, καὶ ἡ 
5 ’ 3 ’ 3 , 3 > > > ’ Lad »” td ε 
ἀπόφασις ἀνθρωπίνης ἀγνοίας, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐπιπνοίας τῆς ἄνωθεν διελέγχει. ἡ 
ἢ δὲ φράσις αὐτῷ τὸ σαφὲς ὅτι μάλιστα οἰκειουμένη πρέποι ἂν ἑρμηνεία, εἰ καὶ 
, Sea ‘ »” , ‘ an 
τοὺς ᾿Αττικοὺς ov τι μάλα θεσμοὺς δυσωπεῖται. 
΄ > a a ne 
Συνανεγνώσθη αὐτοῦ καὶ ἕτερος λόγος περὶ YPICTOY KAI ANTIYPIC- 
2 4 > a a 

ΤΟΥ, ἐν ᾧ ἥ τε αὐτὴ τῶν λόγων ἰδέα διαπρέπει, καὶ τὸ τῶν νοημάτων 


ἡ ε ‘ ’, ‘ > , 
ἁπλούστερόν τε Kal ἀρχαιότροπον. 


32. CECUMENIUS [c. A.D. 9909}. 
Ln Apocalyps. Praef. (Cramer’s Catena p. 173). 
Πρὸς τούτοις καὶ Ἱππολύτῳ τῷ Ῥώμης προέδρῳ ἐν TH TOY εἰς AANIHA 
EPMHNEIA λόγου. 


43. ZONARAS [c. A.D. 1120 ?]. 


(2) Annal. vi. 4 (p. 267). 

Ἔν δὲ τῷ πρὸς Ἕλληνας αὐτοῦ λόγῳ, ὃς KATA TAAT@NOC ἐπιγέγραπται 
περὶ τῆς TOY πὰντόὸο δίτίδο, οὗ καὶ ὁ ἅγιος Ἰωάννης Δαμάσκηνος μνείαν 
Preroinra ἐν τῇ πονηθείσῃ αὐτῷ βίβλῳ τῇ καλουμένῃ Παράλληλα, ταῦτά 

/ ‘ ’, , .» ο΄ Ψ “a aA , 

you πάντες γὰρ δίκαιοί τε καὶ ἄδικοι ἐνώπιον τοῦ Θεοῦ λόγου, x.7.A. 
(ὁ) Annal. xii. 15 (p. 620). 
Tore OvpBavod τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς τῆς Ῥωμαίων πόλεως προεστῶτος καὶ 
ε , ” ὮΝ eee , ‘ ΄, ἃ aA ἂν , 
Ἱππόλυτος ἤνθει ἀνὴρ ἱερώτατος καὶ σοφώτατος ἐπίσκοπος τοῦ κατὰ Ῥώμην 
Plldprov γενόμενος, ὃς καὶ πολλὰ συγγράμματα συνεγράψατο, διάφορα τῆς 
θείας γραφῆς ἐξηγησάμενος. 


34. Surpas [c. A.D. 1100 ἢ]. 
p-. 1058, ed. Bernhardy. 
Ἱππόλυτος" οὗτος ἔγραψεν εἰς τὰς dpdceic τοῦ AANIHA ὑπόμνημα 
ai εἰς τὰς πὰροιμίδο COAOM@NTOC. 


35. NiICEPHORUS CALLISTUS [c. A.D. 1300]. 


Lictles. Hist. iv. 31. 

Τοῖς δὲ κατὰ Sevijpov χρόνοις καὶ Ἱππόλυτος ὁ Πόρτου τῆς Ῥώμης 
σκοπὸς γεγονὼς ἀκμάζων ἦν. καὶ δὴ πολλῶν ὑπομνημάτων συνετῶς 
γεγραμμένων, καὶ τὸ περὶ τοῦ πάοσχδ ἐκτίθεται σύγγραμμα, ἐν ᾧ τῶν 
ἀναγραφὴν ἐκθέμενος καί τινα κανόνα ἑκκαιδεκαετηρίδος περὶ τοῦ 
α προθεὶς ἐπὶ τὸ πρῶτον ἔτος ᾿Αλεξάνδρου περιγράφει τοὺς χρόνους. 








350 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 

































τά ye μὴν αὐτοῦ συγηρήμμανῳ ταῦτα εἰσι᾿ βιβχῶν εἰς τὴν ἑξδήμερον" ἷ 
ἕτερον εἰς τὰ μετὰ ἑξδήμερον' ἀντιρρητικὸς πρὸς μδρκίωνδ' ΜΠ 
τὸ ACMA τῶν ACMATON’ εἶς μέρη TOY ἰεζεκιήλ' περὶ τοῦ πάεχδ᾽ 
cYNTarma πρὸς πάοὰς τὰς aipéceic βιωφελέστατον" περὶ ταδὶ 
πὰρογοίδο τοῦ ἀντιχρίοτογ' περὶ ἀνδοτάσεωσ' καὶ ἄλλα πλεῖστα, 
εἰς Ζάχδρίδν" περὶ ψδλμῶν᾽" εἰς τὸν ficatan’ εἰς τὸν δάνιήλ᾽. 
περὶ ATOKAAY PEaC" περὶ Ta POIMIGDN’ περὶ CAOYA Kal TY OWNOC* 
περὶ ETAINWN τοῦ κΥρίου ἡμῶν iHCOY χριοτοῦ" ἐν οἷς παρόντος 
Ὠριγένους ὡμίλησε. τινὰ δὲ τῶν ἐἀελιρι να ἐπιλήψιμα ἔχων, τῷ Tepl q 
Χριστοῦ μαρτυρίῳ μετὰ ταῦτα τελειωθεὶς τὸν τῆς “ἀγνοίας dmerpiyaro 
μῶμον. ἐξ ὧν φασι καὶ Ὡριγένην ἀρχὴν ἐσχηκέναι ταῖς θείαις ἐπιβάλλειν. 
γραφαῖς. τοσαῦτα δὲ καὶ τὰ Ἱππολύτου. 


36. EBED-JESU [c. A.D. 1300]. 
Catalogus c. vii (Mssersasins Bibliotheca Orientalis τ11. p. 15). | 
Κύριος Ἱππόλυτος μάρτυς τόπο “αλλ θέ ot 
καὶ ἐπίσκοπος ἔγραψε Pipe > -eepds jas eSansuaee | 


περὶ οἰκονομίας καὶ ἑρμηνείαν Ὥσϑο :τόδναλέϑπξο As δ} 


Δανιὴλ τοῦ μικροῦ καὶ Sovoavvas κασι rian, Δ rata 
καὶ κεφάλαια κατὰ Γαΐου μων" \ als 2% . 
καὶ ἀπολογίαν ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀποκαλύ- 
ani mally Ans wayanssa | 
καὶ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου ᾿Ιωάνου Peder τί noo 


τοῦ ἀποστόλου καὶ εὐαγγελιστοῦ. r\oulwiara wt 


Though this Catalogue was originally written in Syriac, I have 
thought it worth while to translate the passage into Greek, so as to shog 
its correspondences with other lists of Hippolytus’ writings. ἡ 

There can be no reasonable doubt that οἰκονομίας (ver. 3) is ἢ 
right translation, the corresponding Syriac word being an ordi nal 
rendering of οἰκονομία in its technical sense referring to the Incarnati or 
see Payne Smith’s Zhes. Syr.s. v. p. 818. The expression ‘the litt 
Daniel,’ if the epithet be correctly so translated rather than ‘ oun 
occurs again Bibl. Orient. 1v. p. 6, where Assemani explains it of t 
apocryphal additions to Daniel, i.e. the history of Susanna, the Song 
the Three Children, and Bel and the Dragon, though Susanna 
mentioned separately in the preceding line. On the other hand Wr 

































Io 


20 


30° 


37: 


HHIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 


Catal. of Syr. MSS of Brit. Mus. τ. p. 19) gives an account of a Ms 
ontaining the prophets of the Old Testament and other matter, which 
between Susanna and Baruch has ‘Daniel the youth (so he translates 
t) concerning our Lord and the end of the world.’ 


INSCRIPTIONS RELATING TO RELIQUES. 


(a) JLnscriptio in Basilica S. Laurentii. 


CONTINET HOC TEMPLUM SANCTORUM 
CORPORA PLURA 
A QUIBUS AUXILIUM SUPPLEX HIC 
POSCERE CURA 
CUM XISTO JACET HIC LAURENTIUS 
IGNE CREMATUS 
ET PROTOMARTIR STEPHANUS LEVI 
TA BEATUS 
POST HOS IPOLITUS COLLIS RE 
LIGATUS EQUORUM 
CUM NUTRICE SUA CUM CUNC 
TA PLEBE SUORUM 
ROMANUS MILES TRIPHOMIA 
VIRGO CIRILLA 
ET QUADRAGINTA QUOS PASSIO 
CONTINET ILLA 
JUSTINUSQUE SACER DEFUNCTOS 
QUI TUMULABAT 
CIRIACE VIDUA QUE SANCTOS 
CLAM RECREABAT 
CUJUS MATRONE FUIT HEC 
POSSESSIO CARA 
IPSIUS NOMEN SPECIALITER 
OPTINET ARA 
MARTIR IRENEUS QUI TECUM 
MARTIR ABUNDI 
DECEDENS SPREVIT FALLACIS 
GAUDIA MUNDI 
YLARUS ET ZOSIMUS PELAGIUS 
HIC RETINENTUR 
TERTIUS ET XISTUS CUM MULTIS 
QUI RETICENTUR 











ΝΠ.» ee. EES eel ee 


352 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. ‘ 













This inscription was found in the narthex of the lower basilica of 
S. Laurentius in 1853. It is given in De Rossi Budi. di Archeol. Crist. 
1881, p. 87. The alternate (shorter) lines are in red. It belongs to the 
ΧΙ century. For the reference in ‘passio illa’ see below, p. 473: 
In the inscription itself, l, 13 MILES is written MILEX, and in l. 29 YLARVS” 
is XLARVS. 


(6) Lnscriptio in Ecclesia S. Silvestri. 


M4 IN N DNI HEC EST NOTICIA NATALICIORUM 
SCORUM HIC REQUIESCENTIUM 
* * 
MENSE AUGUSTO DIE VIII NA SCORU 
QUIRIACI LARGI ET SMARAGDE ARCHEL 
DIE XIII M SS NA SCI YPPOLITI, 


where M SS means mensis suprascripti (i.e. August). This table of 
the inscription, relating to the male saints, was known long ago, and will” 
be found in Muratori ov. Thes. p. MCMLXVI. 


i INN. DNI. HAEC, NOT. NAT. SC[ARUM] 
HIC REQUIESCENT[IUM] 
* * 
MENSE AUG, Ὁ. VIII N. SCAR. MEMMIAE 
ET JULIANAE 
. VIII M. SS. Ν᾿ SCAE ARTHEMIAE 
. XII, M. SS. N. SCAE CONCORDIAE 
MENSE SEPT. Ὁ, XXX. N. SCAR SOFIAE 
PISTIS. HELPIS. ET, AGAPE 
MENSE OCT. D. XIII. N. SCAE CONCHYLE 
D. XVIII. M. SS N. SCAE TRIFONIAE 
D. XXVIII. M. SS. N. SCAE CYRILLAE 


D 
D 


This table, relating to the female saints, has been pieced togeth¢ 
recently by De Rossi; see Bull, di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 39 Sq. 
These were the reliques taken from the demolished and ri le 
suburban cemeteries and placed by Paul I between a.p. 757—161 i 
his monastery of S. Silvester in Capite. | 


+e 


38. ITINERARIES. ᾿ 

These extracts are taken from De Rossi Roma Sotterranea # 
144 sq, where the documents are described and their dates fixed. “ 
extracts are on pp. 178, 179. ia) 

































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 353 


(a) Itinerarium Codicis Salisburgensis [a.D. 62 5--- 638]. 


Postea illam viam demittis et pervenies ad S. Ypolitum martyrem 
Hui requiescit sub terra in cubiculo, et Concordia mulier eius martyr 
mte fores, altero cubiculo 5. Triphonia regina et martyr, et Cyrilla 
lia eius et martyr, quas meditus Decius interfecit uxorem et filiam, 
S. Genisius martyr. Postea pervenies ad ecclesiam S. Laurentii; ibi 
nt magnae basilicae duae in quarum quis speciosiorem et pausat, 
est parvum cubiculum extra ecclesiam in hoc occidentur. Ibi 
ausat 5. Abundius et Herenius martyr Via Tiburtina; et ibi est ille 
pis quem tollent digito multi homines nescientes quid faciunt. Et 
altera ecclesia sursum multi martyres pausant. Prima est Cyriaca 
ancta vidua et martyr, et in altero loco S. Justinus, et iuxta eum 
Crescentius martyr, et multitudo sanctorum, longe in spelunca deor- 
m S. Romanus martyr. Postea ascendes ad ecclesiam S. Agapiti 
Wartyris et diaconi S. Syxti papae. 
In 1. 4 for ‘meditus’ read ‘Messius’; in 1. 6 for ‘in quarum...pausat’ read 
obably ‘in quarum quae speciosior est pausat’; and in 1. 7 ‘ occidentur’ should be 


ad ‘ occidente,’ even if some greater correction is not needed. 
This is the itinerary attached to William of Malmesbury’s Gesta Regum Anglorum. 


(6) Epitome Libri de Locis Sanctorum Martyrum [.D. 635—645]. 
Juxta Viam ‘Tiburtinam (prope murum civitatis ecclesia est S. 
pnuarii episcopi et martyris, eademque via) ecclesia est S. Agapiti 
ultum honorabilis martyrum corporibus. Et prope eandem viam 
clesia est 5. Laurentii maior, in qua corpus eius primum fuerat 
matum, et ibi basilica nova mirae pulchritudinis, ubi ipse modo 
pquiescit. Ibi quoque sub eodem altare Abundus est depositus et 
pris in portico lapis est, qui aliquando in collo eiusdem Abundi pen- 
ebat in puteum missi: ibi Hereneus, Julianus, Primitivus, Tacteus, 
emeseus, Eugenius, Justinus, Crescentianus, Romanus sunt sepulti, 
S. Cyriaca, S. Simferosa, et Justina cum multis martyribus sunt 
ppulti. Inde in boream sursum in monte basilica 5. Hippolyti est, 
bi ipse cum familia sua tota xviiii martyres iacet. Carcer ibi 
st in quo fuit Laurentius. Ibi est Triphonia uxor Decii Caesaris et 
yrilla filia eius: inter utrasque Concordia et 5. Geneseus, et multi 
artyres ibi sunt. 

In 1. 1, 2, the words in brackets are in a later hand. In 1. 11 read ‘sepultae’. Ὁ 


(ὦ Notitia Portarum Viarum Ecclesiarum [Α.Ὁ. 648—682]. 


Sexta porta et via Tiburtina, quae modo dicitur S. Laurentii, iuxta 
anc viam iacet S. Laurentius in sua ecclesia et Habundius martyr. 
it ibi prope in altera ecclesia pausant hi martyres, Ciriaca, Romanus, 
 CLEM. II, 23 














354 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


Justinus, Crescentianus, et ibi non longe Ipolitus vel basilica S. Ippe 
lyti, ubi ipse cum familia sua pausat, id est xviii [v. 2 xxviii]. Et ib 
requiescunt beata Triphonia uxor Decii et filia eius Cirilla et Concordis 
nutrix eius. Et in altera parte viae illius est ecclesia Agapiti martyris. 


(4) Topographia Einsiedlensts [after a.D. 750]. 
In via Tiburtina foris murum in sinistra 5. Ypoliti, in dextera : 

Laurentii. f 
(ce) Liber Mirabilium Urbis Romae [later, various recensions]. 
Coemeterium in agro Verano ad S. Laurentium. 


39: WESTERN SERVICE Books. 


(a) Sacramentarium Leonianum (Muratori Liturgia Romana Vet ἵ 
I. p. 400). a 

Idibus Augusti. 

NATALE SANCTORUM HIPPOLYTI ET PONTIANI. 

Tibi enim, Domine, festiva solemnitas agitur, tibi dies sacrata cel 
bratur, quam Sancti Hippolyti martyris tui sanguis in veritatis a 
testificatione profusus magnifico nominis tui honore signayit. 


(6) Sacramentarium Gregorianum (Muratori 11. p. 112). 
Idibus Augusti. 

NATALE SANCTI HIPPOLYTI. 
! Da nobis, omnipotens Deus, ut beati Hippolythi martyris tui ven 
! randa solemnitas et devotionem nobis augeat et salutem. ' 





(c) Missale Mixtum Mozarabicum (Patrol. Lat. uxxxv. p. 816 ἃ 
Hunc [Laurentium] Hipolitus dum sibi traditum asservaret custoc 

} militari etc. ᾿ 
With more to the same effect. So again p. 818. 


Ϊ SANCTI HYPOLITI SOCIORUMQUE EJUS. Ἧι 
i; But this document has been added to from time to time, and contains saintell of 








| 13th century, e.g. Thomas Aquinas, a 
| (4) Breviarium Gothicum Sanctorale (Patrol. Lat. UXxxvt. 
Ϊ 1134 Sq). i 
is Aug. xiii. In festo sancti Hippolyti Martyris. Αἱ 
il Ferreis percalidus unguibus artifex Ἢ 
ν᾽ Armat spiniferi spicula cardui ; 4 
ἡ Corrupta penitus viscera martyris 4 


Perfundunt rosei flumina sanguinis. 




























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 355 


Hine ad cornipedum terga ferocium 
Innexu religant; tractus in aspera. 
* * * 
Christe Domine omnipotens, qui sanctum martyrem tuum Hippoly- 
um, dum equina feritate per spinarum traheretur acumina, etc. 
There is no trace of any connexion with 5. Laurentius here, and no 
mention of any companions. 
See more on this subject in De Rossi Bullettino p. 30 sq (1882). 


40. CALENDARS AND MARTYROLOGIES. 


(a) Liberian Chronographer [a.D. 354]. 
Successio episcoporum (Mommsen, p. 635 ; see above, 1. p. 255). 

Eo tempore Pontianus episcopus et Yppolitus presbyter exoles 
sunt deportati in Sardinia, in insula nociva, Severo et Quintiano 
cons. [A.D. 235]; 

Depositio Martyrum (Mommsen, p. 632 sq). 

viii Idus Aug. Xysti in Calisti 

ili Idus Aug. Laurenti in Tiburtina 

Idus Aug. Ypoliti in Tiburtina 

et Pontiani in Calisti 
Non. Sept. Aconti in Porto, et Nonni et Herculani et Taurini. 


(6) Ancient Syriac Martyrology [c. A.D. 350?] ed. Wright, pp. 4, 8. 


Jan. 30. In the city of Antioch, Hippolytus. 
Aug. 1. On the same day, the commemoration of Xystus, bishop 
of Rome. 


(c) Calendar of Polemius Sylvius [a.v. 448]. 
ili Idus Aug. Natalis 5. Laurentii mart. 
ii Idus Aug. Hyppoliti mart. 
(4) Consular Fasti [a.d. 493). 
Decio 11 et Rustico [a.p. 251]. 
His coss. passus 5. Laurentius iii Idus Augusti. 
(ὁ Kalendarium Carthaginense. 


viii Idus Aug. sancti Systi episcopi et martyris Romae. 
111 Idus Aug. sancti Laurenti. 
Idus Aug. sancti Hippoliti. 


23—2 




















tail 


356 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 






















(f) Martyrologium Hieronymianum (Hieron. Of, X1. pp. 55% 
585 56). : 
iv Kal. Febr. In Tursia, Constanti, Hippolyti episcopi de am 
tiquis. : 
iii Kal. Febr. In Antiochia, passio sancti Hippolyti martyris. 
Prid. Kal. Febr. In Alexandria, Tarsici, Zotici...Gelasi, Hippo- 
lyti, Ursini, Tyrsi. Ἵ 
viii Idus Aug. Romae in coemeterio Calesti, via Appia nata 
Sixti episcopi, et Felicissimi... Laurentii, Hippolyti, et militum 
centum sexaginta duorum. 4 
iv Idus Aug. Romae via Tiburtina, natalis sancti Laurentii archi 
diaconi et martyris. In via Appia Felicissimi. Et alibi Cres: 
centiani... Pontiani. 
Idus Aug. Romae, natalis sanctorum, Hippolyti martyri 
Pontiani episcopi, Cornelii, etc. . 

xiii Kal. Sept. In Portu Romano, natalis sancti Hippolyti mar 
tyris. In Sardinia natalis sancti Luxurii, ete. 4 

xi Kal. Sept. Et in portu Romano peregrinorum martyrum. — 
x Kal. Sept. In portu urbis Romae natalis sancti Hippolyt 
qui dicitur Nunnus cum sociis suis. In Ong 

natalis sancti Quiriaci, Archelai. , 


(9) Martyrologium Vetus Romanum (Patrol. Lat. ΟΧΧΊΠ. pp. τη 
165, Migne). 

iii Kal. Febr. Antiochiae, passio sancti Hippolyti. 

viii Id. Aug. Romae, via Appia, Xisti papae et martyris. 

vi Id. Aug. Romae, via Ostiensi, Cyriaci martyris cum altis x 
quando viii die mensis Augusti reconditi sung 

v Id. Aug. Romae, Romani militis 

Vigilia sancti Laurentii. 

iv Id. Aug. | Romae Laurentii archidiacon. martyris et mili 
clxv. . 

Idus Aug. Romae, Hippolyti martyris cum familia sua 
S. Concordiae nutricis ejus. ae 


On the relations of the older Roman Martyrologies see Zgnat. and Polyc. 1. 
(ed. 1), p. 570 (ed. 2). 


41. Fiorus-Bepa [c. A.D. 870]. 


Patrol. Lat. Xciv. pp. 827, 999 sq. 
iii Kal. Febr. [Vacat]. 
viii Kal. Aug. Romae 5. Xysti episcopi. 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 357 


















vi Idus Aug. Natalis 5. Cyriaci. 

v Idus Aug. _ Vigilia S. Laurentii. Eodem die Romae S. Romani 
militis, qui confessione S. Laurentii compunctus 
petiit ab eo baptizari; et mox jubente Decio 
cum fustibus exhibitus ac decollatus est. 

iv Idus Aug. Natale S. Laurentii sub Decio; qui post plurima 
tormenta carceris, verberum diversorum, lami- 
narum ardentium, ad ultimum in craticula ferrea 
assatus martyrium complevit. 

Idibus Aug. Romae 5. Ypoliti, qui tempore Decii ligatus pedes 
ad colla indomitorum equorum sic per carduos 
tribulosque tractus emisit spiritum; et Concor- 
diae nutricis ejus, quae ante ipsum plumbatis 
caesa martyrizatur; et aliorum de domo ejus 
decem et novem, qui simul decollati sunt. 


42. ADO OF VIENNE [} A.D. 874]. 


Martyrologium (Patrol. Lat. CXXi11. pp. 224, 318 sq, Migne). 

Ill ΚΑΙ, FEBR. 

Passio sancti Hippolyti martyris qui Novati schismate aliquantulum 
Heceptus, operante gratia Christi correctus ad charitatem ecclesiae 
ediit; pro qua et in qua illustre martyrium postea consummavit. 

VIII IDUS AUG. 

Romae, via Appia, in coemeterio Callisti, natale S. Sixti episcopi et 
martyris et in coemeterio Praetextati sanctorum Felicissimi et Agapiti 
liaconorum ejusdem, sub Decio imperatore, Valeriano praefecto; qui 
enuit beatissimum senem Sixtum episcopum Romanum cum omni clero 
Ο et reclusit eos in custodia publica ete. 

[Sixtus, Felicissimus, and Agapitus, are beheaded with others. ] 

_ VID. AUG. 

Vigilia sancti Laurentii. 

Eodem die Romae, sancti Romani militis qui in confessione sancti 
aurentii compunctus petiit ab eo baptizari, et mox jubente Decio cum 
ustibus exhibitus ac decollatus est. 
| IV ID. AUG. 

Romae natale sancti Laurentii archidiaconi et martyris sub Decio. 
cui beatus Sixtus omnes facultates ecclesiae et thesauros, pergens ad 
soronam miartyrii, tradidit. 

_ [Hippolytus his gaoler, seeing the miracle of giving sight to the blind 
ought by Laurentius, is converted and baptized. Laurentius is 












































358 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


brought before the tyrant Decius, ordered to surrender the treasures of 
the Church, and put to torture. | 

Tunc unus ex militibus, nomine Romanus, credidit Domino Jesu 
Christo et dixit beato Laurentio: Video ante te hominem pulcherrimum 
stantem cum linteo et extergentem membra tua; adjuro te per Christum” 
qui tibi misit angelum suum, ne me derelinquas. Levatus igitur beatus. 
martyr de catasta et solutus, redditus est Hippolyto tantum in palatio, 
Veniens autem Romanus offerens aquam misit se ad pedes beat 
Laurentii ut baptizaretur; qui benedicta aqua baptizavit eum: quod 
factum audiens Decius jussit eum sibi exhiberi cum fustibus. Non 
interrogatus coepit clamare, Christianus sum. Et jubente Decio eductus 
foras muros portae Salariae decollatus est quinto Idus Augusti. Cujus 
corpus noctu collegit Justinus presbyter et sepelivit in crypta in agi 
Verano. 

[Laurentius then undergoes martyrdom, being sensi alive on ἃ 
gridiron. | 

Mane autem primo adhuc crepusculo rapuit corpus ejus Hippolyt 
et condivit cum linteis et aromatibus; et hoc factum mandavit Justino 
presbytero. Tunc beatus Justinus et Hippolytus plorantes et multum 
tristes tulerunt corpus beati martyris et venerunt in via Tiburtina, i 
praedium matronae viduae Cyriacae in agro Verano, ad quam ipst 
martyr fuerat noctu, cui et linteum dedit, unde pedes sanctorum ex 
terserat, et illud ibi jam hora vespertina sepelierunt 1v Idus August 
Et jejunaverunt agentes vigilias noctis triduo, et multitudine Christi 
anorum. Beatus autem Justinus presbyter obtulit sacrificium laudis 
et participati sunt omnes. . 

Eodem die Romae, militum centum et sexaginta quinque. Tun 
passi sunt Claudius, Severus, Crescentio, et Romanus, ipso die qu 
beatus Laurentius, post tertium post diem passionis sancti Sixti. 

ID. AUG. 

Romae, sancti Hippolyti martyris, sub Decio imperatore, Valerian 
praefecto. Hunc beatum Hippolytum vicarium sanctus Laurenti 
cum apud eum esset in custodia, baptizavit. Qui de sanctis exsequi 
martyris post tertium diem ad domum suam rediens dedit pace 
omnibus servis suis et ancillis, et communicavit de sacrificio alta 
beati Laurentii martyris. Et posita mensa, priusquam cibum sumer 
venerunt milites et tenuerunt et perduxerunt ad Decium. Quem 
vidit, subridens dixit ei: Numquid et tu magus effectus es, quia corp 
Laurentii abstulisse diceris? Sanctus Hippolytus respondit ; Hoc f 
non quasi magus, sed quasi Christianus. Decius furore repletus ju: 
ut cum lapidibus os ejus contunderetur. Et exspoliavit eum veste 




























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 359 


induebatur habitu Christiano et dixit ei: Sacrifica, et vives; sin aliter, 
peries per tormenta sicut Laurentius. Sanctus Hippolytus dixit ; 
“§Exemplum merear beati Laurentii martyris fieri, quem tu, miser, ausus 
uisti ore polluto nominare. Extensus igitur fustibus et cardis diu 
aesus est, donec caedentes deficerent. Inde levatus est a terra, et 
jussit eum Decius vestiri militari veste qua gentilis utebatur, et dixit ei: 
Recole militiam, et esto noster amicus, et in conspectu nostro utere 
militia pristina quam semper habuisti. Cumque beatus martyr dixisset ; 
PMilitia mea haec est, Christianum firmum militare, unde cupio ad 
elerem palmam cum fructu venire; iracundia plenus Decius dixit 
aleriano; Accipe omnes facultates ejus, et interfice eum crudeli 
exanimatione. Valerianus itaque, exquisita omni facultate ejus, invenit 
in domo Hippolyti omnem familiam Christianam, quam conspectui suo 
@praesentari fecit. Et jussit beatum Hippolytum foras muros portae 
iburtinae cum familia sua duci. Beatus vero Hippolytus confortabat 
omnes, dicens; Fratres, nolite metuere, quia ego et vos unum Deum 
abemus. Et decollati sunt promiscui sexus numero decem et novem. 
Beatus vero Hippolytus ligatus pedes ad colla indomitorum equorum, 
sic per carduetum et tribulos tractus, emisit spiritum. Nocte venit 
beatus Justinus presbyter, et collegit corpora, et sepelivit in campo 
eodem juxta Nympham, ad latus agri Verani, Idibus Augusti. 
Eodem die natale sanctae Concordiae, nutricis ejusdem beati 
Hippolyti. Cum Valerianus ad familiam beati Hippolyti sibi prae- 
sentatam dixisset, Considerate aetates vestras, ne simul pereatis cum 
Hippolyto domino nostro (4 vestro) ; respondit beata Concordia, Nos 
desideramus potius cum domino nostro pudice mori quam impudice 
yivere. Ad hoc Valerianus ; Genus, inquit, servorum nisi cum suppliciis 
hon emendatur. Et jussit ut beata Concordia cum plumbatis caederetur. 
Et cum caederetur, emisit spiritum, corpusque ejus est in cloacam 
projectum. Cumque diu quaereret illud sanctus Justinus, et non in- 
eniret, ita tristis redditur ut non cessarent flere oculi ejus. Tertio 
decimo vero die post passionem sancti Hippolyti, venit quidam miles 
Porphyrius nomine, ad Irenaeum cloacarium qui occulte Christianus 
erat, et dicit ei; Si secretum possis custodire, divulgabo arti tuae mul- 
tum ad quaestum ; ante hos dies jussit Valerianus praefectus in con- 
pectu suo quamdam creditariam Hippolyti plumbatis deficere, et corpus 
sjus in cloacam jactari: haec in vestibus suis spero quod margaritas 
vabet absconsas vel aurum. Audiens haec Irenaeus, intimavit secreto 
Neato Justino presbytero; qui flectens genua gratias egit Deo. Por- 
Shyrius autem noctu veniens cum Irenaeo invenit corpus sanctum ; sed 
n vestimentis nihil invenerunt. Beatus autem Irenaeus vocavit ad se 


























i 
oY 
































360 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 






















quemdam Christianum Abundium nomine, et tulerunt corpus ejus et 
perduxerunt ad beatum Justinum; qui gratias agens Deo illud sus 
cepit, et juxta corpora martyrum Hippolyti et aliorum sepelivit, 
Kalendas Septembris. 

XV KAL. OCT. 

Item Romae via Tiburtina, ad sanctum Laurentium, natale beati 
Justini presbyteri, quem beatus Sixtus ordinavit. f 

[After speaking of the relations of Justinus with S. Laurentius and 
S. Cyriaca, the account concludes :] 

Hic sanctum Hippolytum et Concordiam, Irenaeum, Abundium, 
Cyrillam filiam Decii Caesaris, martyres, et alios plurimos sepulturis 
condivit. Et persecutione Decii, Galli, et Volusiani, confessionis glori 
insignissimus fuit. : 

Romae, in crypta arenaria, sanctorum martyrum Narcissi et Cre S 
scensionis. 

VII ΚΑΙ, SEPT. q 

Item natalis sanctorum Irenaei et Abundi Romae; quos Deciané 
persecutione jussit Valerianus incloacari eo quod corpus beatae Con 
cordiae cloacam missum levaverunt. Et ipsorum quoque corpora 
levavit Justinus presbyter et sepelivit in crypta juxta beatum Lauren 
tium. 

XV KAL, NOV. 

Item Romae sanctae Triphoniae uxoris Decii Caesaris ; quae, vi Ὁ 
suo post interfectionem beatorum Sixti et. Laurentii divinitus punito 
petiit baptizari cum filia Decii Cyrilla a Justino presbytero ; et alia di 
defuncta est ac juxta Hippolytum in crypta sepulta quinto decimo 
Novembris. 

VIII KAL. NOV. 

Ipso die Romae via Salaria natalis quadraginta et octo militum, gq 
simul baptizati a beato Dionysio papa; et mox jubente Claudi 
imperatore decollati sunt. Quorum corpora noctu collegerunt beatu 
Justinus presbyter et Joannes, et sepelierunt in crypta cum multitudin 
Christianorum in via Salaria in clivum Cucumeris viii Kal. Novembri 
ubi positi sunt et alii martyres centum viginti et unus. Inter qu¢ 
fuerunt quatuor milites Christi, Theodosius, Lucius, Marcus, et Pett 
Hi videntes ad se venire armatos, rogabant ut primi decollarentt 
Scriptum in passione sanctorum martyrum Sixti, Laurentii, et Hippoly 

V KAL. NOV. ‘ ‘ 

Romae sanctae Cyrillae filiae Decii Caesaris quae sub Clam 
principe jugulata et necata est gladio, ac sepulta a Justino presby 
cum matre sua juxta sanctum Hippolytum. “ie 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 361 


43. Mena [a.D. Ὁ]. 



























Jan. 30 (p. 230, ed. Venet. 1877). 

ΕΣ -“ — 4 ε ’ ε ΄ , ε , ») -“ ‘ 

Αθλησις τοῦ ἁγίου ἱερομάρτυρος Ἵππολύτου πάπα Ῥώμης καὶ τῶν σὺν 
αὐτῷ Κενσουρίνου, Σαβαΐνου, Χρυσῆς, καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν" 

Τόλμῃ θάλασσαν ἹἹππόλυτος εἰσδύνει 
οἷα κροαίνων ἵππος ἐν λείῳ πέδῳ 
* * * 
Ἱππόλυτον πόντου τριακοστῇ ἔκτανε ῥεῦμα. 
Αὕτη ἡ ἱερὰ ὁμήγυρις ὑπῆρχεν ἐπὶ τῆς βασιλείας Κλαυδίου, ἡγεμονεύοντος 
“ “ Ν > , ε ’ , A ε QA ral 
Bixapiov τοῦ καὶ Οὐλπίου Ρωμύλου καλουμένου" καὶ ὁ μὲν Kevooupivos, 
’ Ἃ Ν a πε ἐν , er \ ἮΝ , 
μάγιστρος ὧν καὶ τῷ βασιλεῖ ἀγαπώμενος, ἐσέβετο τὸν Χριστὸν λεληθότως 
καὶ τῶν Χριστιανῶν ὑπερησπίζετο᾽ γνωσθεὶς δὲ ἀπεκλείσθη ἐν φυλακῇ᾽ 
ἔνθα νεκρὸν ἀναστήσας ἔπεισε πάντας τοὺς στρατιώτας πιστεῦσαι τῷ 
ρ ™ ρ ‘ 

Χριστῷ᾽ οἵτινες προστάξει τοῦ τυράννου ἀπεκεφαλίσθησαν, καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς 
ε ΄ “ “τον , ε bY A , ‘ 
ἢ μακαρία Χρυσῇ καὶ ὃ ταύτης ὑπουργὸς Σαβαΐνος, πρότερον πολλᾶς 
ὑπομείναντες τιμωρίας διὰ τὸ διακονεῖν τοῖς ἁγίοις καὶ τοὺς ἰχῶρας αὐτῶν 
ἐκμάσσειν καὶ ἑαυτοὺς ἀλείφειν. 

Ταῦτα μαθὼν ὁ μακαριώτατος πάπας Ἱππόλυτος, ζήλῳ θείῳ κινηθείς, 
> NG τ ‘ , ‘ ΄ ε ΓΝ , a a 
ἦλθε καὶ ἤλεγξε τὸν τύραννον κατὰ πρόσωπον. ὁ δὲ ὑπερζέσας τῷ θυμῷ 
πρῶτον μὲν αὐτὸν ἐβασάνισε μετὰ τῶν ἀκολουθούντων αὐτῷ πρεσβυτέρων 
καὶ διακόνων καὶ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου" εἶτα δήσας αὐτῶν τὰς χεῖρας καὶ τοὺς πόδας 
ἐν τῷ βυθῷ τῆς θαλάσσης ἔρριψε, καὶ οὕτως ἐτελειώθησαν. 

This is found also in the Menologium of Basil (Patrol. Graec. ΟΧντι. 
p. 285, Migne) almost verbatim; but the words τοῦ καὶ Οὐλπίου 
Ῥωμύλου καλουμένου are omitted. Hippolytus however is called πάπα 
simply without the addition of Ῥώμης. 


August roth (p. 53). 
Τῇ ( τοῦ αὐτοῦ μηνὸς μνήμη τῶν ἁγίων μαρτύρων Λαυρεντίου ἀρχι- 
διακόνου, Ξύστου πάπα Ῥώμης, καὶ ἹἹππολύτου. 
" * * * 
Tov Ἱππόλυτον ἱπποδέσμιον βλέπω 
ἐναντίον πάσχοντα τῇ κλήσει πάθος. 
ὥπτησαν δεκάτῃ Λαυρέντιον ἠῦτε ἰχθύν. 


᾿ς Ἐϊσαχθεὶς δὴ Λαυρέντιος ὁ ἀρχιδιάκονος καὶ τὰ ἱερὰ χρήματα ἀπαιτού- 
i 4 er Ν ‘ ‘ \ Oy | ΄ τ ὃ ΄ ‘ 

νος, αἰτήσας ἁμάξας καὶ λαβὼν τοὺς χωλοὺς καὶ ἀναπήρους, οἷς διένειμε τὰ 
ms κ᾿ Wis Bee aka , » Ν . XG a 
ματα, Kal ταῖς ἁμάξαις ἐπιστιβάσας, ἤγαγε πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα: οὗς 

















362 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 















ἰδὼν καὶ ὀργισθεὶς κελεύει τὸν ἅγιον Λαυρέντιον τυφθῆναι σφοδρῶς, εἶτα, 
βληθῆναι ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ. ἐν ἣ γενόμενος ἰᾶτο πάντας ὅσοι πρὸς αὐτὸν 
ἐφοίτων, ᾧ ἂν ἕκαστος κατείχετο νοσήμῳτι. ἅπερ ὁ ἤριβύννοα Καλλίψικος 
βλέπων, 0 καὶ τῇ εἱρκτῇ ἐπισγατῶν, ἐπίστευσε τῷ Χριστῷ καὶ ἐβαπτίσθη 
μετὰ τοῦτο δὲ παρίσταται ὃ ἅγιος Λαυρέντιος τῷ βασιλεῖ, καὶ μὴ πεισθεὶς 
θῦσαι τοῖς εἰδώλοις ἐπὶ ἐυχάῤρας ἁπλοῦται, κάτωθεν se salah aint sh 
καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ τῷ Θεῷ εὐχαριστήσας opine τὸ πνεῦμα, καὶ κηδείας τῆς 
ὀφειλομένης mapa τοῦ Ἱππολύτου τυγχάνει. ᾿ 

Τοῦτο γνοὺς ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ μεταπεμψάμενος αὐτὸν ἐκέλευσε κινάραι ; 
σιδηραῖς Μαστιγωθῆνδι, εἶτα ἵπποις προσδεθῆναι ἀγρίοις" ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἐπὶ πολὺ 
συῤόμενος τῷ Θεῷ τὸ πνεῦμα παρέθετο. aes δὲ ὅτι τῇ ἑβδόμῃ ἡμέρᾳ. 
μετὰ τὸ παθεῖν τὸν ἅγιον Ἱππόλυτον Δέκιος καὶ Οὐαλλεριανὸς καθήμενοι ἐπὶ 4 
τῶν ἵππων αὑτῶν τοῦ ἀφικέσθαι πρὸς τὸ θέατρον ἐξέπνευσαν, κράξας ὃ 
Δέκιος ἐν τῇ ὥρᾳ τοῦ θανάτου αὐτοῦ: Ὦ Ἱππόλυτε, ὡς αἰχμάλωτον οὗ 
Sataplion ἀπάγεις με; ἔκραξε δὲ καὶ ὁ Οὐαλλεριανός: casas pe κἀτήν ΙΝ 
οὕτως ἕλκεις; τοῦτο δὲ δῆλον γέγονε καθ᾽ ὅλην τὴν ἰράς σιρέ μὲ καὶ πάντε 
ἐστερεώθησαν τῇ πίστει τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, ᾧ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺ : 
αἰῶνας. ἀμήν. ἢ 


The same account is given in a much abridged form in the Meno- 
logium of Basil (Patrol. Graec. cxvul. p. 580, Migne). 


44. 5. Perrus Damianus [c. A.D. 1060]. 


Lpistola ad Nicolaum 77 (Hippol. Of. 1. p. xi, ed. Fabricius). 


Beatus quoque Nonus martyr, qui et Hippolytus, memoriae nostra οἱ 
non praetereundus occurrit; qui nimirum postquam triginta millia Sa 
cenorum ad Christi fidem efficacissima praedicatione convertit, post- 
quam beatam quoque Pelagiam de lupanaribus ad ecclesiae pudicitiam 
provocavit, postquam denique nonnullos sanctarum expositionum libros 
luculenter explicuit, tandem episcopatum deseruit, de Antiochenis par 
tibus unde erat oriundus abscessit, Romanos fines appetiit: cumqueé 
beata Aurea apud Ostiam civitatem saxo cervicibus alligato in ma 1 
nis fluctibus martyrium consummasset, beatus Nonus sanctum cada 
ver pia devotione collegit et cum omni diligentia tumulavit. Quen 
mox idem persecutor, qui dicebatur Ulpius, juxta Tyberis alveum | 
foveam aquis plenam mergi praecipit; cujus postmodum corpus co 
summato triumphali martyrio in civitate, quae Portus dicitur, Chri 
devotio sepelivit. Illico audita vox veluti infantium per unam > 
horam clamantium, Deo gratias. Qui ergo talem vitae meruit | 
sulam, liquido patuit quia episcopatum deserens coram Deo non i ncul i 
offensam. οΝῇ 


i. 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 363 


45. Passio SANCTI ΒΙΧΤῚ LauRENTII HipPoLyri. 


LHippolytus Romanus p. xiii, ed. Lagarde. 


Xystus igitur Romae urbis episcopus apud Athenas natus et doctus, 
prius quidem philosophus, postea vero Christi discipulus, audiens Decium 
aesarem Romam esse venturum ait; 


[He gives instructions in the face of the coming persecution; en- 
rusting his archdeacon Laurence with ‘universas facultates ecclesiae’. 
he treasures are sold by the archdeacon and distributed to the poor. 

§Decius arrives, bringing with him two Persians, Abdo and Sennes, 
®bound for the name of Christ. The tyrant puts Abdo and Sennes to 
death. Their bodies] 
noctu a Christianis sublata sunt et posita in cimiterio Pontiani die 
Wii Kal. Augusti. Post haec autem jussit ad se adduci Xystum urbis 
Jepiscopum. 
[Xystus is then condemned to death. ] 


Decollatus est autem extra muros urbis via Appia in loco qui ap- 
Bpellatur clivus martyrum, Rapuerunt autem Christiani corpus ejus et 
posuerunt in cimiterio Calisti die octavo Id. Aug. Eodem namque die 
#Decius Caesar adduci in conspectum suum beatum Laurentium prae- 
Hcepit et ait; Ubi sunt thesauri ecclesiae quos penes te esse cognovimus? 
Cui beatus Laurentius dicit; Biduo mihi dentur induciae, ut ex omnibus 
ecclesiis universa deferam. Tunc Caesar jussit ut sub custodia Hip- 
polyti ducis Laurentius ageret. 
















{Laurentius converts his guard Hippolytus by his words and deeds. 
He is then handed over to Valerianus the Prefect of the city, and put to 
death by roasting on a gridiron. | 


Die vero eadem rapuit corpus ejus Hippolytus et condivit aro- 
matibus et posuit in crypta abditissima quarto iduum augustarum, 
fecitque illic biduum jejunans et orans, Egressus autem tertia die 
Hippolytus venit ut ingrederetur domum, et priusquam caperet cibum, 
a militibus conprehensus est et perductus ad Caesarem. Cui Caesar 
ait : Numquid et tu magus effectus es, ut corpus Laurentii abstulisse 
dicaris? Sanctus Hippolytus, cujus jam gloriae corona parata erat, 
ad laudem intrepidus respondens dixit: Hoc feci non quasi magus 
‘sed ut Christianus. Quo audito Decius Caesar ira commotus jussit os 
ejus contundi lapidibus et exui eum vestem quam habuit et extensum 
ad cardos ferreos caedi. Post haec autem seminecem jussit duci extra 
jurbem et pedes ejus ligari pedibus equorum indomitorum et dimitti 

















264 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 





























in cardeto. Dum autem eum traherent, reddidit spiritum. T Ἶ 
corpus ejus rapuerunt Christiani et posuerunt in crypta, quae est juxte 
agrum praetorianum die id. aug. Post diem autem septimum passio 
ejus dedit munera Decius et sedit in curru una cum Valeriano prae 
fecto urbis;-ut jam descenderent et amphitheatrum introirent, um 
momento ambo expiraverunt. Clamabat autem Decius in hora morti 
suae dicens: O Hippolyte, quasi captivum me vinctum ducis. Vale 
rianus autem clamabat: O Laurenti, igneis me catenis vinxisti et trahis 


46. Acra SS. Cyriaci, Hippotyti, AUREAE, ETC. 


Hippolytus Romanus, p. v (ed. Lagarde). 


Μαρτύριον TOY ἁγίου κγριὰκοῦ, ἱππολύτογ, MAazZIMOY 
XPYCAC, κἀὶ τῶν λοιπῶν. ᾿ 
Ἔν ταῖς ἡμέραις Κλαυδίου τοῦ παρανόμου βασιλέως, παρόντος βικο pion 
Οὐλπίου Ῥωμϑλλου, μέγιστος ἀνήφθη διωγμὸς τοῖς τηνικαῦτα οὖσιν Χριο 
νοῖς. ἦν οὖν τις ἀνὴρ Κενσουρῖνος κ.τ.λ. 4 


[Then follows the account of the good confession of Censurinus wh 
is accordingly imprisoned at Ostia, where he is visited and looked afte 
by one Chryse of royal race, who had undergone many persecutions fot 
Christ. The priest Maximus and the deacon Archelaus offer spiritua 
ministrations. The guards of Censurinus are struck by a miracle wrough 
and by exhortations spoken by Maximus. ] 


Tore ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἅπαντες αὐτῶν, 6 τε Φῆλιξ, Μάξιμος, Tavpivos, “Ep. οἱ 
λιανός, Νεβέριος, Στοράκινος, Μῆνας, Κομμόδιος, Ἑρμῆς, Μαῦρος, Εὐσέβ ος 
Ῥωστίκιος, Μονάκριος, ᾿Αμανδῖνος, ᾿Ολύμπιος, Κύπριος, καὶ Θεόδωρος, 
τριβοῦνος, ἔβαλον ἑαυτοὺς ἅμα πρὸς τοὺς πόδας τοῦ μακαριωτάτου Magi 
τοῦ πρεσβυτέρου. 

[They are all baptized and looked after by Chryse; and Cyriac 
the bishop anoints and seals them. Then follows the story of the s 
maker, who having lost his son, a child of twelve years, is converte ed a 
Christ. The child is restored to life and christened Faustinus. Owi 

to this resurrection, Chryse is accused of magic, and tortured on | 
wheel and in other ways. Cyriacus, Maximus, and Archelaus are pu 
death, as are also the soldiers. Cyriacus and Maximus are burn eC 
the presbyter Eusebius on the Ostian Way, on vi Id. Aug. The 0 O 
soldiers are laid near them. ] a 


τ 





Ταυρῖνον δὲ καὶ Ερκουλιανὸν ἐν τῷ Πόρτῳ Ῥώμης κατέκρυψεν. Ὁ 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 365 



























[Then Romulus commands Chryse to be brought before him. She 
onfesses Christ boldly. In a fury he orders her to be beaten with 
aden bullets, but to no effect. | 


fal ‘ lal / 2 A 
*Exédevoe δὲ πάλιν λίθον μέγαν δεσμευθῆναι κατὰ τοῦ τραχήλου αὐτῆς 
-“ ~ ~ “~ [2 
at οὕτως κρεμασθῆναι ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ" ἥστινος τὸ ἅγιον σῶμα περιῆλθεν ἕως 
“ > cal 7 ε , / ε ἈΝ 6 Ν Ἵ 5X 
αἰγιαλοῦ: ὅπερ ὁ μακαριώτατος Novos ὁ καὶ μετονομασθεὶς ᾿Ἱππόλυτος 
’ 


ayer, καὶ τοῦτο κατέθαψεν ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ αὐτῆς χωρίῳ, ἔνθα καὶ κατῴκει, 
Ew τῶν τειχέων τῆς ᾿Οστησίας πόλεως τῇ πρὸ ἐννέα ἸΚαλανδῶν Σεπτεμβρίων. 

[Then follows the apprehension of Sabinianus a Christian, the pro- 
rator (ἐπιμελητὴς) of that district, who is ordered to discover the 


rhereabouts of Chryse’s treasures. Romulus orders him to be cruelly 
ortured. | 


Τοῦτο δὲ ἀκούσας 6 μακαριώτατος Ἱππόλυτος ὁ πρεσβύτερος ἐλθὼν ἔστη 

ὥπιον τοῦ Ῥωμύλου καὶ λαμπρᾷ τῇ φωνῇ εἶπεν" Ὦ ἄθλιε «.7.X. 
lel > , ε 3 ’ὔ « ’ > , 65 Ν / € 

ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ ἀσεβέστατος Ῥώμυλος ἐθυμώθη σφόδρα καὶ προσέταξε 
οὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰς χεῖρας δεδεμένον εἰς βόθυνον κατακρημνισθῆναι. 
-“ > , ε , 4 > -“ 4 >. 4 ’ , 
οὔ ovv μακαρίου Ἵππολύτου βυθιζομένου ἐν τῷ τείχει εἰς τὸν βόθυνον πόρτον 
A ? ’ὔ , Φ 4 Ν 3 , ε ‘ , 
ὃν avayopevopevov Iloprov (sic), ἄφνω φωνὴ ἠκούσθη ὡσεὶ διαστήματος 
bpas μιᾶς, καθάπερ νηπίων λεγόντων εὐχαριστίας τῷ Θεῷ: καὶ ἐν τῷ ταῦτα 
ἰπεῖν ἀφῆκεν τὸ πνεῦμα τῷ Κυρίῳ τῇ πρὸ δεκαμιᾶς Καλανδῶν Σεπτεμβρίων. 

[The rest of the story is taken up with the martyrdom of Sabinianus 
hich is placed v Kal. Febr.] 


§ 2. 
MODERN LITERATURE. 


There is no complete edition of the works of Hippolytus. Of the 
Philosophumena, as a whole, the best and most convenient text is that 
f Duncker and Schneidewin, but the first book has been edited with 
pecial care by Diels; of the other Greek remains, that of Lagarde. 
e fragments preserved in Syriac, Arabic, and Coptic, must be sought 
sewhere. Migne’s edition of the Greek works (without the Philosophu- 
a) is very convenient as containing a reprint of the most important 
s of Fabricius and De Magistris, besides other materials from older 


Of the several lists of the literature connected with Hippolytus 
fullest is in Richardson’s Bibliographical Synopsis of Antenicene 











366 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 





















Literature, Buffalo 1887. The plan of my own list differs from his. 
My aim is not completeness, but usefulness. For this reason I Πανὶ 
struck out a large number of works which have been superannua ed 
either by the discovery of the Phélosophumena or from other cau eS, 
On the other hand I have introduced very many (e.g. a complete list of 
De Rossi’s articles in the Bud/ettino, which bear directly or indirectly on 
the subject), because I have found them of great use, even where they 
did not bear the name of Hippolytus on their face. For this same 
reason also I have mentioned a few of the principal works on the 
Muratorian Canon, because in the subsequent discussions (see below, 
p- 405 sq) I have connected it with Hippolytus. 


A. ditions. 


BARDENHEWER Des Heiligen Hippolytus v. Rom Commentar sum Buche 
Daniel (Freiburg im Br. 1877). A 
Canisius Lectiones Antiguae τι. Ὁ. 218 (ed. Basnage 1725). The 
Chronica in one Latin version (see above I. p. 259), reprinted in in 
Du Cange Chron. Pasch. τι. p. 23 (ed. Bonn). . 
De La Rue Orig. Oger. 1. p. 872 sq (1st book of Philosophumena). . 
Diets Doxographi Graect p. 144 sq Ρ. 553 sq (Berolin. 1879). 18t 
book of Philosophumena. : 
DUNCKER ET SCHNEIDEWIN S. Hippolyti Episcopi et Martyris Refuta 
tionis Omnium Haeresium Libri Decem (Gotting. 1859). A 
Fasricius (J. A.) S. Hippolyti Episcopi et Martyris Opera Vol. τ. (1716) 
Vol. τι. (1718) Hamburg. Works omitting PAé/osophumena. 
GALLAND. Sibliotheca Patrum 11. p. 409 sq. 5 
Τεωργιάδης (B.) περὶ ὁράσεως τοῦ προφήτου Δανιήλ, in ᾿Εκκλησιας Ὶ 
᾿Αλήθεια 1885 May. "Ἂ 
Gwynn Hermathena vi. p. 397 sq Hippolytus and his Heads again 
Caius; ib. vil. p. 137 (1889) Hippolytus on S. Matthew xxiv. 15 
22. a 
HANEBERG Canones S. Hippolyti Arabice etc. (Monachii 1870). a 
Kennepy (J. H.) Commentary of St Hippolytus on the Book of Da. 
(Dublin 1888). i 
LaGARDE Lippolytus Romanus (Lips. et Lond. 1858). Works omi it 
Philosophumena. Sl 
Analecta Syriaca p. 91 sq (Lips. et Lond. 1858). (Fvagments. 
Le Moyne Varia Sacra τ. Prol. p. 23, Text p. 53 sq, Il. p. 930 56 nm 
(ed. 2, Lugd. Bat. 1694) Contra Graecos. 3 
Mati (A.) Script. Vet. Coll. Nov. vu. io 
Biblioth. Nov. Patr. vu. Pars ii. . aa 


Brat 
ee 
+ 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 367 




































ΜΊΟΝΕ Patrologia Graeca X. p. 201 sq (Paris, 1857). Works omitting 
Philosophumena. 

MILLER (E.) Origenis Philosophumena (Oxon. 1851). (Editio princeps 
of great part of the Philosophumena). 

Momsen Ueber den Chronographen vom Jahre 354, p. 549 sq (Leipz. 
1850), an extract from the Abhandl. der Konigl. Sachs. Gesellsch. 
ad. Wissensch. The Chronica in the second Latin version, with 
the accompanying works. 

Routu Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Opuscula τ. Ὁ. 45 sq (ed. 2, Oxon. 
1840) Contra Haeresim Noett. 

PTREGELLES Canon Muratorianus (Oxf. 1867). 

WorpswortH /ippolytus and the Church of Rome (ed. 2, Oxf. and 

Cambr. 1880) Philosophumena ix (p. 62 sq); Fragm. de Universo 


(p. 306 sq). 


B. Literature. 


BALLARD Aistoire des Persécutions pendant la premicre moitié du Trotsi¢me 
Siecle Ὁ. 195 sq (Paris 1866). : 
ARMELLINI (T.) De prisca refutatione Haereseon Origenis nomine ete. 
commentarius (Romae 1862). 
Aust (B.) Les Chrétiens dans 1 Empire Romain (a.D. 180—249) p. 428 sq 
(Paris 1881). 
LEglise et 1 Etat (a.D. 249—284) p. 362 sq (Paris 1885). 
Baronius Annales Ecclesiastici 5. ann. 226, 229, 11. p. 407, 409 sq 
(Venet. 1738). 
BaxMaNnn Die Philosophumena u. die Peraten in Zeitschr. f. die Histor. 
Theol. (1860). 
‘}Benson (E. W., now Arcusp. ) Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology 
I, p. 188 sq (1854) On the Martyrdom and Commemorations of 
Saint Hippolytus. 
‘@Brancuini (F.) De Kalendario et Cyclo Caesaris et de Paschali Canone 
S. Hippolyté ete. 
BBoitann. Acta Sanctorum Januarius 11. p. 1027 (Jan. 30 De S. Hippolyto 
Presbytero Antiocheno), Augustus 111. p. 4 sq (Aug. 13, De S. Mart. 
Romanis Hippolyto Concordia etc.), wv. Ὁ. 504 sq (Aug. 22, De 5S. 
LTippolyto Episc. et Mart. in Portu Romano), iv. p. 755 sq (Aug. 24 
De SS. Aurea seu Chryse Virgine, Censorino, ete.). 
BunsEN (Cur. Ὁ. J.) Hippolytus and his Age (ed. 2, London, 1854). 
Caspart Quellen zur Geschichte des Taufsymbols etc. 1m. p. 374 sq 
| (Christiania 1875). 
Cave Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Literaria τ. Ρ. 102 sq. 





































368 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 


Cruice Etudes sur de nouveaux documents des Philosophumena (Paris 
1853). Histoire de l’Eglise de Rome sous les Ponti ificats de δ, 
Victor, de S. Zéphirin, et de S. Calliste (Paris 1856). ἥ 

Dr Macistris (S.) Acta Martyrum ad Ostia Tiberina (Romae 1795 ) 
(parts reprinted in Migne, p. 547). . 

De Rossi (G. B.) Bullettino di Archeologia Cristiana 

Serie Prima. ; 
1. pp. 8, 16 sq, 32, 33, 47, 68 sq, 73 (1863) Basilica 

di S. Lorenzo fuor le mura; τι. p. 33 (1864) Scoperte nella 

| basilica di S. Lorenzo nell’ agro Verano; τι. p. 41 sq (1864) 

| Le due basiliche di S. Lorenzo nell’ agro Verano; wv. p. 1 Sq 

Ρ. 17 sq, Ρ. 65 sq, p. 77 sq (1866) Lsame archeologico e critico della 
storia di S. Callisto narrata nel libro nono dei Filosofumeni; 
Iv. p. 37 sq, 63 (1866) 2 monumenti cristiani di Porto; iW. p. 96 
(1866) Lo Xenodochio di Pammachio in Porto; v. p. 49 sq (1864) 
I monumenti del secolo quarto spettanti alla pv ai S. Pudenziane 

Serie Terza. 4 

I. p. 16 sq (1876) Scoperte nell’ agro Verano e nel Sotterranto 
Cimitero di Ciriaca; 1. p. 145 sq (1876) Arcosolio dipinto dé 
Cimitero di Ciriaca etc; τι. Ὁ. 5 sq (1877) 7 museo epigrafia 
Cristiano Pio-Lateranense (see Ὁ. 15 Sq); VI. p. 5 564 (1889 
La Silloge epigrafica d'un codice gia corbeiense etc.; νι. Ὁ. 26 § 
(1881) Zlogio Damasiano del celebre Ippolito martire sepolto press 
la via Tiburtina; vi. p. 86 sq (1881) Dello scavo fatto 
antica basilica di S. Lorenzo per collocare il sepolcro di Pio IX ett. 
vI. p. 93 sq (1881) L’epitafio metrico del papa Zosimo sepollam 

‘oa S. Lorenzo nell’ agro Verano. 

Serie Quarta. 

I. p. 9 sq (1882) “7 Cimitero di S. L[ppolito presso la 
Tiburtina ela sua principale cripta storica ora dissepolta ; 1. p. τῇ 
(1882) Continuazione delle scoperte nella cripta storica e 

] adjacenti gallerie del cimitero di S. Ippolito; τι. p. 60 sq (188 

ι Iscrizione storica det tempi di Damaso papa nel Cimitero di 

4 Ippolyto; 111. p. 7 54 (1884, 1885) 7 Carmi di S. Damaso; 

p. 60 sq (1887) The Hippolytus of the Appian Way. if 
Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae 1. Ὁ. 1 ΧΧῚΧ sq De ζοῦν, 

Cyclo inventione, etc.; τι. p. 72 sq Sylloge Centulensis p. 82. 
Roma Sotterranea 1. p. 178 sq, 181, Wotices in the Itineraries; p. 

sq The Hippolytus of the Appian Way; τι. p. 23 sq The Hip 

of the Appian Way; 1. p. 193—226 (The Acts of Hippolytus α 

the Greek Martyrs, and the Arenarium Hippolyti), 301—312, 

DG6.LuINGER Aippolytus and Kallistus (Regensburg 1853). Bed 








——-$ — -.. “ὦ — 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 369 


































DRAsEKE Zu Pseudo-Hippolytos (Contra Beronem etc.) in Jahrb. f. Protest. 
Theol. X. p. 342 sq (1884); Zu Hippolytos Demonstratio adv. 
Judaeos, ib. X11. p. 456 sq (1886). 

Beron und Pseudo-Hippolytos in Zeitsch. f. Wiss, Theol. Xx1x. p. 291 
sq (1886). 

QDucuesne (L.) Lider Pontificalis Tome 1 (1886); Tome τι, Fascicule 

i (1888). 

ΤΕΕΒΕΒ Die Lebenszeit des Hippolytus nebst der des Theophilus von Antio- 

chien in Jahrb. f. Protest. Theol. xiv. p. 611 sq (1888). 

FABRICIUS Bibliotheca Graeca vi. p. 183 sq, ed. Harles 18or. 

UNK Theolog. Quartalschr. LXi1. p. 277 sq (1881) Lst der Basilides der 
Philosophumen Pantheist? uxt. p. 423 sq (1881) Ueber den 

Verfasser der Philosophumenen ; LXvi. p. 104 sq (1884) Die Zeit 
der Hippolyt-statue. 

RUBER Die Ophiten (Wiirzburg 1864). 

UNDERT Zeitschr. f. Luther. Theol. xvi. p. 209 54, XVII. pp. 37 56, 
443 56. 

UTSCHMID (A. v.) Ueber die Verhiltniss d. Hippolytischen Liber Genera- 
tionts etc. zu Julius Africanus (1856). 

AGEMANN Die Rémische Kirche (Freiburg 1864). 

ARNACK Dogmengeschichte 1. p. 437 sq and elsewhere (1886). 

Zur Quellenkritik der Geschichte des Gnosticismus (Leipzig 1873), 
Leitschr. f. Histor. Theol. p. 170. 

EINRICI Die Valentianische Gnosis etc. (Berlin 1871), 

ESSE (F. H.) Das Muratorische Fragment (Giessen 1873). 

ILGENFELD Zettschr. f. Wiss. Theol. v. p. 400 sq (1862) Der Gnosticis- 
mus und die Philosophumena; ΧΧΙ. p. 228 sq (1878) Der Basilides 
des Hippolytus. 

Ketszergeschichte des Urchristenthums (Leipzig 1884). 

ORT in Smith-Wace Dict. of Christ. Biogr. 1. p. 268 s.v. Basilides. 

ἌΘΟΒΙ Deutsche Zeitschr. Κα Christl. Wiss. 1851 no. 25; 1853 no. 24. 
Hlerzog’s Real-Encyklopidie s.v. Hippolytus ed. 2 (1880). Brieger’s 
ZLeitschr. f. Kirchengesch. τ. p. 481 sq (1878) Das ursprungliche 
Basilidianische System. 

UNGMANN JDissertationes in Histor. Eccles. p. 173 sq (Ratisbon 

π΄ τ88ο). 

‘Kome1 (Ε. J.) De Hippolyti Vita et Scriptis (Jena 1839). 

“@LANGEN (J.) Geschichte der Rimischen Kirche (Bonn 1881). 

‘Bursts (R. A. ) Quellenkritik des Epiphanios (Wien 1865). 

i Die Queilen der Aeltesten Ketzergeschichte (Leipzig 1875). 

By ~ Smith-Wace Dict. of Christ. Biogr. tv. s.v. Valentinus. 


CLEM. II. 24 


























370 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 

















LumpeER /fistor. SS. Pair. vu. Ὁ. 1 sq (Aug. Vind. 1791); ἜΡΗΒΟΝΝ in 
Migne. 

NoLTE Zheolog. Quartalschr. 1862 p. 624 sq 

OVERBECK Quaestionum Hippolytearum Specimen (Jena 1864). 

REVILLE (A.) Revue des Deux Mondes 1865, 111. p. 892 ; Saint Hi ippolyte 
et la Société Chretienne de Rome au commencement du 7172. Siecle. ὦ 

ROEPER (G.) Philologus vi. p. 511 sq, 607 sq, 767 (1852). 

RuGceErius (Const.) De Portuensi S. Hippolyti Episcopi et Martyris 
Sede etc. (Romae 1771), reprinted in Lumper and in Migne. 4 

SALMON in Smith-Wace Dict. of Christ. Biogr. 1. p. 506 sq, 509, 
Chronicon Canisianum, Chronica Horosii; τι. p. 679 Gnosticism; 
ul. p. 85 sq, Hippolytus Romanus ; tv. p. 80 Ophites ete. 

Hermathena τ. Ὁ. 82 sq (1874) Chronology of Hippolytus ; 
p. 389 sq (1885) Cross-references in the Philosophumena. 
Infallibility of the Church, p. 382 sq (London 1888). 

SMEDT Dissertationes Selectae (Ghent 1876) De Auctore Philosophu 
Ρ. 83 sq. 

TILLEMONT AZémoires 111. p. 238 sq, 672 56. 

UnLHOoRN Das Basilidianische System (Gottingen 1855). 

VoLKMAR Lippolytus und die Romischen Zeitgenossen (Zurich 1855). 

Westcott Canon of the New Testament Appendix C (ed. 6, 1888) 
Muratorian Canon. 4 

Worpswortu (Bp Chr.) St Hippolytus and the Church of Rome (ed. 2 
Oxf. and Cambr. 1880). 


§ 3. 
NAMESAKES OF S. HIPPOLYTUS. 


Among these stands foremost the hero of Greek story, who ha 
bequeathed not only his name, but also the myth of his death, to th 
Christian theologian and bishop. I need not however dwell now Ὁ 
this inherited legend, of which I shall have to speak hereafter. I woul 
only remark on one other point of contact, which (over and above th 
name) might suggest the propriety of adapting the legend of the earli 
Hippolytus to the later. The son of Theseus was the type a 
embodiment of continence in Greek mythology. _ The oppone τῇ 


the severe opponent of any laxity which might endanger the vi 
discipline of the Christian brotherhood, ie 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 371 




























But my business now is rather with those contemporaries or nearly 
ontemporaries—real or imaginary persons—who have been blended 
with the hero of the Tiburtine Way, and thus have confused his per- 
Jsonality and involved his history in endless perplexity. Of such name- 
}sakes I single out five. 

(1) Aippolytus the martyr of Antioch. Déllinger (p. 51 sq) sup- 
§posed that he had read the riddle of this Antiochene martyr’s creation ; 
Τὰ πα indeed his solution seemed, with the imperfect knowledge which 
ey then possessed, to be highly plausible. He supposed that the 
same passage of Eusebius which, as translated by Rufinus, had be- 
ΤΠ towed on Hippolytus the see of Bostra (see below, p. 428), had also, 
as adopted by Jerome’, transformed him into a presbyter of Antioch. 
he notice in the Chronicon of Jerome (Euseb. Chron. τι. p. 179) 
nder the year 227 is ‘Geminus presbyter Antiochenus et Hippolytus 
t Beryllus episcopus Arabiae Bostrenus clari scriptores habentur.’ 
WDollinger postulates the omission of ‘et’ in some copies, so that the 
onnexion ‘presbyter Antiochenus Hippolytus’ would be established 
Bn the Wieronymian Martyrology we have under iii Kal. Febr. (Jan. 30) 


In Antiochia passio sancti Hippolyti martyris. 
oreover on the previous day (Jan. 29) we have 
iv Kal. Feb. Hippolyti episcopi de antiquis, 


d on the succeeding (Jan. 31) there is also a mention of a Hippolytus. 
hese all doubtless represent the same person, the notices having been 

erived from different but allied sources. Accordingly in the ΟἿ 
Woman Martyrology there is a similar notice on the same day 


Antiochiae passio sancti Hippolyti, 


nd consequently his name occurs in this place in Ado and the later 
atin Martyrologies. But Dollinger’s hypothesis offers no explanation 
the difference of the day, iii Kal. Feb. in place of Id. Aug. 

_ The publication of Wright’s Syriac Martyrology shows that this 
intiochene Martyr Hippolytus was a real person celebrated on this day 
om the beginning. 

_ Later Kanun [Jan.] 30 In the city of Antioch, Hippolytus. 

_ Here, as elsewhere, the contents of this ancient list have found their 


1 See AR.8.k. So far as regards 
lippolytus and Beryllus this notice is 
iken from Euseb. A. 2. vi. 20; but 
usebius does not mention Geminus. Je- 

¢ himself however devotes a few lines 








to him elsewhere (Vir. Z//ustr. 64), where 
he describes him as ‘ Antiochenae eccle- 
siae presbyter,’ who flourished under the 
emperor Alexander. 


24—2 














372 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


























way into the Roman Martyrologies through the so-called Hieronymian, 
But they can tell us nothing about him; except that they transfer to 
him the notice ascribing the lapse into Novatianism and recantation 
which belongs first to the Roman Hippolytus. The Greek book: 
are equally ignorant of any circumstances relating to the life or 
martyrdom of this Antiochene Hippolytus. But the Mena, like the 
later Latin Martyrologies, clothe him with borrowed plumage taken 
from the martyr of the Tiburtine Way—adopting however not the 
Novatianism but the incidents of the Chryse legend as told in the 
Roman story (see AR. 44). But both Eastern and Western Martyro- 
logies preserve for this Antiochene Hippolytus his proper day. ; 

This Hippolytus therefore is a real person distinct from any Romar 
Hippolytus, as the Syriac Martyrology (p. 646) shows; and it is strange 
that a modern critic, Erbes, should have confused the two and imagined 
that he had found support for his theory of the Antiochene origin of % 
the Roman Hippolytus. But he does not seem to have seen the notice 
in the Syriac Martyrology, which is the key to the whole position. 
may mention by the way that the expression, ‘of the ancients,’ @ 
antiguis, is characteristic of this Syriac Martyrology and designates 
those martyrs and confessors who perished in some earlier persecution 
than the last under Diocletian, which was recent when the list was fir 
drawn up. 

(2) Hippolytus, the Alexandrian connected with Dionysius. In Wi 
account of the letters of Dionysius, bishop of Alexandria (a.D. 249 
265), the historian Eusebius (7. Z. vi. 46) mentions among others on 
addressed to the Romans, which he describes as διακονικὴ διὰ Ἱππολύτου 
This Hippolytus therefore must have been the delegate who wa 
charged with delivering the letter. What may have been the purport ¢ 
this letter διακονική, de ministerits or de diaconis, we cannot say. But 
we are told on contemporary authority (see I. p. 255) that Fabianu 
bishop of Rome (fA. D. 250) about that time ‘regiones divisit di 
conibus,’ it is a reasonable conjecture that the letter had some referen¢ 
to these arrangements. Cornelius the successor of Fabianus infor 
us (17... vi. 43) that there were in the Roman Church in his tim 
‘seven deacons and seven subdeacons.’ We may therefore believe th 
there is some truth in the notice of the Liber Pontificalis (1. p. 6 
found even in its earlier form (c. a.D. 530), which adds to the cc 
temporary notice above quoted ‘et fecit vii subdiaconos qui septe 
notariis imminerent ut gesta martyrum fideliter colligerent.’ At 
events this division of the city by Fabianus among the seven deac 
was sufficiently important in the eyes of the contemporary chronicle 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 373 






























Jentitle it to a special notice which is unique of its kind in his chronicle. 
But however this may be, Hippolytus is a fairly common name, and 
we should want better eyidence than we possess that the Roman 
ippolytus was living and able to take a long journey at so very late a 
date; nor is there any notice which connects him even remotely with 
Alexandria. 

(3) Hippolytus the Greek captain of brigands. In the Notitia 
ortarum, Viarum, Ecclesiarum, or guide book of the close of the 

7th century, which William of Malmesbury has appended to his Gesta 
BAnglorum, there is a notice referring to the papal crypt on the Appian 
way, ‘non longe pausant martyres Hippolitus, Adrianus, Eusebius, Maria, 
artha, Paulina, Valeria, Marcellus’ (Rom. Sott. 1. p. 181). The 
Wortion of the Acts of these Greek martyrs is extant in a single 
@Latin ms, of which the text has been carefully edited by De Rossi 
om. Sott. 11|. Ὁ. 201 sq. Baronius, who had first published them, 
Book considerable liberties with the ms, so that his text is worth- 
ess. The heading is; ‘Pridie Kl. Decembris festivitas sanctorum 
Peartyrum, Eusebii presbyteri, Marcelli diaconi, Hippolyti, Hadrias, 
aulinae, Neon et Mariae, Maximi, Martanae, et Valeriae.’ The date 
Biven is ‘Valeriano et Lucullo consulibus’’ [a.D. 265], but the persecut- 
ng emperor is represented to be Decius [a.p. 250—252] and the 
oman bishop Stephen [a.D. 254—257]. They begin by describing 
ow ‘ Hippolytus the monk’ lived in the crypts (‘in cryptis’) where he 
athered together the believers in secret. The place is more than once 
alled ‘arenarium.’ Paulina, the wife of Hadrias, is the sister of Hip- 
olytus, and Maria and Neon are their children, aged thirteen and ten 
espectively. They are all converted and undergo martyrdom, though 
Ot at the same time. Paulina suffers first, together with Eusebius the 
riest and Marcellus the deacon, and they are buried by Hippolytus in 
e ‘arenarium’ at the first mile-stone from the city. Then Neon and 
aria; and they too are buried, vi Kal. Nov., ‘in ipsa via Appia milliario 
Ὁ urbe Roma primo in arenario ipso ubi consueverant convenire.’ A 
w days afterwards Hadrias and Hippolytus are seized and beaten to 
eath. Their bodies are left ‘in eodem loco juxta insulam Lycaoniam’; 
jut a certain deacon* comes by night and reverently deposits them in 
he same ‘arenarium’ with the rest v Id. Nov. Nine months later two 


1 De-Rossi has been able to explain 3 The present text says ‘venit quidam 
ow a false consular date became attached  Hippolytus diaconus noctu’; but obvi- 
) this persecution, Bull. di Archeol. ously the transcriber through carelessness 
vist. 1887, p. 65. has substituted the wrong name. 











374 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


Greek Christian ladies, Martana and her daughter Valeria, arrive it 
Rome. They also die as confessors, apparently starved to death ; 
are buried in the same place iv Id. Dec. 7 
Though these Acts are free from the accumulation of horrors andi : 
miracles which condemn so many other accounts of martyrdom, ἐπεὶ 
chronological inconsistencies, not to mention other signs, show tha 
they cannot be a contemporary or nearly contemporary record. D 
Rossi (2. S. 11. p. 200) contents himself with stating that in thei 
present form they ought not to be placed later than about the εἰ ght 
century. 
We have however older evidence for the story than these Acts i 
two inscriptions which were read by the medieval pilgrims in the ce 
metery of Callistus in the neighbourhood of the papal crypt. They ru 
as follows ; 4 


NATA MARIA SIMUL CARO CUM FRATRE NIONE 
GAUDENTES SACRAM PROMERUERE FIDEM 

DIVITIAS PROPRIAS CHRISTI PRAECEPTA SECUTI 
PAUPERIBUS LARGA DISTRIBUERE MANU 

QUORUM PRECLARIS MONITIS MULTOQUE LABORE 
ACCESSIT SUMMO SANCTA CATERVA DEO 

POST ANIMAS CHRISTO TRADENTES SANGUINE FUSO 
UT VITAM CAPERENT NON TIMUERE MORI 

HORUM VIRTUTES QUEM PASSIO LECTA DOCEBIT 
RITE SUIS FAMULIS DISCET ADESSE DEUM 


OLIM SACRILEGAM QUAM MISIT GRAECIA TURBAM 
MARTYRII MERITIS NUNC DECORATA NITET; 
QUAE MEDIO PELAGI VOTUM MISERABILE FECIT 
REDDERE FUNEREO DONA NEFANDA JOVI 
YPOLITI SED PRIMA FIDES CELESTIBUS ARMIS ἢ 
RESPUIT INSANAM PESTIFERAMQUE LUEM. oi 
QUEM MONACHI RITU TENUIT SPELUNCA LATENTEM 
CHRISTICOLIS GREGIBUS DULCE CUBILE PARANS 
POST HUNC ADRIAS SACRO MUNDATUS IN AMNE 
ET PAULINA SUO CONSOCIATA VIRO. 
xiii K. JUN. 


These inscriptions are given by De Rossi Rom. Sotz. 1. p. 194 ( 
I. p. 263) and in Juscr. Christ. Urb. Rom. τι. p. 66 sq. For 







































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 375 


De Rossi had inferred that these inscriptions must be anterior to the 
7th century and were probably written in the 5th or at the latest in the 
6th (111. p. 197). A few letters of the first inscription itself have been 
discovered very recently (Budi. di Archeol. Crist. 1887, p. 60 sq), which 
fully confirm this surmise. They suggest the age of Symmachus as the 
date of the inscription. The fragment contains the date v Id. Nov. at 
the heading, which is the day of Hippolytus’ martyrdom. 

Our evidence however goes much farther back than this date. In 
the inscription which pope Damasus (A.D. 366—384) placed in or near 
the papal crypt he enumerated the illustrious dead who were buried 
there (see Rom. Sott. u. p. 23; comp. Luscr. Christ. Urb. Rom. τι. 
Ῥ. 66); and among these are specified 


HIC POSITUS LONGA VIXIT QUI IN PACE SACERDOS 
HIC CONFESSORES SANCTI QUOS GRAECIA MISIT, 


where we have evidently a reference to this same group of Greek 
martyrs and confessors of whom this Hippolytus was the chief; though 
he does not tell us any particulars about them. To one of this group, 
possibly to Hippolytus himself, may refer the Damasian verses 7,5. 
Christ. Urb. Rom. τι. p. 108, where he apostrophizes a certain martyr 
‘quod fama refert, te Graecia misit,’ but it throws no additional light on 
the subject. 

Comparing the extant Acts with the inscriptions above cited, which 
once were read in the cemetery of Callistus, we see that these Acts 
take up the story at a late point, after the conversion of Hippolytus. 
They must therefore have lost their beginning; or at all events they 
presuppose some previous document giving an account of the earlier 
history. This story related how Hippolytus was the captain of a band 
of Greek robbers ; how on his voyage he had vowed a vow to Stygian 
Jove (funereo Jovi) or Pluto; how arrived at Rome he had established 
himself in an arenarium or disused cave whence sand had been ex- 
tracted ; how he had been converted to the Christian faith and exchanged 
the life of a free-booter for the life of a recluse (‘monachi’); how he had. 
been instrumental in the conversion of his companions and gathered 
together a Christian congregation in this cave; and how finally he had 
left this arenarium as a catacomb (‘dulce cubile’) for Christian folk—he 
himself and his companions being buried there. 

These are doubtless the martyrs who are commemorated in the 
Zieronymian Martyrology under xiii Kal. Jul., where the notice as 
ected by De Rossi (Rom. Sott. 1. Ὁ. 264; comp. 111. p. 197) from a 











376 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


Romae in coemeterio Hippolyti sanctorum Honorii, Evodii, Pet ἑ 
Valeriae, etc.’ 4 
thus giving xiii Kal. Jul. where the inscription (as transcribed) as 
xiii Kal. Jun., so that there must be an error in the one or the othe 
This is a very common form of blunder, see e.g. Lgnat. and Poly 
1. p. 666, ed. τ; p. 683, ed. 2. 4 
On this notice De Rossi points out that the consuls of the year 38 6, 
Honorius and Evodius, are mixed up with the names of the martyrs, 
probably (as he suggests, III. p. 197) because the bodies of Gervasi 1s 
and Protasius, commemorated on this same day (xiii Kal. Jul. ), wel 
discovered in this year. Marcellus is connected with these Gree x 
martyrs in the Acts, as we have seen; but of Petrus, here associated 
with them, no account has been given. Of Maria and Neon there are 
some traces though very corrupt in this Martyrology under vi Kal. Nov. 
The bodies of Hippolytus, Adrias, Maria, Neon and Paulina were d 8- 
posited in 8. Agatha of the Suburra under Leo IX (A. D. 1048—r0§4); 
but whether they were translated thither straight from their origina 
resting place we do not know. 4 
A description of the catacomb supposed by De Rossi to be 
arenarium of Hippolytus to the N.E. of the cemetery of Callistus is given 
in Rom. Sot#. 111. Ὁ. 213 8q, Ρ. 301 sq (see Tav. xlii—xlv). He places it i 
the second half of the third and beginning of the fourth century. Fron Ἢ 
this sanctuary on the Appian Way, not from the more famous cemetery 
on the Tiburtine, was taken in the year 1646 the sepulchral i 
scription bearing the words AT EPOLITV (ad Hippolytum); see Rom 
Sott. ut. p. 215, Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 48. he 
(4) Hippolytus the soldier, the warder of S. Laurence. Much ἢ 
been written on the supposed confusion of Hippolytus the theologia 
and Hippolytus the soldier ; 1 











and not a few critics have found in 
confusion the key to most of the perplexities which confront us int h 
story of Hippolytus. I shall have occasion to discuss the whole subje 
at a subsequent point; and it will then be shown that this was nal 
case of confusion. There was no Hippolytus the warder of S. Lau er 
distinct from Hippolytus the famous divine: but at a very late per τ 
in his legendary career popular opinion transformed him from a cle 
into a soldier, connecting him at the same time with 5. Laurence. — 


aL 





1 In the Berne Ms, generally our best 
authority for the text of this Martyrology, 
the scribe has inserted VIA TIBVRTINA, 
thus confusing this arenarium on the Ap- 


pian way with the more famous Ce ne 
of the more famous Hippolytus ; see / 
Sott. 11. p. 198. 4 






























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 377 


(5) ippolytus of Thebes, a writer of the eleventh century; on whom 
see Fabricius 4ib/. Graec. vil. p. 198 sq, ed. Harles. Fragments of this 
writer are included in Fabricius Hippol. Οὗ. 1. App. p. 43 sq. He is 
Hquoted by Michael Glycas as Ἱππόλυτος ὁ Θηβαῖος. In Niceph. Call. 
ΗΠ. E. ii. 3 a fragment of this writer is given as from Hippolytus ὃς 
Πόρτου τῆς πρεσβυτέρας Ῥώμης ἐπίσκοπος ἐτύγχανεν wv. He was the 
author of a Chronicle (χρονικὸν σύνταγμα). The accounts De Duodecim 
Afpostolis and De Septuaginta Discipulis, which have sometimes been 
included in the works of our Hippolytus, are his. 


ὃ 4. 
GAIUS OR HIPPOLYTUS ? 


Gaius, the Roman presbyter, plays an important part in the literary 
Phistory of Christianity at the opening of the third century. If the 
Jravages of time have spared only fragments of his works, he has not 
been more hardly treated in this respect than many famous writers of 
the Antenicene Church. Even without the important fragment desig- 
‘@nated the Muratorian Canon, and the elaborate Refutation of all 
WHeresies discovered in our own generation, both of which works have 
been ascribed to him by some modern critics, the literary remains 
bearing his name with the accompanying notes occupy some thirty 
pages in Routh’s collection. Will it be thought audacious if I venture 
Ὁ question the existence of such a person? 
' The works attributed to Gaius by ancient writers and included under 
his name by Routh are the following : 
(1) The Dialogue with Proclus, directed against the Montanists. 
It is quoted several times by Eusebius, who mentions Gaius as the 
author (#7. £. ii. 25, iii. 28, 31, vi. 20). 
(2) A treatise on the Cause of the Universe, directed against the 
Platonic doctrine. Photius (42. 32. a) ‘states that certain persons 
tribute it to Gaius. Aconsiderable fragment of this work is extant. 
ἢ (3) The Little Labyrinth, from which long quotations are given by 
Zusebius, and which is mentioned by name by Theodoret (AR. 12 e). 
the relation of this work to the Zadyrinth of Photius I shall have 
something to say hereafter (p. 378 sq). 
| (4) A treatise Against the Heresy of Artemon, mentioned by Pho- 
lus (AR. 32. a) as assigned to Gaius. 










































378 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


But besides the works above enumerated, of whose literary parent: ᾿ 
some account must be given, before we can dispose of Gaius, ce air 
facts are recorded of his life, which seem at first sight to give him ¢ 
substantial existence and to resist any attempt to annihilate him. 

We learn from Eusebius that he was a member of the Catholi 
Church (ἐκκλησιαστικὸς ἀνήρ); that he was a man of great learnin 
(Aoywitaros); that he resided at Rome; that he held the dialogue vit 
the Montanist Proclus during the ponies of Zephyrinus; and that hi 
received only thirteen Epistles of S. Paul, thus excluding the Epistle t 
the Hebrews. Jerome, as usual, derives all his knowledge from Eusé 
bius, and repeats the same statements somewhat more loosely. Theodore’ 
only knows Gaius as the writer of the Dialogue against Proclus. Photius 
(AR. 32. a) is somewhat fuller. ‘This Gaius,’ he writes, ‘is reported te 
have been a presbyter of the Church in Rome during the pontificate οἱ 
Victor and Zephyrinus, and to have been ordained bishop of tht 
Gentiles.’ 

I have already alluded to the fact that the ‘ Refutation of ἢ 
Heresies,’ which was brought to light less than forty years ago, wa 
added to the literary achievements of Gaius by several able critics. 
fresh honour was the immediate occasion of his downfall. The Refuta 
tion is now ascribed by pretty general consent to his learned contem 
porary Hippolytus. On this point the representatives of the moi 
opposite schools—Bunsen, Wordsworth, Dollinger—are agreed; 
the coincidence with respect to the authorship is the more striking 
because the work affords material for manifold theological contr 
versy. 

Unhappily for the fame of Gaius the Refutation cannot stand a 
Its author must have written all the treatises ascribed by ancit 5 
authorities to this learned Roman presbyter with the exception of § 
Dialogue with Proclus, ‘a 

The Treatise against Artemon may be conveniently taken first. The 
cannot be much doubt that this treatise is identical with the Little La 
rinth mentioned by Theodoret (AR. 12. 6). For though the exte 
fragments are directed chiefly against Theodotus, another lead 
monarchian, yet Eusebius, to whom we are indebted for their pre 
vation, says that the work was written ‘against the heresy of Artem 
(H. £. ν. 28); and Theodoret, after mentioning both Artemon ἃ 
Theodotus, says ‘against the heresy of these men was compos 
Little Labyrinth,’ 

The testimony of Photius (AR. 32. a) requires careful 
After discussing the authorship of the Treatise on the Universe h 
































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 379 


tions marginal notes (ἐν παραγραφαῖς) to the effect that it was written by 
Gaius, an elder living in Rome, who they say composed Zhe Labyrinth 
also, and of whom a Dialogue is extant against a certain Proclus, 
champion of the Montanist sect; which (treatise On the Universe) 
being left anonymous has been ascribed to diverse persons, just as 
The Labyrinth has been ascribed by one to Origen. But ‘in truth,’ he 
}continues, ‘it is the work of Gaius who composed Zhe Labyrinth, as 
he himself testifies that the Zyeatise on the Nature of the Universe is 
his.’ ‘They say that this Gaius,’ he adds, ‘composed another treatise 
also specially directed against the heresy of Artemon, and an important 
Dialogue against Proclus, a champion of Montanus.’ 

What does Photius mean by this Labyrinth ? Shall we identify it 
with the Little Labyrinth of Theodoret? ur first impulse is to identify 
the two; but, if so, Photius must have given an incorrect account, 
for he obviously contemplates two separate works. This however he 
might very well have done, since he seems not to have seen the Lité/e 
Labyrinth. But another solution offers itself, which deserves more 
consideration. There is every reason to believe that the Summary 
comprising the roth book of the Philosophumena was circulated sepa- 
}rately from the main portion of the treatise, and fell into the hands 
of some who were unacquainted with the rest. Now in the opening 
words of this roth book Hippolytus says that after ‘breaking through 
the Labyrinth of Heresies,’ he will proceed to the Demonstration of the 
Truth. It would seem therefore that this summary was known as the 
Labyrinth from the opening words. This explains the further statement 
of Photius that ‘at the close of the Zadsyrinth he testifies that he wrote 
the treatise On the Nature of the Universe’; for in one of the final 
chapters the author of the Philosophumena (x. 32) refers his readers to - 
this work, as his own. 

’ But though different works are probably indicated by the Little 
Labyrinth and the Labyrinth, the nomenclature points to the identity 
of authorship. The same person, who would describe a general work 
on heresies as penetrating a labyrinth, would select as the appropriate 
title for a special treatise dealing with a particular group of heresies the 
Little Labyrinth. ‘Thus the reference in the Philosophumena gives an 
additional confirmation of the Hippolytean authorship of the treatise 
Against Artemon. Even before the discovery of the Philosophumena, 
} Routh had suggested this as the probable inference from the facts 
‘before him’, 

ΝΣ 1 In the Fournal of Philology p. 98 sq; appeared in its original form, I had 
where this essay Gaius or Hippolytus? identified the Little Labyrinth of Theo- 

















380 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


































The Little Labyrinth. ‘The comparison of Eusebius with Theodore 
leaves no doubt that by this name the treatise Against Artemon is me 
as I have just shown. Gaius therefore is deprived of the credit ofl he 
authorship of this work. Indeed the identification of the two supplies 
additional grounds for turning to Hippolytus as the true author. 5 

To Hippolytus also must be assigned the Mature of the Universe, 
For this ascription there are abundant reasons, as I shall show below 
(Ρ. 395 sq). It is sufficient to say here that the author of the Refutati 
distinctly claims it as his own work ; and no case has been made out for 
denying the 2efutatio to Hippolytus. Indeed we may consider this 
latter point as established irrefragably, whatever doubt may have been 
entertained among critics at an earlier date. 


[The above paragraphs are taken partly from an article which T 
wrote in 1868 in the Journal of Philology 1. p. 98 sq, in which I 
was disposed to maintain that Gaius was only the double of Hippol 
and that αὐ the works ascribed to the former belong rightly to the 
latter. Only here and there a correction of statement has been rendered 
necessary in the foregoing paragraphs by further knowledge. So far I 
adhere to my former opinions. But in the light of recent discovery, a 
I shall explain presently, I feel myself no longer able to maintain this 
extreme view. It is now quite certain that there was a certain Gaius, 
against whom Hippolytus wrote. Yet my former discussion seems to 
me worth while reproducing in part, because it brings out mam 
difficulties attending the question which have never been solved ant 
because it offers some suggestions which may not be useless in othe 
ways even in the light of further knowledge. If we could suppose th 
writer against the Montanists to be Hippolytus, and the opponet 
of the Apocalypse some unknown person of the name, we should hay 
a solution of our difficulties; but I feel that I have no right to sugges 
this solution, except provisionally, with the evidence now before me. Ι 

Thus stripped of his borrowed plumage, Gaius retains only th 
Dialogue with Proclus the Montanist. Of this work a brief noti 
is given by Eusebius, who also preserves two or three short fra 
It appears from these that the dialogue professed to have been held 
Rome during the pontificate of Zephyrinus ; that Gaius was the orth e 


doret with the Labyrinth of Photius, as the roth book of the Philosof 
writers before me had done; but the gives another aspect to the question. — 
investigations of subsequent critics, show- _ two can no longer, I think, be treate 
ing the separate use of the Summary in _ titles of the same work. hie 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 381 


nd Proclus the Montanist disputant ; that in defending the prophesyings 
f his sect Proclus appealed to the four daughters of Philip, who with 
heir father were buried at Hierapolis; and that, as a set-off against 
ese precious reliques, Gaius offered to show his antagonist the tombs 
f St Peter and St Paul, the one at the Vatican, the other on the 
stian Way. Moreover, a passage is quoted (obviously from a speech 
f Gaius), which, as the exact expressions have an important bearing on 
e subject of this paper, I shall here quote at length: 

“But Cerinthus also, by means of revelations purporting to have 
been written by a great apostle, lyingly imposes upon us marvellous 
prodigies which he professes to have been shown him by angels, 
saying that after the resurrection the kingdom of Christ is an earthly 
kingdom, and again that men shall live in Jerusalem in the flesh 
and be the slaves of lusts and pleasures. And, being an enemy 
to the scriptures of God, he would fain deceive, and says that a tale 
of a thousand years is to be spent in marriage festivities’.” 

Having thus given the facts which bear upon the decision, I will 
ate my hypothesis. Unless I am mistaken, it explains all the pheno- 
ena better than they have hitherto been explained ; and, if so, it may 
irly claim a hearing. 

Gaius is simply an interlocutor in a dialogue against the Montanists 
itten by Hippolytus. By this person, who takes the orthodox side in 
e discussion, Hippolytus may have intended himself, or he may have 
vented an imaginary character for dramatic purposes. In other 
Fords, such a dialogue may really have taken place, or the narrative may 
e fictitious from beginning to end. In the former case, we may 
ppose that Gaius was his own praenomen; for then he would naturally 
9 style himself in the dialogue, just as Cicero appears under the name 
f Marcus in his own writings. Not being a slave and being in some 
ense a Roman, Hippolytus must almost necessarily have had two 
ames, if not more; just as his Alexandrian contemporary is styled in 
T. Flavius Clemens, and his African contemporary Q. Septimius 
orens Tertullianus. Such a combination as Gaius Hippolytus is 
atural in itself, and indeed occurs in an extant inscription found at 
acentia ; Q. POBLICIO L.L.c. HIPPOLYTUS*. On the latter supposition 


























1 Euseb. H. Z. ul. 28 ἀλλὰ καὶ Χριστοῦ" καὶ πάλιν ἐπιθυμίαις καὶ ἡδοναῖς 












ἤρινθος ὁ δι ἀποκαλύψεων ὡς ὑπὸ ἀπο- 
ὅλου μεγάλου γεγραμμένων τερατολογίας 
ἂν ὡς δ ἀγγέλων αὐτῷ δεδειγμένας 
δόμενος ἐπεισάγει, λέγων μετὰ τὴν 
στασιν ἐπίγειον εἶναι τὸ βασίλειον τοῦ 


ἐν Ἱερουσαλὴμ τὴν σάρκα πολιτευομένην 
δουλεύειν. καὶ ἐχθρὸς ὑπάρχων ταῖς γραφαῖς 
τοῦ Θεοῦ ἀριθμὸν χιλιονταετίας ἐν γάμῳ 
ἑορτῆς θέλων πλανᾶν λέγει γενέσθαι. 

2 Gruter, DCCCCLXXXIX. 4. 














382 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 



































(that Gaius is an imaginary person), we may appeal to the legal formula 
‘Ubi tu Gaius, ego Gaia,’ as suggesting that Hippolytus might avail 
himself of the name which corresponds to the anonymous N. or Μ. of 
our own formularies’. Of the former kind of dialogue, where the au hor 
himself is the orthodox disputant, the work of Justin against Trypho m y 
be taken as a type: of the latter, where a fictitious person maintains the 
right cause, the dispute between Jason and Papiscus by Arista 
Pella will serve as an example’. aj 
I suppose then that the copies of the Dialogue in general circulation 
were anonymous. The title may have run Διάλογος Tatov καὶ Πρό 
(or πρὸς Πρόκλον) ἢ κατὰ Μοντανιστῶν. A’writer, into whose hands this 
Dialogue fell, would naturally infer, as Eusebius inferred, (and he 
analogy of Justin’s work would favour the inference), that Gaius was the 
actual author of the book. The few particulars which Eusebius gives 
respecting the life of Gaius were doubtless drawn from the Dialog 16 
itself. Those which are added by Photius came from the othe 
writings attributed to Gaius, from the Cause of the Universe or the 
Labyrinth, or perhaps even from the Refutation itself. The critics, 
whom he quotes and to whom he is indebted for these particulars, ha¢ 
observed the cross references from one work to another and correctly 
inferred therefrom the identity of authorship. Among these cross reference: 
was one which connected the authorship of the Dialogue of Gaius ani 
Proclus with the other works, just as these are connected among them: 
selves and proved to belong to the same author. Hence Gaius assume 
to be the author of the Dialogue was credited with the other worl Κι 
also. | 
This is the explanation of the fact that all the particulars, which ‘ 
predicated of Gaius, are predicated or predicable of Hippolytus also 
They both flourish during the same pontificates ; they are both style 
‘presbyters,’ and both live in Rome; they both receive only thi ec 
Epistles as written by St Paul, excluding the Epistle to the Hebrew 
they both are men of great learning, though the Roman Church f 
some generations before and after this time was singularly devoid 
literary eminence. And lastly, we have here an explanation of ὃ 


1 So Tertullian AZfol. 3 ‘Nemo re-_ chief disputant on the right side ‘is 
tractat, ne ideo bonus Gaius et prudens third person, the writer himself 5. 8, 
Lucius, quia Christianus’; 7. 48 ‘At posed to be present. Another insté 
enim Christianus, side homine hominem οὗ an early polemical writing th ᾿ 
ipsumque de Gaio Gaium repromittat.’ the form of a dialogue is the di 

2 The work of Minucius Felix stands Archelaus and Manes, (Rov 
midway between the two; for, while the Sacer. v. p. 3 sq.) 






























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 383 


herwise not very intelligible statement, that Gaius was appointed 
ishop of the Gentiles’ (4... 32. a); for Hippolytus in the Refutation 
ks of himself as holding the episcopal office (4. 1), and addresses 
Gentiles more than once as though they were his special charge’. 
the designation ‘bishop of the Gentiles’ is not strictly correct, it was 
least a very easy inference from his language in this work; and 
Fobably he expressed himself similarly elsewhere, when the occasion 
manded, as for instance in the treatise on the Universe addressed to 
Greeks. 
To this identification of Gaius and Hippolytus another ancient 
tice also points. ‘The extant manuscripts of the Martyrdom of Poly- 
rp profess to be derived ultimately from a copy which was ‘tran- 
ibed from the writings (or manuscripts or lectures) of Irenzeus the 
ciple of Polycarp by Gaius who also was intimate with Irenzeus®.’ 
fow I shall not stop to enquire whether this postscript to the account 
Polycarp’s martyrdom contains authentic matter or not; but in any 
e it would seem that the transcriber here intended was none other 
n our Gaius, the Roman presbyter; for he is the only notable per- 
age of the name and age, whose attestation would be of value to 
redit the genuineness of the narrative. If so, it is remarkable that 
is represented as a disciple of Irenzeus. For Hippolytus also at- 
ded the lectures of this father, and was much indebted to them for 
materials of his earlier Compendium against Heresies. In his later 
pfutation also he twice mentions Irenzeus as ‘the blessed elder,’ and 
the second of the two passages avows his great obligations to him 
ef. Haer. Vi. 42, 45). May we suppose that Gaius in the Dialogue 
Ἢ Proclus expresses himself similarly with respect to this father ? 
Again, the hypothesis of an anonymous copy falls in with another 
4.55 of facts mentioned above. The knowledge of Eusebius was limited 
character and extent by the materials within his reach. To the 
at Caesarea, collected by the diligence of his friend Pamphilus, 
probably owe the valuable remains of early Christian literature which 
has preserved to us; and, where this library was defective, his know- 
ge would be defective also. Now it appears to have contained some 
umes bearing the name of Hippolytus; for, though he passes over 


X. 31, 32, 34. In the close of the Elpyvatov μαθητοῦ τοῦ ἸΤολυκάρπου, ὃς καὶ 
ise, which is wanting, he may have συνεπολιτεύσατο τῷ Elpnvalw; or, as it 
ed to his episcopate more directly, in appears in the Moscow MS, ἐκ τούτων οὖν, 
exion with the Gentiles to whom ὡς προλέλεκται, τῶν τοῦ Εἰρηναίου ovy- 
peroration is addressed. γραμμάτων Τάϊος pereypayaro (see ζρηαΐ. 
ταῦτα μετεγράψατο μὲν Τάϊος ἐκ τῶν and Polyc. 111. pp. 401, 403, ed. 2). 











a 





































384 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


this father very lightly, he gives a list of several books written by h n 
adding, ‘And you may find very many works besides still extant in th 
hands of many persons’ (47. £. vi. 22). But, in addition to the wor ks 
which he enumerates, the library also contained another stray volume 
from which the writer’s name was accidentally omitted, and of whid 
Eusebius therefore did not recognise the authorship. This volum 
comprised the Dialogue of Gaius and Proclus, the Little Labyrinth, ant 
the Cause of the Universe. ‘The first of these Eusebius ascribes to 
(of whom he evidently knows nothing besides), because Gaius is he 
orthodox interlocutor. The second he quotes but quotes anonymously, 
not knowing who was the author. Of the third it is worth remarkin 
this negative fact, that he has not included it in his list of the works Ὁ 
Hippolytus, though it is so included in the catalogue on the statu 
From its subject it probably would not assist his historical researche 
and he therefore does not quote from it, and probably did not read i 
In the same form also—perhaps in a copy transcribed from the arche 
type in the Cesarean library—the three anonymous treatises fell int 
the hands of the critic or critics mentioned by Photius. They saw fro: 
the cross-references that the three works must be ascribed to the san 
author ; and, either following Eusebius or drawing the same easy Di 
incorrect inference independently, they attributed the Dialogue again 
the Montanists to one Gaius. To Gaius therefore this anonymot 
volume was assigned. . 


But independently of the theory itself, are there reasons for suj 
posing that Hippolytus ever did write against Montanism? Thei : 
at least a presumption, that so ruthless a scourge of heterodoxy in ¢ 
its forms should not have left this type of error unassailed. Besic 
writing two general works against all the heresies—his earlier Co ip 
dium, the little book read by Photius, and apparently preserved (thou 
not without considerable modifications) in the Latin treatise attach 
to the Praescriptio of Tertullian (see below, p. 413 sq), and his la 
fuller work, the Refutation, first brought to light and published in 
own. generation—he likewise attacked in special treatises the more 
portant heresies which were rife in his own age and church. Weh 
seen how he refuted the monarchian doctrines of Theodotus 8 
Artemon, by which the Roman community was assailed about 
time. We have moreover an extant fragment of a work against Nc 
(whether an independent treatise or not), whose heretical vie rs 
threatened this same church in his day. He wrote likewise ag 
Marcion. It would seem strange therefore if so persistent a char 




























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 385 
of orthodoxy had been silent about Montanism, which was certainly one 
of the most formidable antagonists of the Catholic Church among the 
oman Christians at this time. 

On the other hand, in the Refutation he dismisses this heresy very 
priefly. Bunsen complains that ‘the whole article is meagre,’ and fails 
Ὁ fulfil the promise which Hippolytus made at the outset, that he 
would leave no form of error unanswered. I think this meagreness is 
easily explained on the hypothesis which I have put forward. Just as 
ἃ previous section Hippolytus had dismissed the heresy of Theodotus 
though second in importance to none in its influence on the Christian 
istory of his time) with a very few lines', because he had controverted 
t in the Zittle Labyrinth, so now he disposes of Montanism with the 
ame despatch, because he either has written, or intends to write, a 
pecial treatise on the subject. If the words which follow refer, as they 
erhaps do, not to the Noetians who are mentioned just before, but to 
6 Montanists who are the main subject of the paragraph, this polemical 
ork was still an unaccomplished project. ‘Concerning these,’ he says, 
I will write more in detail at a future time.’ The supposition that the 
talogue was not yet written, though projected, is quite consistent with 
e fact, that the discussion which it reproduced purported to have been 
eld during the pontificate of Zephyrinus. The Refutation indeed was 
ot written till after the death of Callistus, the successor of Zephyrinus. 
put, as Callistus only held the see for four years (219—223), no long 
me need have elapsed between the supposed date of the discussion 
d the publication of the Dialogue, so that no dramatic propriety 
rould be violated. But on either supposition, whether the Dialogue 
xisted already, or was only planned in the author’s mind, the fact 
ould explain why he is satisfied with this very cursory notice of the 
fontanists in his great work. 

From this Dialogue also Stephanus Gobarus (AR. 20) may have 
uoted, when, as represented by Photius, he stated ‘what opinions the 
host holy Hippolytus held concerning the Montanists.’ The account 
these heretics in the 2efufation is almost too short to explain this 


1 Ref. Haer. viii. 19. Another case in 
pint is the article on the Quartodecimans 
iii. 18), who are dismissed still more 
mmarily. Hippolytus had discussed 


The account I have given in the text 
seems to me much more probable. At 
the same time I am disposed to think 
that the Refutation was left unfinished by 


em in his treatise On the Passover. 
p all these three cases Bunsen (Hi- 
νέες 1. pp. 376, 382, 385) supposes 
our manuscript has preserved only 
| abstract of what Hippolytus wrote. 


CLEM. 11. 








its author, and that he had intended to 
expand these meagre articles, making use 
of his special treatises for this purpose. 
This hypothesis will explain much which 
needs explanation in the form of the work. 


: 25 














386 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


























language. And, if the Latin of the Pseudo-Tertullian at all adequatel ell 
represents his earlier work, the Compendium also was equally brie 
Indeed in the later work he does little more than repeat the statement nts 
of the earlier respecting these heretics. ; 

It only remains to enquire, whether the extant fragments of the 
Dialogue are consistent with the hypothesis that Hippolytus was he 
author. ᾿ 

As regards style, the work might well have been written by this father 
though any inference drawn from such scanty extracts can have but little 
value. The matter however presents some difficulty. The infe enc 
has been often drawn from the passage quoted above (see p. 381)", 
the writer of the Dialogue considered the Apocalypse of S. John to be 
forgery of Cerinthus; and, if this inference were true, my hypothesi 
must be abandoned ; for Hippolytus not only quoted largely from h 
Apocalypse as a work of S. John, but also, as we have seen, wrote 
book in its defence. This adverse interpretation however may rea son 
ably be questioned. It is difficult to see how an intelligent perso 
should represent the Apocalypse as teaching that in the Kingdom ¢ 
Christ ‘men should live in the flesh in Jerusalem and be the slaves ¢ 
lust and pleasures,’ and again that ‘a thousand years should be spenti 
marriage festivities*.’ It is hardly less difficult to imagine how a ma 
of great learning, as the author of the Dialogue is represented to ha 
been, could have reconciled such a theory with the known history an 
tenets of Cerinthus. It must be confessed indeed that Dionysius ¢ 
Alexandria appears so to have interpreted the language of Gaius in fl 
Dialogue. At all events he speaks of some previous writers (τινὲς 7 
πρὸ ἡμῶν) as maintaining that the Apocalypse was written by Cerinthu 
and describes their views in language somewhat resembling the pas 
of the Dialogue (Euseb. H. £. vii. 25 ; comp. iii. 28); though he h 
self, while questioning the Apostolic authorship of the book, has t 
good sense and feeling to reject this solution as untenable. It is n 


so clear that Eusebius also understood the passage in the same w 
aa 





1 Neander (1. p. 441 Bohn’s transl.) 
writes thus: ‘Moreover it deserves con- 
siderationin this respect, that by Stephanus 
Gobarus the judgments of Hippolytus and 
of Gregory of Nyssa respecting the Mon- 
tanists are set one against the other, so 
that we may conclude that the former 
belonged to the defenders of Montanism.’ 
And others have attributed Montanizing 
views to Hippolytus. But we do not 


_ signify a marriage festival, as it is 


know in what respect the opinions 
these two fathers were contrasted 
Stephanus, if they were contrasted ᾿ 
all events Hippolytus in the Refu ; 
speaks quite as_ strongly 
Montanists as the case justifies. 
2 The word γάμος however nee 








elsewhere of festivities genera ly; 
LXx, Esth. iv. 22. . 


































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 387 


ΤΠ On the other hand Theodoret adopted a different interpretation. 
}‘Cerinthus,’ writes this father, ‘also invented certain revelations pre- 
tending to have seen them himself (ὡς αὐτὸς τεθεαμένος). Against him 
not only have the above-named persons written, but with them also 
Gaius and Dionysius the Bishop of Alexandria (AR. 12 d).’ So 
interpreted, the passage signifies that Cerinthus set himself up for ‘a 
}great apostle’ who had revelations’: and this is more in accordance 
with his attitude towards S. John as it appears in other ancient notices. 
}But, whatever be the exact bearing of the words ws ὑπὸ ἀποστόλου 
μεγάλου γεγραμμένων, the description is inappropriate to the Apocalypse 
lof our Canon. Nor indeed is it likely that an orthodox presbyter of the 
oman Church should have so written of a book which a contemporary 
Ppresbyter of the same Church reverenced as the genuine work of an 
inspired Apostle ; for the author of the Déa/ogue does not write as one 
who is putting forward an opinion which would be contested by his own 
eompeers. 

If may be said, however, that at all events Gaius attacks the millen- . 
arians, whereas Hippolytus himself held millennial views. But both 
ropositions involved in this statement are open to question. Gaius 
lid indeed condemn a sensuous millennium, but it is by no means clear 
hat the passage goes so far as to condemn Chiliastic doctrine in all its 
orms. On the other hand it is not certain that Hippolytus was a 
hiliast at all, while it is quite certain that he must have scouted all 
hiliastic views which wore a sensuous garb. As regards the first point, 
e does indeed maintain that the world will last six thousand years, cor- 
esponding to the six days of creation, and that afterwards will come the 
eign of Christ, of which the Sabbath is the type’, but the parallel is not 
essed so far as to insist upon the same duration for his antitypical 
abbath as for his antitypical working-day; and he elsewhere speaks of 
ne second Advent in such a way as to leave no room for a millennium. 

is at least remarkable, that though he again and again enlarges on 
chatological subjects he is wholly silent on this one point, even where 
e subject would naturally lead him to state the doctrine, if he held 
. But, if it is hardly probable that Hippolytus held Chiliastic opinions 


See the parallel given by Routh (11. p. forged Apocalypses under the name of 
)from Apollonius in Euseb. 7.2. v.18, some Apostle, perhaps S. Peter. 

ούμενος Tov ἀπόστολον, καθολικήν τινα 3 Hippol. γαρηι. 59 (on Daniel), 
αξάμενος ἐπιστολήν, speaking of one _ p. 153 (Lagarde). 

emiso, a Montanist. The more natural 3 See the:treatise on Antichrist through- 
erpretation of the words however seems _ out (especially c. 44 sq), besides several 
be, that Cerinthus palmed off his fragments bearing on the subject. 


25—2 









































388 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


of any kind, it is quite certain that he would have condemned, as strongly 
as any one, the sensuous conception of the millennium attributed by 
Cerinthus in the Dza/ogue. ‘In the resurrection,’ he writes, ‘men shall be 
as angels of God: that is to say, in incorruption and immortality and 
immutability (dpevoia). For incorruptible being is not born, does not 
grow, does not sleep, does not hunger, does not thirst, does not toil, 
does not suffer, does not die, is not pierced by nails and spear, does not 
sweat, does not shed blood: such beings are those of the angels and of 
souls released from bodies; for both these are different in kind from 
(ἑτερογενεῖς), and alien to, the visible and corruptible creation of the (pre- 
sent) world’.’ % 


i 
Je 


When the above essay was written, I had thought also that the 
Heads against Gaius, which are mentioned in Ebedjesu’s list (42. 
might have been this very Dialogue of Gaius and Proclus, which Euse 
bius mentions; and that owing to a careless heading, or to a superficia 
impression derived from its opening sentences, it might have been take 
to be written against Gaius, because the interlocutor Proclus, wh 
perhaps opened the debate, was found arguing against him. Thus th 
last vestige of evidence for the existence of Gaius as distinct from Hy 
polytus would have disappeared. But only last year Prof. Gwynn ¢ 
Dublin discovered and published from Dionysius Barsalibi several fra 
ments from this very treatise, in which Hippolytus maintains again: 
Gaius the genuineness and authority of the Apocalypse of S. Joh 
(see below, p. 394 sq). Gaius therefore is alive once more, though 
seemed to me to be dead. But, whether this is really Gaius the Romi 
presbyter or another, may perhaps be still an open question. Γ 


Ἃ 
ἐν. 


ὃ 5: 
THE LITERARY WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. ol 
rey 
With most writers the obvious order would be the life first and 
works afterwards. The works are the fruit and consequence of the ! 
the works live and flourish after the life is ended. But with Hip ol 
it is convenient to reverse the natural order. We know next ton οἱ 
about Hippolytus except what we learn from his own works; and, | 
genuineness of the productions ascribed to him is beset in many 
with great difficulties, we are quite powerless to deal with the life, 
the preliminary questions affecting these are first’settled. 


1 Hippol. Fragm. 9, p. go (Lagarde). 

































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 389 


In the following account I have been greatly assisted by J. A. Fabri- 
Wcius B72. Graec. vu. p. 183 sq (ed. Harles); Bunsen Lippolytus and 
His Age i. p. 514 sq (1854); Caspari Zaufsymbol u. Glaubensregel 11. 
P- 377 54; and especially Salmon in Smith-Wace’s Dict. of Christ. 
Biogr. 1. p. 91 sq 5. v. ‘ Hippolytus Romanus,’ whose list is the most 
careful and complete. 

His work may be divided conveniently for my purpose into four 
‘classes ; 

(A) Biblical and Exegetical ; 

(8) Zheological and Apologetic ; 

(c) Historical and Chronological ; 

(0) Herestological. 


Where a strictly logical classification is impossible, and where in many 

cases either from the character of the writing itself or from the defect 
fof our information we may doubt where to place any particular work, 
his rough division will suffice. 


A. BIBLICAL AND EXEGETICAL. 


1. Zhe Muratorian Canon. ‘The reasons for assigning this work to 
ippolytus require to be stated in full, and are given in a separate 
ection. See below, p. 405 sq. 

2. On the Hexaemeron, This work on the days of Creation seems 
o have been well known in early times. It is mentioned in several 
ists, and Jerome (AX. 8. g) tells us more especially that 5. Ambrose in 
his extant work on the same subjects made great use of it. Some frag- 
nents are given in Lagarde, p. 123-141. The reference of Jerome to 
he charge brought against himself of misinterpretation in explaining 
e odd and even days of Creation (AZ. 8. d) must be to this work. 
3. On the Sequel to the Hexaemeron. This work (εἰς τὰ μετὰ τὴν 
ξαήμερον) is mentioned by Eusebius and others. The commentary Zn 
enesim, included by Jerome in his list, is probably the same. It would 
leal with certain passages in the patriarchal history. Jerome elsewhere 
_ GAR. 8. c) gives a mystical interpretation of one of these from 
᾿ς: Isaac symbolizes God the Father, Rebecca the Holy 


3 4. On L£xodus, only in Jerome’s list. It is questionable whether 
ἢ 63) ἡ μεγάλη in Theodoret’s quotation (42. 12. b) has anything to 
Plo with the Song of Moses Exod. 15. 

_ 5 On the Benedictions of Balaam. This work is quoted by Leon- 














390 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 




























tius of Byzantium (42. 21. b), but there is a v. 1. ᾿Αβραάμ for Βαλαάμ 
(see Lagarde, p. 140). The blessings of Balaam are a more likely 
subject to have been chosen by Hippolytus; and a copyist would be 
tempted to substitute the commoner word ᾿Αβραάμ. ‘The extract itself 
contains nothing which is decisive. 5 Ἷ 
Fabricius (11, p. 33 sq) gives extracts from some Arabic Mss at 
Oxford of a Catena on the Pentateuch, which contains numerous pa: 3 
sages ascribed to ‘Hippolytus the expositor of the Targum.’ We are 
not encouraged either by the source of these extracts, or by their con- 
tents, to regard them as a genuine work of our Hippolytus. a 
6. On Elkanah and Hannah. ‘This discourse is twice quoted by ! 
Theodoret (AR. 12. a, b). Γ΄. 
7. On Saul and the Witch of Endor (περὶ Σαοὺλ καὶ πύθωνος) or, as 
it is described on the chair, [εἰς τὴν ἐγ]γαστρίμυθον. It is found a 
in Jerome’s list. This same incident is made the subject of a di ᾿ 
sion by Hippolytus’ contemporary Origen ; and his representation oF 
was considered so important that it was specially answered by Eus 
thius of Antioch. The two tracts have been recently edited roped et 
by Jahn in Gebhardt τ. Harnack Zexte u. Untersuchungen, 1886. i” 
8. On the Psalms. 'Theodoret (AR. 12) quotes from the com 
mentary on the 2nd, the 23rd, the 24th, and (if he means this D) 
τὴν δὴν τὴν μεγάλην), the 119th Psalm. See also in Migne (p. 611 
a fragment on the 77th Psalm, published by Bandini (Cafa/. Coa 
Graec. Medic. τ. p. 91). There is likewise a possibility that the Demon 
stration against the Jews may be a commentary on Ps. Ixix. im 
There is also a long passage extant (Lagarde, p. 187 sq) entitled ἢ rhe 
‘hypothesis’ or ‘introduction of Hippolytus the bishop of Rome to th 
Psalms,’ which seems to show the influence of Origen’s Hexapla (Ove 
beck Quaest. Hippol. p. 6 sq). The genuine introduction of Hippolyt 
appears to be preserved in the corresponding ‘Syriac (Lagarde’s 
Syr. p. 83), and confirms Overbeck’s view, as pointed out by 
(‘Hippolytus Romanus,’ p. 103). The writer of the extant Greek fir 
ment has worked together materials of Hippolytus and Origen. We: 
a characteristic trait of Hippolytus which appears much more def 
in the Syriac than in the Greek. In the Chronicon he enumerated 
72 nations of the earth (25 from Shem, 15 from Japhet, and 32 from H Ha 
and in the Phélosophumena (x. 20) he refers to his enumeration. J 
in the Syriac fragment he tells how David’s four chief singers hz di 
72 players of instruments under him, corresponding to the 72 nat 
which again he distributes in the same way, 25 to Shem, 1 5 to | Ja 
and 32 to Ham, . oa 




































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 391 


9. On the Proverbs, mentioned in several lists. Some fragments 
are given in Lagarde, p. 196; and one long additional passage in Migne 
Τρ. 616 sq from Mai Bid/. Nov. vu. 11. p. 71 (1854). 

10. On £cclesiastes, mentioned by Jerome. A quotation is given 
} by 5. de Magistris as from Anastasius of Sinai, but it is not in the printed 
editions ; comp. Lagarde p. 201. 

11. On the Song of Songs in several lists: see Lagarde p. 200 sq. 
}Apparently extant in a Syriac translation ; Assem. Bib/. Orient. τ. p. 607. 

12. On Isaiah, mentioned by Jerome. Theodoret (AR. 12. a) 
quotes from the beginning of it. See Lagarde Hiffol. p. 142 and 
Anal. Syr. p. 87. 

13. On Jeremiah. Atleast Assemani (2262. Or. τ. p. 607) mentions 
Wthe existence of such a work, but does not state whether it is a com- 
Pplete commentary. 
| 14. On parts of Ezekiel, in the list of Eusebius. The work on ‘the 
Four living creatures’ is mentioned by Assemani (Bibl. Or. τ. p. 607) 
fas extant in a Syriac translation. 

15. On Daniel, in most of the lists, though not in Eusebius. 
Apparently a very popular work and several times quoted (42. 8.h, 18, 
332, 33, 35). This work is the subject of a careful monograph by 
ardenhewer (1877), who had pointed out that the long and important 
Phigi fragment (Lagarde p. 151 sq) does not preserve the Commentary 
pf Hippolytus in the original form. For the fragments known when this 
work was written see Lagarde p. 145 sq, Migne p. 633 sq. Quite recently 
u very important discovery has been made. Georgiades has published in 
he ᾿Εκκλησιαστικὴ ᾿Αλήθεια, May 1885 for the first time, Anal. Syr. περὶ 
ράσεως τοῦ προφητοῦ Δανιὴλ λόγος δ΄, and is preparing a greater work for 
hich he is collating in the libraries of Europe. Meanwhile Kennedy 
Dublin 1888) has reprinted the Greek text with an English translation. 
As the fourth book contains the last six chapters, Georgiades infers that 
dyos a contained the History of Susannah, λόγος β΄ the Song of the 
hree Children, and λόγος y the earlier portion of the Canonical 
‘Paniel. On p. 13 ἐν τῇ πρὸ ταύτης βίβλῳ σεσήμανται we ought pro- 
ably in the light of this new discovery to see a reference to the 3rd 
ook, as the prophet was divided in Hippolytus. Hippolytus states 
p. 42) that our Lord was born on viii Kal. Jan. on the 4th day, in the 
στ year of Augustus being the 5500th year from Adam; and that He 

vas crucified in His 33rd year, on viii Kal. Apr. on Friday (παρασκευῇ) 
the 18th year of Tiberius, in the consulship of Rufus (Fufius) and Ru- 
yellio, or (as it is elsewhere expressed) ‘duobus Geminis’ (see 1. p. 253). 
de thus places the Crucifixion on March 25 a.D. 29, and the Birth on 



































392 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


Dec. 25 B.c. 4, which he regards as the, 42nd of Augustus. If this 
be the genuine text of Hippolytus (and there seems no reason to 
doubt it), the information is highly important. It shows that the dat 
which we find elsewhere for the Crucifixion in the Liberian chronicle 
expresses Hippolytus’ deliberate view. This date also of the Crucifixion 
is involved in the Paschal Tables. For the reasons which led Hippolytut 
to fix on this day, though not the real full-moon in a.p. 29, see Salmo 
in Smith-Wace Dict. of Christ. Biogr. s.v. ‘Chronicon Canisianum 
I. p. 506; ‘Hippolytus Romanus’ 111. p. 92 sq; and Hermathena τ. Ὁ. 96 
But it has a still more important bearing. -In the corresponding frag- 
ment in the Chisian fragment of Daniel (Lagarde p. 153) we have 
exactly the same statement ἔπαθε δὲ τῷ τριακοστῷ τρίτῳ ἔτει, though 
without the same particulars. Salmon (Hermath. 1.6.) expresses his sur 
prise that, while Hippolytus defends the authenticity of the fo rth 
Gospel and founds his chronology of the passover on S. John (see Π 
Ῥ. 104), he has not in the Paschal Tables and in the Chronicle made t 
usual inference from S. John’s account as to the duration of our Lor τ 
ministry. This indeed would be the more surprising because hi 
master Irenzeus not only does this, but exaggerates the inference fro 
S. John, alleging the tradition of the elders that Christ’s ministry δὲ 
tended over many years and thus refuting the Valentinian argumen 
for their thirty czeons derived from the thirty years of Christ’s earth! 
life’. He therefore supposes that ‘thirty third’ was a transcriber’s co 
rection in the Chisian fragment to improve the chronology. ς 
however that this new authority is discovered it seems impossible 
maintain this view. If the crucifixion which he certainly places ‘duc 
Geminis’ i.e. A.D. 29, and the duration of our Lord’s life to His 33 
year, are both inconsistent with the reckonings of the Chronicle and t 
Paschal Tables, the inconsistency must be allowed. The real difficu 
is with the Paschal Tadles, where the renecic x¢ is placed on iy No 
Apr. in the 2nd year of the first cycle, and the πάθος χᾷ on viii K 
April in the 16th year of the second, thus making an interval of 
years within a few days between the two, it being assumed that 
renecic means the visitation. As the Commentary on Da ὌΝ 


apparently written much earlier than the other works, perhaps Hi 
lytus saw some way meanwhile of fitting in the three passover 
S. John into his later chronology. At all events he cannot have | 
unaware of the difficulty. οὐ 
In the ordinary Greek Bibles Susannah precedes, the Song ¢ 
Three Children follows, and last comes the Book of Daniel pi 
1 Tren. Haer, ii. 22; see Essays on Supernatural Religion, p. 245 5ς : 
































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 393 


his was doubtless the case with the copy of Hippolytus. The long 
agment (Lagarde p. 145 sq) ¥elating to Susannah has every appearance 
f being the introduction to the whole work. Hippolytus begins by 
}xplaining why, though the events took place later, they are recorded 
t the beginning of the work (ἡ ἱστορία γεγένηται ὕστερον, προεγράφη δὲ 
ἧς βίβλου πρώτης); for it was customary, he adds, for the scribes to 
ecord things in reversed order (ὑστερόπρωτα), as we find with many 
isions of the prophets. It is needless to say that Susannah signifies 
e Church, and the two elders are the two peoples, the Jewish and the 
entile. This mystical interpretation constituted its great attraction to 
e fathers. But what is the Zittde Daniel, which according to Ebedjesu 
4R. 36) Hippolytus commented on? It is commonly explained of the 
dinary Lxx apocryphal additions to Daniel (Susannah, the Three 
Whildren, Bel and the Dragon); but these would all be included 
rdinarily under Daniel; and in Ebedjesu’s list Susannah is specially 
entioned. In Wright’s Syriac MSS Brit. Mus. τ. p. το (see above, 
}. 350 sq) there is a fragment from the ‘ Daniel the less (or the youth) 
n our Lord and the end of the world.’ It seems to be a distinctly 
Whristian apocryphal writing. Daniel is represented as preaching the 
ture judgment in the language of S. John’s Gospel ‘He will come to 
is own, and His own will not recognise Him...I am not able to ex- 
lain who He is, but by the Spirit in a mystery. The servant is not able 
‘Io overcome his master, but I give signs and preach concerning Him.’ 
The book recovered and published by Georgiades evidently preserves 
he Cornmentary of Hippolytus in its original form. Bardenhewer had 
urmised that in the long fragment of the Chisian ms (Lagarde 
. 151—168) it was much compressed; and this new discovery has 
onfirmed his suspicion. 

Moreover this new discovery throws some light on the date of the 
york. Bardenhewer (p. 68), impressed by the language used of the 
ersecutions of the Church, places it as early as 202. To this early date 
- Balmon (111. p. 104) objects, calling attention to the fact that according 
o Eusebius (7. £. vi) Judas, writing on the 70 weeks of Daniel, brought 
is chronography down to the roth year of Severus and maintained that 
he coming of Antichrist was imminent (ἤδη τότε παρεῖναι), and he argues 
hat at least a dozen years must have elapsed to ‘allow the minds of the 
hristians to cool down.’ But now that we have the complete words 
f Hippolytus, we see that the excitement was still at a red heat and 
mat probably this treatise was written to calm men’s fears. He 
1entions apparently this very Judas; ‘I will relate,’ he says, ‘what took 
Place not long ago (τὸ συμβὰν ov πρὸ πολλοῦ χρόνου) in Syria,’ where a 


Ὑ 











394 EPISTLES OF 5, CLEMENT. 



























certain leader of the Church led himself and others astray, persuadi 
‘many of the brethren with their wives and children to go out into tl 
wilderness to meet Christ.’ He adds that if his wife, who was also | 
Christian, had not been wiser than himself and prevailed upon the gove T 
nor, he would have slain them all as robbers. He mentions also anothe 
ruler of a church in Pontus, whom I do not know whether it is possi 
to identify, ‘a pious and humble man, but with no firm grasp (μὴ poy 
ἀσφαλῶς) of the scriptures,’ who, misled by visions, staked his credit 
the immediate coming, and the people sold their lands accordingly. 
16. On Zachariah, mentioned by Jerome. a 
17. On S. Matthew. This is not included in Jerome’s list, but ἢ 
himself (42. 8. i) especially elsewhere mentions Hippolytus as havin n 
written on this Gospel. De Magistris has given an extract on ἐπιούσι 
in the Lord’s prayer, purporting to come from Hippolytus (Mign 
p- 700); and quite recently Gwynn has printed and translated from th 
Syriac of Dionysius Barsalibi (Hermathena vu. p. 137, 1889) a long am 
important comment on Matt. xxiv. 15—22, which may have come fron 
this work. Indeed Barsalibi (p. 142) seems to state this ‘in th 
Commentary on the Gospel,’ as if distinguishing it from an earl 
quotation taken from some other work. Assemani (8221. Or. τ. p. 604 
mentions Hippolytus as writing on the five persons omitted " 
Matthew’s genealogy. 
18. From the way in which they are quoted by Theodoret (Al 
12. Ὁ, c) The Discourse on the Distribution of the Talents, and TL 
Discourse on the Two Thieves would seem to have been separé 
homilies, not portions of a Commentary. ἠδ 
What may be the source of the fragments relating to the ear 
chapters of S. Luke (Lagarde p. 202), we do not know. There is 1 
notice of any Commentary on this Gospel. They may have been tak 
from the περὶ οἰκονομίας, or from almost any of his theological works, 
19. Defence of the Gospel and Apocalypse of S. John. From 
preposition (ὑπέρ, not περί) and from the association of the two ’ 
together, it is a safe inference that this was an apologetic work, direc 
against those persons who objected to both works alike, because t 
described our Lord as the Λόγος; but they must have contained m 
exegetical matter. Indeed we may enone that Epiphanius borre 
the name ἄλογοι ‘the irrational ones, ’ from Hippolytus ; for the: a 
are very much in his way ; e.g. νοητός, ἀνόητος (ix. 10), and doxe nie ᾿ 
δοκηταί (viii. 1). Dionysius Barsalibi states that Hippolytus, like Ir 
holds the Apocalypse to have been written by John the Evangelist 
Domitian sCramn Hermathena Vu, Ὁ. 137)» 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 395 


The Heads against Gaius are mentioned in the list of Ebedjesu 
FR. 37) as a separate work. But they have every appearance of being 
tracts from that part of this apologetic work which relates to the 
ocalypse. I have already considered what relation these bear to the 
tices of other writers relating to Gaius the Roman presbyter (p. 388). 


B. THEOLOGICAL AND APOLOGETIC. 





20. Demonstratio c. Judaeos ( Ἀποδεικτικὴ πρὸς Ἰουδαίους). A large 
rtion of this treatise was first published by Fabricius (11. p. 2 sq) from 
Vatican Ms communicated to him by Montfaucon. 

But besides this Greek portion De Magistris (p. 435 sq) connected 
th it, as part of the same work, a Latin treatise commonly printed 
ong the spurious works of Cyprian (e.g. Hartel’s edition, m1. 
133 sq). So far as I can discover, he had no ground whatever 
cept his own arbitrary assumption for assigning it to Hippolytus. 
: least he gives none. If there is no reason for assigning this work to 
rian, it seems even less possible to maintain the Hippolytean 
@thorship. Yet Bunsen (I. p. 450) accepts it without a question, 
scribing it as ‘far more interesting than the part preserved in the 
feek text.’ The connexion of this Latin tract with the Greek fragment 
purely arbitrary. On this subject see Draseke Jahrb. Καὶ Prot. Theol. 
. p- 456 sq (1886). 

This might seem at first sight to be part of his commentary on the 
th Psalm. But the mutilated title on the Chair cannot be so well 
pplied as by προς toyc 1oyAalioyc. Moreover the Jews are directly 
dressed again and again, ὦ Ἰουδαῖε, ὦ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι. Again, though it is 
gely taken up with the exposition of this one psalm, it is not wholly 
Lastly ; the sequence of scriptural authorities quoted (p. 66 sq 
garde) Δαυὶδ ὁ σὸς χριστός, ws ὁ μέγας ᾿Ἰώβ, φέρω δὴ ἐς μέσον καὶ τὴν 
οφητείαν Σολομών, καὶ πάλιν ὁ Δαυὶδ ἐν ψαλμοῖς, καὶ πάλιν ΣΞολομών, 
ints to a more general treatise than the exposition of an individual 



























21. On the Nature of the Universe or, as it is described on the 
air, Against the Greeks or Against Plato or Concerning the Universe. 
may observe by the way, that according to the general arrangement 
titles (see p. 325) χρονικῶν is a distinct work from πρὸς Ἕλληνας 
.A., and that the two should not be fused, as is sometimes done. 
_ hus the genuineness and identity of the work are established on the best 
εἰ ssible authority. Nevertheless Photius (42. 32. a) found it ascribed 
uis copy to Josephus; but he saw that this was impossible owing to 














396 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 






























its distinctly Christian theology. He adds that he has found it sta 
in some notices that it was really written by Gaius the Roman presbyt 
the author of the Labyrinth. ‘This Labyrinth, as 1 have shown elsewhet 
(see above, p. 379), is probably the tenth book of the Philosophumen 
in which Hippolytus distinctly mentions himself as having written 
treatise Concerning the Nature of the Universe (Ref. x. 32). Photiu iv 
further mentions the report that, having been left anonymous, it j 
assigned by some to Josephus, by others to Justin Martyr, and ἢ 
others to Irenzeus, just as some assign the Labyrinth to Origen. In th th 
so-called John Damascene (Sacr. Parallel. τι. pp. 755, 789) it is 
quoted, and ascribed in the one passage to Meletius, in the ie 
Josephus. By Joannes Philoponus (Lagarde, p. 124), who gives a fe 
lines, it is ascribed to ‘Josephus the Hebrew’ and entitled zepi rei 
παντὸς αἰτίας. In the ms from which Hoeschel first printed 
important fragment (Lagarde p. 68) in his notes to Photius (Ph 
Op. iv. p. 362 Migne) it was ascribed to Josephus, and seems to hay 
borne the title περὶ τῆς τοῦ παντὸς αἰτίας ἢ οὐσίας. The resemblances | 
language and substance bespeak the same authorship with the Phil 
phumena, even if we had not the authors own certification 
Wordsworth, p. 211 sq). Wordsworth (p. 306) gives the latter part 
Hoeschel’s fragment (from p. 27, 1. 5, 6 μέγας τῶν δικαίων K.t.d. 
onward), where it is carried a few lines farther from an Oxford ἢ 
Barocc. 26, which however had been previously printed by Heart 
This additional part contains the apocryphal quotation, ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἂν 
ὑμᾶς, ἐπὶ τούτοις κρινῶ, which is quoted by Justin Martyr and seve 
fathers (Resch Agrapha p. 112 sq, 226 sq, 290 sq, in Gebhardt 
Harnack Texte u. Untersuch. v. Hft. 4, 1889). This is quoted as fr 
Ezekiel (i.e. the pseudo-Ezekiel) by some of the fathers; and i 
noticeable that Clem. Alex. Quis div. Salv. 40 (p. 957) after κρινῷ εἰ 
the quotation in the same way as Hippolytus, καὶ παρ᾽ ἕκαστα βοᾷ 
τέλος πάντων. ἫΝ 
In the long extant fragment Hippolytus addresses the Greeks | 
than once, and he mentions Plato by name (p. 70, Lagarde). Phi 
also says that he refutes Alcinous ‘concerning the soul and mai er 
resurrection,’ and shows after the manner of the Christian apolc 
generally, and indeed of Josephus, ‘the much greater antiquity Ὁ 
Jews than the Greeks’ (AZ. 32. a). Alcinous is not mentioned it 
extant fragments. cece 
In the passage of the Philosophumena (x. 32) he expour 
the cosmogony which was the foundation of this treatise. Go 
absolute and alone. He created from simple elements, fire, 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 397 

































ater, and earth. Those creatures which are composed of more than 
e element are capable of dissolution. The soul is pure air or spirit 
eda). The great interest in the extant fragment is the application 
his cosmogony to explain the intermediate state, which was a favourite 
bject of Hippolytus. 

22. An exhortation addressed to Severina (προτρεπτικὸς πρὸς Σεβη- 
ivav), This is mentioned on the Chair, and it is generally identified 
ith πρὸς βασιλίδα τινὰ ἐπιστολὴ twice quoted by Theodoret (AX. 12. 
c). The fragments have reference to the Resurrection, and more 
pecially to Christ as the ἀπαρχή. No princess bearing the name 
sverina is mentioned anywhere either in inscriptions or in literature. 
nsen supposed that she was a daughter of Alexander Severus, but he 
nly married in 229, and his daughter, if he even had one, can only 
hve been four or five years old. at Hippolytus’ death. Le Moyne 
entified her with Severa the wife of Philippus; and Déllinger (p. 25) 
ith Julia Aquilia Severa the second wife of Elagabalus. But no 
ason is given why either of these should have been called Severina. 
5. no princess of the name is known, it is perhaps better to identify 
6 βασιλὶς of Theodoret with Julia Mammeea the mother of Alexander. 

22%, A letter to a certain princess twice quoted by Theodoret (AR. 
. b,c). See the last section. 

The quotation in Anal. Syriac. p. 87 sq (Lagarde) belongs not im- 
obably to the same work. It runs as follows ; 

‘OF HIPPOLYTUS BISHOP AND MARTYR On the Resurrection to 
Empress Mammea ; for she was the mother of Alexander who was 
that time emperor of the Romans.’ 

‘ Now the cause of the heresies of the Nicolaitans was first brought 
ward in like manner by Nicolas—he was one of the deacons who were 
ected at the first-and is recorded in the Acts—when he was troubled 
y strange spirits saying that the resurrection had taken place; sup- 
osing that the resurrection was to believe in the Messiah and to be 
aptized, not meaning the resurrection of the flesh.’ 

To him Hippolytus goes on to trace the errors of Hymenzeus and 
hiletus and of the Gnostics; and he couples with them the false 
sachers at Corinth, explaining S. Paul’s language ‘we have this treasure 
earthen vessels’ of the gift of immortality; for ‘what is our dead 
esh but these vessels before mentioned, into which the treasure of 
acorruption being put makes them immortal?’ 

This may be the passage to which Stephanus Gobarus refers 
4R. 20), but the same opinion was expressed by Hippolytus in both 
is general works on Heresies. Ἢ 





me eh -- “ὦ 

















398 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


































23. On the Resmerection, mentioned by Jerome (AR. 8. b), a 
on the Chair (περὶ Θεοῦ καὶ σαρκὸς ἀναστάσεως). 

24. A Homily on the praise of our Lord and Saviour (xpoco, 
de Laude Domini Salvatoris) mentioned by Jerome as having been de 
livered before Origen. I shall have occasion to refer to this again, a 
it is one of our very few chronological land-marks (see below, p. 42 
It is possible that this homily is the περὶ οἰκονομίας of the Chair an 
Ebedjesu (A. 2. 37). a 

25. On Christ and Antichrist. This work is mentioned by Jerom 
under the title ‘de Antichristo,’ and under the further title περὶ Xpua τοῖ 
καὶ ᾿Αντιχρίστου by Photius who read it. Ἢ 

A spurious work bearing the title περὶ τῆς συντελείας τοῦ κόσμου κα 
περὶ τοῦ ᾿Αντιχρίστου καὶ εἰς τὴν δευτέραν παρουσίὰν τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἴησο 
Χριστοῦ was published by Joannes Picus (Paris 1556), and still retain r 
place in the editions (e.g. Fabricius 1. p. 4 sq, Lagarde p. 92); but it 
universally condemned as spurious. It begins ᾿Επειδὴ of μακάριοι κιτιλ 

The genuine treatise, which was read by Photius, entitled zept τὸ 
σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ περὶ τοῦ ᾿Αντιχρίστου was first publishet 
by Gudius (Paris 1611), and will be found in Fabricius 1. p. 4 sq ar 
in Lagarde p. 1—36. It is apparently almost complete. It is address 
to one ‘brother Theophilus,’ possibly like the Theophilus whose na n 
the Acts bears on the forefront, an imaginary person; and, as it deal 
with prophecy affecting the future of the Roman empire, Hippolyt 
not unnaturally cautions his friend in the language of S. Paul 1 
Timothy to guard the deposit carefully, and only to commit it to fai nf 
and discreet disciples. The general scheme of the world’s history am 
the end of all things is the same which this father has evolve 
from Daniel’s prophecy as described above; though in some respects it 
more fully drawn out. He deals with the mystical number of the bea 
in the Apocalypse, mentioning the alternative explanations terra 
eyan@ac, and Aateinoc, as Irenzeus has done before him (aer. v. 30. 1 
and deciding in favour of the last (p. 26). For other obligations 
Hippolytus to his master in the work on Antichrist see Overbeck p. 70 

On the whole there seems to be reasonable ground for Overb τ 
contention (p. 88 sq), that this work was written at a time of per 
cution, and therefore presumably in the age of Severus, about a.D. 2 
The awe of the Roman power, and the warnings of caution, both pe 
in this direction. The coincidences of interpretation, which he menti 
between Hippolytus and Origen, are curious but not sufficient, I th 
to establish on either side any direct obligation of the one from 
other ; which is improbable in itself. Ἢ 


Dp. 
“ἢ 
4 

ij 


ΡΥ ae ee 































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 399 


26. On the Holy Theophany (cis ta ἅγια θεοφάνεια). This is a 
iscourse on the Baptism of our Lord, preserved in a Gale ms Trin. 
oll. 0. 5. 36 at Cambridge. It was probably addressed to candidates 
hen they presented themselves for baptism (see Wordsworth, p. 224). 
hough it is nowhere quoted (at least under this name), so far as I am 


are, by ancient writers, there is nothing which Hippolytus might not 
ve written. 


C. HISTORICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL. 

27. Chronica. This work is mentioned on the Chair, and even 
ithout this certification it contains unquestionable internal evidence of 
authorship. The original Greek is lost; but it is extant in two 
atin translations, of which the one first published by Canisius may 
2 conveniently consulted in Ducange Chron. Pasch. τι. p. 96 sq (ed. 
onn.) under the title Liter Generationis; the other, being incorporated 
ι the collection of the Chronographer of 354, is admirably edited by 
ommsen. In this latter connexion I have had occasion to speak of it 
; length in my previous volume (1. p. 258 sq). It is brought down to 
Ὁ. 234 (the xiiith year of Alexander), when doubtless it was. com- 
eted. It is not in any strict sense a chronicle, but is partly ethno- 
aphy and partly chronography. One of its main purposes, as with 
ost early apologists, was to show the superior antiquity of the Jews to 
e Classical nations of antiquity. 

28. Paschal Tables’. This record is found inscribed in full on the 
es of the Chair, where it is described as ἀπόδειξις χρόνων τοῦ πάσχα 
τὰ [τὰ] ἐν τῷ πίνακι. The more important parts of it are given above 
#. 2). It is a calculation of the times of Easter according to a 
cle of sixteen years from a.D. 222—333. Salmon however has given 
ong reasons (/ermathena 1. Ὁ. 88 sq; Smith-Wace Dict. of Christ. 
7. s.v. ‘Hippolytus Romanus’ 111. p. 93) for supposing that it was 
ued A.D. 224. It has received great attention from Scaliger, Bucher, 
nchini, and others; and more recently from De Rossi and from 
Imon, who have rendered very efficient service. The table not only 
culates the Easters for more than a century, but likewise fixes all 
se mentioned in the Old Testament. Thus it affords many tests for 
ablishing the authorship of works ascribed to Hippolytus, as well as 
the criticism of his life in other ways. I shall have occasion more 
once to refer to it for these purposes. 

This work is mentioned by Eusebius _ construction the calculation was found to 
Jerome, as well as by others, and be incorrect, and it had to be abandoned 


s to have excited considerable at- ἰπ favour of other systems. 
ἢ, though within a few years after its 





A 8 EE 








400 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT 


Ὁ. HERESIOLOGICAL, 




















29. The Compendium against all the Heresies, an early work, founded 
on the lectures of Irenzeus. ‘This will be considered immediately in a 
section to itself. See below, p. 413 sq. a 

29*. Against INoetus. Reasons will be given presently for sup- 
posing that this is only the peroration of the previous treatise ; which i 15. 
known to have ended with the heresy of Noetus, 3 

29**, Against the Heresy of Artemon. The reasons for assigning | 
this work to Hippolytus have been given already (p. 377 sq). Ἷ. 

Only one objection of apparent force to the Hippolytean authorship 
is alleged by Salmon (p. 98). The anonymous writer against Artemon: 
(Euseb. H. Z. ν. 28) speaks of Victor as the 13th bishop of Rome | 
Peter; whereas in the Liberian list Cletus and Anacletus are made two 
distinct persons, so that he would be the 14th. I have anticipated this 
objection, and shown already (1. p. 282 sq) strong reasons for believin a 
that Hippolytus cannot be made responsible for these blunders in 
earlier part of the papal list. ἢ 

30. Against Marcion. This treatise is mentioned by Eusebius 
and Jerome and by others, and seems to have been one of considerable 
importance. As the fundamental idea of Marcion’s theory was the 
dual principle of good and evil (Ref Haer. vii. 30 ἀντιπαράθεσις ἀγαθοῖ 
καὶ κακοῦ, vii. 31 ἡ πρώτη καὶ καθαριωτάτη Μαρκίωνος αἵρεσις ἐξ ἀγαθ οὗ. 


Good and whence cometh the Evil. 
31. Concerning Spiritual Gifts (χαρισμάτων) the Apostolic Traditio 


explained. For reasons which I have. given in another instance (p. 395 
we must regard this as a single title, and not, as has been suggests’ 


works; (τ) 55 fins XA and (2) ἀποστολικὴ παράδοσις. ; 
ne Aavelte use of the word χαρίσματα seems to furnish the safest key tC 
the purport of this work. In his discourses on the ‘ Witch of End or 
and the ‘Blessings of Balaam’ Hippolytus sought to explain some of t 1 
anomalies attending the bestowal of these graces, and it seems proba 
that in this treatise he attempted to give something like a syste nat 
exposition of the whole subject based upon the Apostolic teachir 
The vagaries of Montanism more especially would force it on his notic 
as pressing for some reasonable treatment. How far and under wh 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 401 





































circumstances was the presence of moral or intellectual obliquity 
consistent with the bestowal of such exceptional graces from above? 
In fact all those questions which are suggested by S. Paul’s account of 
the abuses in the Corinthian Church, and many more which start up 
when we stir the question ourselves, must have been more rampant in 
early ages, when the disciples were face to face with similar phenomena 
in heathendom. | 

This I believe to have been the intention of our author’s treatise 
respecting charismata. On the other hand a wholly different explanation 
has been sometimes-given of it. It is supposed to have been a code 
of Church ordinances or constitutions regulating the appointment to 
ecclesiastical offices. Though this view does not commend itself at 
first sight, it can claim a large amount of traditional support of a certain 
kind. I cannot however reckon in this the statement of Jerome (AR. 
8. f) who quotes Hippolytus as explicit on the point whether fasting 
should be observed on the sabbath and whether there should be a 
daily celebration of the eucharist. He might have delivered himself of 
such dicta in many other places, as in his treatise on the Hexaemeron 
or in his books on the Paschal Festival or in his Demonstration against 
the Jews. But there is extant in the Alexandrian Church a code of 
38 Canons first published by Ludolf (a.p. 1691) and bearing the name 
of ‘ Abulides,’ which is only another transliteration of Hippolytus, here 
styled ‘first patriarch of the city of Rome’ and ‘chief bishop of the 
city of Rome’; though Wansleb who first called attention to these 
canons (1672, 1673) did not know who could be meant. These have 
been recently re-edited by Haneberg Canones S. Hippolyti Arabice 
(Monachii 1870), who has given reasons for supposing that they were 
originally written in Greek. Connected with these are the διατάξεις τῶν 
αὐτῶν ἁγίων ἀποστόλων περὶ xetporovidy διὰ Ἱππολύτου, as they are called 
in the Ms from which Lagarde has edited them (J@onac. 380), and their 
designation is similar in others (see Caspari 111. p. 387). Corresponding 
to the 8th Book of the Apostolic Constitutions are two early elements 
in Greek, from which it was apparently compounded and amplified : 
(1) Διδασκαλία τῶν ἁγίων ἀποστόλων περὶ χαρισμάτων corresponding to 
post. Const. viii. 1, 2 (Rel. Jur. Eccl. Ant. p. 1 sq, Lagarde), which 
ntains a sort of preface concerning spiritual gifts; and (2) Διατάξεις 
.7.X, as already given, corresponding to Afost. Const. vili. 4 sq (p. 5 sq) 
Ἢ ecclesiastical offices, etc. The name of Hippolytus is attached to 
is latter only. Yet here we have seemingly the explanation which we 
k. Not improbably to these ecclesiastical rules were prefixed (with 
difications) some remarks of the genuine Hippolytus from the work 


CLEM. II, 26 





402 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 








































whose title is given on the Chair; and in this way he came to be 
regarded as the author of the Canons themselves. It is hardly probable 
that even in their present comparatively simple form they can have 
been his product, as they are attributed to the several Apostles, ‘I Pete 
first, ‘I the beloved of the Lord,’ etc., and prefixed with the fiction 
‘We the twelve Apostles of the Lord met together in conjunction with 
Paul the vessel of election our fellow-Apostle and James the bishop 
and the rest of the presbyters and the seven deacons.’ We have also 
Canons extant in Syriac designated ‘Ordinances of the Apostles given 
through Hippolytus’ (Wright’s Syriac Catal. of MSS of Brit. Mus. τι. 
Pp. 949, 1033, 1037). All these Canons which are ascribed to 
Hippolytus are apparently simpler and allied forms of the ordinane 8 
in the present 8th Book of the Ajostolic Constitutions. As against 
supposition of the Hippolytean authorship however of the portion περ 
᾿ς χαρισμάτων, Caspari (111. p. 389) observes that it presents no coincidence: 
of conception with the parts of the genuine Hippolytus where we should” 
expect to find them, the conclusions of the efufatio and of th 
Treatise against Noetus ; whereas several may be found with the othe 
parts of the Apostolic Constitutions. On the other hand I note—whé 
seems to me a more weighty consideration on the other side—that ἢ 
this very short treatise consisting of five octavo pages great emphasis I 
laid on two topics which are characteristically Hippolytean; (1) 
enumeration of the prophetesses, to which Hippolytus devotes a sectio 
in his Chronicon (Mommsen p. 641, Ducange 11. p. 108); (2) The stre 
laid on the history of Balaam, which Hippolytus made the subject 
a special treatise (see above, p. 389). We can imagine how Hippol Ἢ 
starting from the discussion of the χαρίσματα generally, might ἢ 
been led to speak about some of the special gifts mentioned 1 
S. Paul’s two lists (1 Cor. xii. 28, Ephes. iv. 11), and that some lat 
editor, working up the material of Hippolytus and others, would give” 
it the name of this father. The fact that Hippolytus is designated “: 
acquaintance (γνώριμος) of the Apostles’ by Palladius (42. 11), as so 
as the early decades of the fifth century, is significant in this connexio 
It seems to indicate that some such work had been already attribut 
to him ; and at all events it shows that a spurious progeny was fath ; 
upon him as coeval with the Apostles. The next writer who so designa 
him, τοῦ παλαιοῦ καὶ γνωρίμου τῶν ἀποστόλων (AR. 16), lived in the mic 
of the sixth century. There seems therefore to be some ground for 
opinion of Bunsen (see esp. 11. p. 412 sq) and others, that the treat 
mentioned on the Chair lies at the root of the tradition respecting 
authorship ; but when with him we expunge the ‘ We the Apostiall 
























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 403 


other dramatic parts, we introduce a vital change into the document, 
which is altogether capricious, and we have no basis of criticism for the 
teproduction of the Canons of Hippolytus, if he drew up any. 

This appears to me the most probable account. At the same time 
I do not wish to speak with any confidence ; for this would not be 
justified without a thorough investigation of the origin and development 
Hof the Apostolic Constitutions such as I cannot pretend to have given. 

32. On the Passover. This work must be carefully distinguished 
from the Paschal Cycle with the Paschal tables engraved on the 
Chair. It is mentioned separately in the lists both of Eusebius and 
of Jerome. From the reference in the Chron. Pasch. (AR. 22) we find 
at it consisted of more than one book. Along with Irenzeus and (so far 
we know) all the Asiatic fathers of the school of S. John’, Hippolytus 
aintained that our Lord Himself was the true Passover, suffering on 
Θ 14th Nisan, and thus superseding the legal Jewish passover. This 
position he took up also in both his general books against the heresies, 
Bhe early Compendium and the later Refutatio. It may be regarded 
herefore as written to refute the Quartodecimans, as the fragments in 
he Chron. Pasch. (42. 22) show. 
33. The Philosophumena or Refutation of All FTeresies, his final 
york, probably left incomplete at his death. This will demand a 
ection to itself*, 


SPURIOUS HIPPOLVTEAN WORKS. 


(1) The treatise Contra Beronem et Helicem (Ὁ) haereticos de Theo- 
sta et Incarnatione Sermo is now almost universally allowed to be 
“Ppurious, though accepted as genuine by Dorner (Lehre v. der Person 
hristi τ᾿ p. 536 sq) and by Bunsen (1. p. 448 sq) in our own generation, 
5 at an earlier date it had been defended by Bull. Its rejection by most 
ent critics, e.g. Haenell, Kimmel, Fock, Dollinger, Overbeck, Caspari, 
aseke, and Salmon, has left it without a friend ; and I have no inten- 
on of defending a hopeless cause. | 
ἢ Anastasius the Apocrisiarius, or Papal Nuncio at Constantinople (a.p. 
95), saw this work at Constantinople and made a few extracts from it, 
“hich are preserved (AR. 24). It is quoted also (AR. 30) by Nicephorus 
f Constantinople [+ a.p. 828]. The manuscripts vary between Ἥλικος 
2 This is distinctly the case with rest of the school; see Essays on Super- 
audius Apollinaris, whose language atural Religion, p. 237 sq. 
ppolytus closely resembles; and there * [The section in question was never 
mo ground for separating him from the _written.] 


26—2 


404 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 































or Ἡλικίονος (Ἡλικίωνος) as the companion heretic of Bero or Vero. 
But no Helix or Helicion is mentioned in the extant fragments; wherea 
in one place we read (p. 61, Lagarde) Βήρων τις ἔναγχος μεθ᾽ ἑτέρω 
τινῶν τὴν Βαλεντίνου φαντασίαν ἀφέντες κιτιλ. There can be little or 
no doubt therefore that Fabricius (Hippol. ΟΖ. 1. p. 225) was right in his 
conjecture ἡλικιωτῶν αἱρετικῶν for Ἥλικος τῶν αἱρετικῶν. On the title 
see Draseke Zahrb. f. Prot. Theol. x. p. 342 sq. 4 
Of this Vero or Bero we never hear in the heresiological writers of 
the fifth and earlier centuries. ‘This would be astonishing if the treatise 
had been genuine or even early. Epiphanius and Philaster and Theo- 
doret—the two former especially—are eager to make their list as com- 
plete as possible. Moreover all the three were acquainted with the 
writings of Hippolytus; and therefore their silence would be the more 
inexplicable ; for nothing else so explicit or so important was written 
by Hippolytus on questions of Christology, and we should have expecte¢ 
frequent references and quotations to it. . 
Moreover, when we investigate the fragments themselves, the trea- 
tise condemns itself by its style and substance. It is much more philo 
sophical in its language than Hippolytusitself. It uses terms and mode: 
of thought which betoken a later stage of the Christological controversy. 
On this point however it should be observed that κένωσιν is probably ἃ 
false reading and that we should probably read ἕνωσιν instead (Drasekt 
l.c. p. 344 sq). Bunsen, accepting the work as genuine, considers on 
expression only ἐκ τῆς mavayias ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας to be interpolate: 
(1. p. 448). Ifthis had been the only difficulty, we should have agree 
with him that it ‘proves nothing against the authenticity of the work 
But, as Déllinger (p. 319 sq) points out, the terminology bristles wit 
difficulties on the supposition that it was a work of the beginning ¢ 
the first half of the third century. Fock and Dédllinger connect 
with the Monophysite disputes, and assign it to the sixth or seven’ 
century. The subject has more recently been investigated by Drase 
(Zeitschr. f. Wiss. Theol, Xx1x. p. 291 sq, 1886), who would assign it 
a somewhat earlier date. He ascribes it to the Apollinarian school, a 
supposes it to have been written not later than the early decades of 
fifth century (p. 318). I need not pursue the subject further. It has | 
bearing on my theme, the life and opinions of Hippolytus, though 
without an interest for the later stages of the Christological controvei 
(2) A story told at length by Palladius (42. 11), in which a vil 
was placed in great danger to her chastity by the iniquity of the magis 
and only rescued by the continence and purity of a youth to who 
honour was fet be sacrificed, | 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 405 




















(3) The Arabic Catena on the Pentateuch, of which mention has 
been made already (p. 390). 

(4) The treatise De Consummatione Mundi, which for some time 
took the place of the genuine work De Christo et Antichristo; see 
above, p. 398. . 

(5) The Afostolical Canons, which however are perhaps not without 
some foundation of fact; see above, p. 401 sq. 





ὃ 6. 
THE MURATORIAN FRAGMENT, 


In the early part of his work (Haer. i. 15, 16) Irenzus quotes, 
rom one whom he describes as ‘the divine elder and herald of the 
ruth,’ some verses (ἐμμέτρως) written against the Valentinian heretic 
Marcus. They run as follows ; 


Εἰδωλοποιὲ Mapxe καὶ τερατοσκόπε, 
ἀστρολογικῆς ἔμπειρε καὶ μαγικῆς τέχνης, 
δί ὧν κρατύνεις τῆς πλάνης τὰ διδάγματα, 
σημεῖα δεικνὺς τοῖς ὑπὸ σοῦ πλανωμένοις, 
ἀποστατικῆς δυνάμεως ἐγχειρήματα, 

ἅ σοι χορηγεῖ σὸς πατὴρ Σατᾶν ἀεὶ 

δι ἀγγελικῆς δυνάμεως ᾿Αζαζὴλ ποιεῖν " 
ἔχων σε πρόδρομον ἀντιθέου πανουργίας, 


pme slight corrections being made in the sixth line on which all 
itics are agreed, and which are suggested by the ancient Latin 
srsion. It will be observed that our poet is very fond of trisyllabic 
et, and that more especially he affects anapests in the fourth and 
places. I should add that, as the editors give his text, he does 
ot shrink from a spondee 7” guarto ; but we might easily relieve him 
this monstrosity by reading δυνάμιος in both cases, thus giving him 
Ὁ more of his favourite anapzests instead. 
In this instance the editors could not well go wrong; for they were 
ned by éupérpws that some verse was coming, and have printed 
ordingly. But elsewhere, where there was no such warning, they 
5. altogether astray. Thus in Haer. iii. 17. 4 (a passage preserved 
ly in the ancient Latin version) Irenzeus is made to write ; 


_ ‘Aquae mixtum gypsum dans pro lacte seducat per similitudinem 
coloris, sicut quidam dixit superior nobis de omnibus qui quolibet 


406 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


















modo depravant quae sunt Dei et adulterant veritatem Jz Dei 
gypsum male miscetur, 


where the Claromontane ms has ‘veritatem Dei, Lacte,’ etc. This i 
the correct reading (é” being a repetition of the previous 722), but not 
the correct punctuation. The sentence should run, 4 


‘Dei lacte gypsum male miscetur,’ 
which in Greek is 


Θεοῦ γάλακτι μίγνυται γύψος κακῶς, 


modern civilisation. I may mention by the way that not a few of our 
homely proverbs are anticipated by the fathers. A lively writer lil 5 
Jerome would furnish several examples. One occurs to me at the 
moment, ‘equi dentes inspicere donati,’ ‘to look a gift horse in the 
mouth,’ which Jerome calls ‘a vulgar proverb’ even in his own day 
(vil. p. 538, Vallarsi). 4 
Nor is this the only instance in which the editors of Irenzu 
have been at fault. In Aaer. 1. praef. 2 likewise this father quotes ont 
whom he styles in the same way (6 κρείττων ἡμῶν, here however rendered 
melior nobis in the Latin), and who is doubtless the same person. Her 
the original Greek is happily preserved, which I will write out as il 
ought to be written, separating the prose from the verse (without how 
ever altering a single word); 
καθὼς ὑπὸ τοῦ κρείττονος ἡμῶν εἴρηται ἐπὶ τῶν τοιούτων [τῶν αἱρετικῶ 
ὅτι 
λίθον τὸν τίμιον 

σμάραγδον ὄντα καὶ πολυτίμητόν τισιν 

ὕαλος ἐνυβρίζει διὰ τέχνης 
παρομοιουμένη, ὅποταν μὴ παρῇ ὁ σθένων δοκιμάσαι καὶ 

τέχνῃ διελέγξαι τὴν πανούργως γενομένην 
ὅταν δὲ 

: ἐπιμιγῇ 
ὁ χαλκὸς εἰς τὸν ἄργυρον, τίς εὐκόλως 
δυνήσεται τοῦτον ἀκεραίως δοκιμάσαι; 


where however for ἀκεραίως we should probably read ἀκέραιος, as 
Latin has ‘rudis quum sit.’ Very slight alterations would bring 
of the context into the verses. Thus ὁμοιουμένη might be substit 
for παρομοιουμένη, and ὅταν yap for ὅταν δὲ, the Latin having ‘q 
enim.’ But this is sufficient to show that several verses are embet 
in a passage which the editors print continuously as prose. Prol 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 407 


































‘our superior’ in the two last passages is the same with the ‘divine 
Ider’ who writes against Marcus in the first. 

The employment of verse or of rhythm for theological teaching was 
ot uncommon in these early ages. The heretics had their own psalms, 
}in which they propounded their favourite doctrines. From the orthodox 
oint of view Clement of Alexandria, at the close of his Paedagogus 
I. p. 312 sq), has written a metrical hymn in honour of Christ for 
ucational purposes. An anonymous contemporary of Clement, who 
been identified for excellent reasons with Hippolytus, is quoted by 
usebius (77. Z. v. 28) as referring to the ‘numerous psalms and songs’ 
'ἱψαλμοὶ ὅσοι καὶ wdat) written by believers in which Christ is spoken of 
jas God. Again; in the fourth century the notorious Zha/ia of Arius, 
hich was sung in the streets and taverns of Alexandria, will occur to 
on the one side, and the poems of the elder and younger Apollinaris 
n the other. More especially, where a memoria technica was needed, as 
the list of the Canon, verse was naturally employed as a medium. 
n the last quarter of the fourth century we have two such metrical 
ists of the Scriptures—the one by Amphilochius, the other by Gregory 
azianzen. 

The Muratorian Canon was discovered and published by Muratori 
1740 from a MS in the Ambrosian Library at Milan, originally taken 
om the ancient monastery of Bobbio. It contains a canon of the 
ew Testament. It is mutilated at the beginning so that it commences 
the middle of the second Gospel; and it ends in the midst of an 
ccount of certain apocryphal books. Muratori himself attributed it to 
saius, the contemporary of Hippolytus, who flourished under Zephyri- 
hus. All the necessary information respecting the text will be found 
Tregelles’s Canon Muratorianus (Oxford, 1867), and in Westcott’s 
istory of the Canon Appx C. 

It is generally allowed that this catalogue emanated from Rome, as 
deed the mention of ‘the city’ implies. Of its date we may say that 
is ascribed by different critics to various epochs between about a.D. 
60 and A.D. 220. The general opinion also is that the document was 
itten in Greek and that we possess only a not very skilful, though 
teral, translation, greatly corrupted however in the course of transmis- 
ion. On the other hand Hesse in his important monograph (Das 
uratoristhe Fragment, Giessen 1873) maintains that Latin was the 
iginal language; and he has succeeded in convincing Caspari (Zau/f- 
dol 111. p. 410) and one or two others. His reasons however seem 
me to be wholly inadequate. Thus he lays stress on such forms as 
nia, catholica, etc., maintaining that these are admissible in Latin. 





408 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 

























This may be perfectly true, but proves nothing. I cannot doubt that 
the usual view is correct. The literature of the Roman Church wa 
still Greek, as we see from the example of Hippolytus; even tho oh 
Victor, being an African, may have written in Latin. Moreover I 
am quite unable to explain the phenomena of the document, if it is 
preserved to us in its original language. ‘The whole cast and connexion 
of the sentences are Greek. In answer to this view, it is urged that on 
this hypothesis the document ought to lend itself easily for retranslation 
into Greek, and that the Greek reproduction ought to throw back li 
on the meaning of the Latin. To this objection the following pag 
will, I trust, be a sufficient answer. a 

But it does not seem to have occurred to anyone that the original 
document was written in verse, like the corresponding lists of Amphilo- 
chius and Gregory Nazianzen. Yet the more I study the work, 
stronger does this conviction grow. Neither in phraseology nor in 
substance does it resemble a prose document. There is an absence 
of freedom and equability in the treatment. This is the more remark- 
able where the writer is dealing with a mere list pure and simple. It is 
obvious that he has to grapple with a medium which constrains him 
and determines what form any particular statement shall take. a 

The Muratorian Fragment has been translated into Greek prose bi 
Lagarde for Bunsen (Anmalecta Antenicena τ. p. 142 sq), and by Hilgen- 
feld (Zinleitung in das N. T. p. 97 sq). Either of these translations 
would, as it seems to me, justify the contention that Greek was tht 
original language of the fragment, for it reads so much more naturall 
than in the Latin. I had not read either of these when I made my ow 
verse renderings ; but I note with satisfaction that the last words of fl 
fragment, 


Asianum Cataphrygum constitutorem, 
are translated unconsciously by Hilgenfeld into an iambic line, 
tov τῶν ᾿Ασιανῶν Καταφρύγων καταστάτην, 


as I had translated it, except that I should substitute κατὰ Φρύγας ἢ 

Καταφρύγων, since the Montanists are always (so far as I have notice 
called in Greek οἱ Φρύγες or of κατὰ Φρύγας, never ot Kari 5 
all events for some centuries’. But would not ‘constitutor’ be a strat 


Omn. Haer. 7 ‘qui dicuntur secund 


1 They are οἱ Φρύγες in Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 13, p. 605; 2. vii. 17, p. 605; 
Hippol. Haer. viii. pref., 19, x. 253 
Euseb. H. 25. iv. 27, v. 16; but [οἱ] 
κατὰ Φρύγας Ps-Tertull. [Hippol.] adv. 


vi. 20; Epiphan. Haer. xlviii. 12, 14 





Phrygas,’ Euseb. H. 2. ii. 25, v- 


413, 416. In the title of Epiphani 
have καταφρυγαστῶν, but this is; orc 


ΝΜ 
ag 

ao 
4 


— .-- in 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 409 


word for a ‘founder’ in an original Latin prose document? Why also 
should these Cataphrygians be called Asiatic, except that an epithet was 
wanting to fill up a line? 

Again: the author of Supernatural Religion, 11. p. 385, accuses the 
writer of this Canon of going so far as to ‘ falsify’ the words of S. John’s 


} First Epistle in his zeal to get evidence for the apostolic authorship of 


the Fourth Gospel. He was a clumsy blunderer, if this were his design; 
for his abridgment has considerably weakened the force of the original. 
But his motive, I believe, was much more innocent. He had to 
squeeze the language of the epistle into his own verse ; and accordingly 
he wrote (as represented by his translator), 


dicens in semetipsum quae vidimus oculis 
nostris et auribus audivimus et manus 
| nostrae palpaverunt haec scripsimus vobis, 


which may have run in the Greek ; 
λέγων 
ἐς ἑαυτόν: ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἅ θ᾽ ἑωράκαμεν, 
κἀκήκοαμεν τοῖς ὠσίν, αἱ θ᾽ ἡμῶν χέρες 
ἐψηλάφησαν, ὗμιν avr ἐγράψαμεν. 
Now let us see what can be made of some longer passages ; 
(x) 
acta autem omnium apostolorum 
sub uno libro scripta sunt Lucas obtimo Theophi- 
lo comprendit quia sub praesentia ejus singula 
gerebantur sicuti et semote passionem Petri 
evidenter declarat sed et profectionem Pauli ab ur- 
be ad Spaniam proficiscentis. Epistulae autem 
Pauli quae a quo loco vel qua ex causa directae 
- sint volentibus intelligere ipsae declarant. 
Primum omnium Corinthiis scysma heresis in- 
terdicens deinceps Galatis circumcisionem 
Romanis autem ordinem scripturarum sed et 
principium earum esse Christum intimans. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀποστόλων 
πράξεις ἁπάντων βιβλίον ὑφ᾽ ἕν γεγραμμένας 
Λουκᾶς κρατίστῳ Θεοφίλῳ συλλαμβάνει, 


αὐτοῦ παρόντος ὡς ἕκαστ᾽ ἐπράττετο" 





corruption for τῶν κατὰ Φρύγας, though Monk, Serm. 130 (p. 1845, Migne). 
error is older than Antiochus the 


410 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


ε ‘ , ae ae ε \ , 
ws καὶ μακράν [γ᾽ ἀπόντος ἡ σιγὴ] πάθος 
Πέτρου προφαίνει κἀκ πόλεως δ᾽ εἰς Σπανίαν 
Παύλου πορείαν ἐκπορευομένου σαφῶς. 
Παύλου δ᾽ ἐπιστολαὶ τίνες, ἐκ τίνος τόπου, 
ἐπεστάλησαν, ἢ ποίας ἐξ αἰτίας, 
δηλοῦσιν αὐταὶ τοῖσι βουλομένοις νοεῖν" 

Py 5€ 4 2. ΝΣ , 
πρῶτόν ye πάντων αἱρέσεως Κορινθίοις 

top. a: ) tra Tada ἢ 
σχίσμ᾽ ἀπαγορεύων, εἶτα ταις περιτομήν, 
γραφῶν δὲ Ῥωμαίοισι τάξιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ 


> Ν > , ‘ μι ld 
ἀρχὴν ἐκείνων Χριστὸν ὄντα δεικνύων. 









For the form and quantity of this last word there is good Attic authority 4 
(Menander in Fragm. Comm. Graec. Iv. pp. 93, 245). As regards the 
martyrdom of S. Peter and the j journey of S. Paul to Spain, there can be 
little doubt, I think, as to the meaning. As S. Luke only records wh at 
took place within his own cognisance, his silence about these two 
important facts is regarded as evidence that they happened in his 
absence. But whether or not some words have fallen out in the Latin, 
such as I have given in the Greek, ‘semote [quum esset, silentium 
ejus] evidenter declarat,’ I will not venture to say. 4 


(2) 
fertur etiam ad 
Laudicenses alia ad Alexandrinos Pauli no- 
mine finctae ad haeresim Marcionis et alia plu- 
ra quae ad catholicam ecclesiam recipi non 
potest fel enim cum melle misceri non con- 
gruit. 
φέρεται δὲ καὶ 
ἡ Λαοδικεῦσιν, ἡ δ᾽ ᾿Αλεξανδρεῦσιν αὖ, 
πρὸς Μαρκίωνος αἵρεσιν πεπλασμέναι 
ὀνόματι Παύλου: πολλά τ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ ἃ καθολικὴν 
οὐκ ἀναδέχεσθαι δυνατὸν εἰς ἐκκλησίαν" 
οὐ συμφέρει γὰρ μέλιτι μίγνυσθαι χολήν, 
which last line reminds us of the language of the earlier poet who vy 
"against the heretic Marcus. 


(3) 

pastorem vero 
nuperrime temporibus nostris in urbe 
Roma Herma conscripsit sedente cathe- 
dram urbis Romae ecclesiae Pio eps fratre 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 411: 


ejus et ideo legi eum quidem oportet se pu- 
blicare vero in ecclesia populo neque inter 
prophetas completum numero neque inter 
apostolos in finem temporum potest. 


τὸν δὲ Ποιμένα 
νεωστὶ καιροῖς ἡμετέροις ἐν τῇ πόλει 
Ῥώμῃ συνέγραψεν ἐπικαθημένου Πίου 
Ἑρμᾶς καθέδραν τῆσδε Ῥωμαίων πόλεως 
ἐκκλησίας ἀδελφὸς ὧν ἐπισκόπου" 
“ > > 3 , ld > > 3 ‘4 
ὥστ᾽ οὖν ἀναγινώσκειν μέν, ἐν δ᾽ ἐκκλησίᾳ 
οὐ δημοσιεύεσθαί σφε τῷ λαῷ χρεών" 
οὐδ᾽ ἐν προφήταις δυνατὸν οὐδὲ συντελεῖν 
> , 5 3 Ἁ » , , 
ἀποστόλων és ἀριθμὸν εἰς τέλος χρόνων, 





























here I am disposed to think that ‘completum numero’ is a clumsy 
ranslation, perhaps corrupted by transcription, of the idiomatic Greek 
ελεῖν és ἀριθμόν,“ to be classed among the number’; but it would 
t be difficult to substitute a more literal rendering of the Latin. In 
his passage the repetitions ‘in urbe roma,’ ‘urbis romae,’ ‘sedente 
thedram,’ ‘ecclesiae episcopus,’ lead me to suspect that we have here 
}some surplusage introduced for the sake of foreigners, when the original 
ocument was translated into Latin for the use of (say) the African 
hurches; but I have given them the benefit of the doubt, and 
etranslated them. 

But if this catalogue was originally written in Greek verse, who was 
he poet? In a paper written some time ago (Hermathena τ. Ὁ. 82 sq) 
n the ‘Chronology of Hippolytus’ Salmon (p. 122 sq) discussed at 
Wength the notice of the authorship of Hermas, which the Muratorian 
anon has in common with the Liberian Catalogue, of which the earlier 
rtion is attributed on fairly satisfactory grounds to Hippolytus. He 
ere maintains that the writer’s ‘nuperrime temporibus nostris’ cannot 
too strictly pressed ; that a change came over the Church after the 
e of Irenzus and Clement of Alexandria, who both quote the 
herd with deference; that this change took place in the interval 
tween the two treatises of Tertullian, De Oratione and De Pudicitia, 
e work being treated with respect in the former and rejected in the 
tter, as having been classed ‘ by every council of your churches among 
se and apocryphal books’ ; and that the statement in the M/uratorian 
‘anon was the great instrument in effecting this change. The 
uratorian Canon on this showing therefore may be placed at the 
ose of the first century or the beginning of the second, so that there 


































412 EPISTLES OF 5, CLEMENT. 


is no difficulty in ascribing it to Hippolytus, or at least in assuming it 
to have been known to him, and thus to have suggested the note whic 
we find in the Liberian Catalogue. As however I do not see 
Salmon elsewhere (Smith and Wace, Dict. of Christ. Biogr. ss. w. 
‘Hippolytus,’ ‘Muratorian Canon’) has so ascribed it, though he still 
maintains the later date, I presume that he has changed his mind. 

Now I should not be prepared to attribute an influence so great to 
this document, especially if it came from Hippolytus, who was ἃ 
daggers drawn with the heads of the Roman Church. But nevertheless 
I am ready to accept the Hippolytean authorship. To this view I am 
predisposed by the fact that there was no one else in Rome at thi 
time, so far as we know, competent to produce it. It agrees in all 
respects with the Canon of Hippolytus; both in its rejection of the 
Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and its accept 
ance of the genuineness of the Apocalypse. Moreover the lang 
used of the Shepherd of Hermas is strongly in favour of 
attribution to Hippolytus. But I seem also to see elsewhere direct 
evidence of the Hippolytean authorship. Among the works 
Hippolytus, whose titles are inscribed on his Chair, we read 
@Aatictiacactacrpagac. If correctly copied, this represents dal 
εἰς πάσας τὰς γραφάς, ‘odes’ or ‘verses on all the Scriptures.’ 
might represent two titles; (1) @daé, and (2) εἰς πάσας τὰς ypadas. 
this case the #dat would only be available as showing that Hippolytus 
wrote metrical compositions, of which these verses on the Canon might 
be one ; and εἰς πάσας τὰς γραφὰς would represent his exegetical wo cs 
which, as we learn from Jerome, were numerous, though it would be an 
exaggeration. But against this separation two objections lie: (1) In ne 
other case in this inscription are titles of two works run together in one lin 
(see above, pp. 325, 395). Thus yponikon has a line to itself, thoug! 
only one word. (2) The inscriber has already named the commentary 
‘On the Psalms,’ not to mention the treatise on the ‘Witch of Endor 
(τὴν ἐγγαστρίμυθον) and the ‘Defence of the Gospel and Apocalypst 
of John,’ which might all have been dispensed with, if εἰς πάσας 7 
γραφὰς were a comprehensive description of his commentaries and othe 
exegetical works. What then were these ‘odes referring to all th 
Scriptures’? Might they not describe two metrical composition 0 
relating to the Canon of the Old and New Testament respective i 
which the latter only is preserved, being itself mutilated at tl 
beginning? If this were not sufficient to account for the expressic 
the collection might, like Gregory Nazianzen’s, have included Ὁ 0€ 
‘On the Patriarchs,’ ‘On the Plagues of Egypt,’ ‘On the Decalog 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 413 























On Elijah and Elisha,’ ‘On the Miracles of Christ,’ ‘On the Parables 
Christ,’ etc. But this seems to me unnecessary. Before the extant 
eaves in the ms, which begin abruptly in the middle of the description 
f S. Mark, a sheet or sheets are wanting, and these may have contained 
he Canon of the Old Testament. This was at least as important as 
he Canon of the New in the eyes of the early fathers, and’ precedes it 
almost every ancient list, e.g. in Athanasius and Epiphanius, in 
mphilochius and Gregory Nazianzen. The fragment on the Canon is 
ollowed in the ms by a passage from 5. Ambrose (De Adbrah. i. 3, 
15, 16, Op. τ. p. 289); and Jerome tells us (Zfis¢. Ixxxiv. 7) of 
3. Ambrose that he ‘sic Hexaemeron illius [Origenis] compilavit, ut 
agis Hippolyti sententias Basiliique segueretur” If Jerome does not 
eat the two works of Hippolytus εἰς τὴν ἑξαήμερον and εἰς τὰ μετὰ τὴν 
ξαήμερον as one, at all events Ambrose would use the second as freely 
he used the first. May we not then have here possibly (I will not 
ay more) a passage from a Latin translation of Hippolytus, which 
Ambrose borrowed verbatim ? 

If Hippolytus be the author of this Canon, it was probably one of 
is earliest works. He seems to have died about a.p. 236, being then 
advanced age. Thus his birth may be placed about Α.Ὁ. 155—160. 
is literary activity began early; for his Compendium on Heresies for 
Farious reasons which I will explain presently cannot well be placed 
fter about A.D. 185 or 190. In this case he might say with only a 
atural exaggeration that Hermas wrote the Shepherd ‘temporibus 
ostris,’ according to his own view of the authorship, which may or may 
ot have been correct. 

I may add that in the above translations I have avoided many 
etrical licenses which Hippolytus might have used. My task would 
ave been much easier if I had indulged in such monstrosities as we 
nd even in cultured writers like Amphilochius and Gregory Nazianzen, 
iting on the same theme. 


§ 7. 
THE COMPENDIUM AGAINST ALL THE HERESIES. 


A work by Hippolytus ‘against all the Heresies’ was widely known 
mong early writers. It is mentioned by Eusebius and Jerome, it 
pplied Epiphanius and Philaster largely with materials, and it is 
robably quoted by the Roman Bishop Gelasius. Photius (42. 32. b) 
described this work, which he calls σύνταγμα ‘a compendium,’ 
er fully. 


414 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 

































He speaks of it as a little book (βιβλιδάριον). It comprised thir y- 
two heresies, beginning with the Dositheans and ending with Noetus 
and the Noetians. It was founded on some lectures of Irenzeus (ope 
λοῦντος Eipyvaiov), in which these heresies were submitted to re - 
tations (ἐλέγχοις ὑποβληθῆναι). It was clear, grave, and terse in ΜΝ 
though it fell short of the Attic diction. It was not absolutely accure 
in some respects, as for instance in stating that the Epistle to the 
Hebrews was not written by S. Paul. | a ᾿ 

When the great work of Hippolytus—the so-called Philosoph 
mena—was discovered and published for the first time by Miller, wh 0 
however ascribed it to Origen, several critics, who discerned the tru } 
authorship, believed that this was the identical work described by Photius. 
Bunsen for instance was very positive on this point; though in his 
later edition he speaks more circumspectly. But a careful inspection | 
showed that the identification was impossible. In the first place Photius 
calls the work which he describes ‘a little book.’ Now the Philosophu- 
mena is a large book, even in its present mutilated condition; and when 
it comprised the whole ten books—of which two are lost—could not by 
any figure of language be called βιβλιδάριον. Least of all, would it be 
designated a ‘Synopsis,’ or ‘Compendium’; for it is even diffuse in the 
treatment of most heresies of which it treats at all. Secondly; by no 
feat of arithmetic can the number of heresies which it includes pe 
summed up as thirty-two. _Z/irdly; it neither begins nor ends like the 
work described by Photius. The first heresy dealt with is not the 
Dosithean, but the Naassene; and the last is not the Noetian, but t 
Elchesaite. Of its relation to Irenzeus I shall have to speak presently re 

But though the Philosophumena is not the identical treatise men 
tioned by Photius, it recognises the existence of that treatise ; and it 
does so in such a way as to show that the two were the work of the 
same author. At the commencement of this longer work the 
states (AR. 1. a) that long ago (πάλαι) he had written to expose 
and refute the doctrines of the heretics, not minutely (kara λετ ) 
but roughly and in their broad features (ἀδρομερῶς); that they had fa i 
to profit by his moderation, and that now he must speak more pla 
and warn them of their eternal peril. Here then we have a descriptio 
as having been written at a much earlier date, of the ‘ Compendi :. 
seen by Photius. +i 

But is this ‘Compendium’ still extant in any form or other a 
the close of the Praescriptio Haereticorum of Tertullian is 8 , 
sort of appendix, a brief summary of heresies, which has lng b 
recognised as the work of some other author besides Tertullian, 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 415 


this list begins with the Dositheans, it was a somewhat obvious con- 
jecture that we have here a Latin translation or abridgement of Hip- 
polytus’ work. This conjecture is as old as Allix Fathers vindicated 
touching the Trinity p. 99, who is quoted by Waterland (Works v. 
. 227); but to Lipsius (Quellenkritik des Epiphanios, Wien 1865) the 
erit is due of rescuing the theory from the region of conjecture and 
lacing it on a solid scientific basis. 

The list of the Pseudo-Tertullian contains about thirty-two heresies, 
ne or two more or less, for it is not possible in every case to determine 
hether a particular designation is intended to specify a separate 
eresy or not. Moreover it begins, as I have said, with the Dositheans, 
Photius describes the Syntagma of Hippolytus as beginning; but 
instead of ending with Noetus, it substitutes another monarchian, 
raxeas. How this came to pass I shall explain presently. 

But the great testimony to the identity of the Pseudo-Tertullian with 
ippolytus is derived from a different source. Two later writers on 
eresies, Epiphanius and Philaster, have very much in common. They 
rote about the same time. Epiphanius commenced his work in the 
ear 374, and the 66th of the 80 sections was written in 376. The date 
f Philaster’s work cannot be decided with absolute certainty, but it 
eems to have been written about 380. Thus there is no chronological 
mpossibility in the common parts having been derived by Philaster 
trom Epiphanius. But the independence of the two is shown incon- 
estably by the two following considerations. 

(1) The same thirty-two heresies which appear in the Pseudo- 
ertullian run like a back-bone through the works of Epiphanius and 
hilaster, being supplemented in different ways by the two writers at 
ivers points, as far as the close of the second century when Hip- 
olytus wrote. 

(2) After the close of the second century, they have nothing in 
ommon, which suggests any plagiarism on either side. 
























The following list of heresies in the three writers, carried down as 
as the Arians, will make these phenomena plain : 


EPIPHANIUS PSEUDO-TERTULLIAN PHILASTER 
Ophites 
Cainites 
Sethites 
‘barism 





416 


EPIPHANIUS 


Hellenism :— 
Platonists 


Pythagoreans 


Stoics 
Epicureans 
Samaritans :— 
Gortheni 
Sebuaei 
Essenes 
Dositheus 
Judaism :— 
Scribes 
Pharisees 
Sadducees 


Hemerobaptists 


Ossenes 
Nazarenes 


(Nacoapator) 


Herodians 
Simon Magus 
Menander 
Saturninus 
Basilides 
Nicolaitans 
Gnostici 
Borborians 
(Barbelites) 


Carpocrates 
Cerinthus 
Nazarenes 


EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


PSEUDO-TERTULLIAN 


Dositheus 


Sadducees 
Pharisees 


Herodians 
Simon Magus 
Menander 
Saturninus 
Basilides 
Nicolaitans 


Ophites 
Cainites 
lesan 
arpocrates 
Cerinthus 


Ebionites 


















PHILASTER 


Dositheus 


Sadducees 
Pharisees 
Samaritans 


Nazarenes 
(Nazaraei) 
Essenes 
Heliognosti 
Frog-worshippers 
(Ranarum cultores) 
Musorites 
Musca-accaronites 
Troglodytes 
De Fortuna Caeli 
Baalites 
Astarites 
Moloch-worshippers 
De Ara Tophet 
Puteorites 
Worshippers of the B 
Serpent 
Worchineers in subte 
caves 
Thammuz-mourners 
Baalites (or Belites) 
Baal-worshippers ea 
de Pythonissa es 
Astar and Astaroth-worsh 
pers ae 
Sal tg 
imon Magus 
Menander 
Saturninus 
Basilides 
Nicolaitans 
(isti Barbelo ven 


Judaites 


Carpocrates 
Cerinthus 


Ebionites 



















Montanists 
Tascodrugites 
Pepuzians 
Quintillians 
Artotyrites 


ampsaeans 
(Elkesaeans) 


eodotus 


CLEM. II. 


EPIPHANIUS 


PSEUDO-TERTULLIAN 


Valentinus 
Ptolemaeus 
Secundus 
Heracleon 
Marcus 
Colarbasus 


Cerdon 
Marcion 
Lucan 
Apelles 


Tatian 


Cataphrygians :— 


secundum Proclum 
secundum Aeschinem 


Blastus 
Theodotus 


Melchizedekites 
(Theodotus IT) 


Praxeas 
(end) 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 


PHILASTER 


Valentinus 
Ptolemaeus 
Secundus 
Heracleon 
Marcus 
Colarbasus 


Cerdon 
Marcion 
Lucan 
Apelles 


Tatian 


Cataphrygians 


Theodotus 

De Patris et 
Filii substantia 

Melchizedekites 


Noetians 


Sabellians 
Praxeans) 
Seiatestaedais) 
Seleucus 
Hermias 
Proclianites 
(Hermeonites) 
Florians 
(Carpocratians) 
Quartodecimans 
Chilionetites 
Alogi 
Manichaeans 
Patricians 
Symmachians 
Paul of Samosata 
Photinus 
Arians 


27 


417 


Shed Cte tt ee ᾿ 





418 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 


















The original treatise of Hippolytus closed with the heresy of Noetu: 
In place of Noetus, the Latin abridgement substitutes another mo 
archian, Praxeas. With this Praxeas we are chiefly acquainted throug 
the tract of Tertullian directed against him’. He came to Rom 
during the pontificate of Zephyrinus (c. a.D. 199—217), with whom ἢ hi 
doctrines found favour, as we learn from Hippolytus that he embrz 
monarchian views. This is the pontiff respecting whom Tert 
writes (c. 1) ‘Duo negotia diaboli Praxeas Romae procuravit, prophetian 
expulit et haeresim intulit, paracletum fugavit et patrem cruci τ 
He moreover says that Praxeas had influenced this bishop by repr 
senting his predecessors as having maintained the orthodox doct in 
(praecessorum ejus auctoritates defendendo), just as the same charge | 
brought against the contemporary monarchians, Artemon and other 
by the author of the treatise directed against them, presume bl 
Hippolytus. There can be little doubt therefore that Tertullia 
writes during the episcopate of Zephyrinus*. It seems clear also thi 
Tertullian borrows from Hippolytus, and not conversely. 


ὡ 

ri 
j 

ee 


[This section was never finished "7 | 


§ 8. 
THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 


a 


[See above, p. 403. Not written. ] ἫΝ 


1 See the article Tertullian wider 2 T have stated elsewhere that Vi 
Praxeas by Noedechen in $¥ahrb. f. was the bishop attacked by Tertul 
Protest. Theol. X1V. p. 576 sq (1888), in but I am now convinced that Zephy 
which the relations of Tertullian to ἰ5 meant. ote ‘ 
Hippolytus are traced, showing that the 8 [For the approximate date 
African father is indebted to the Roman, Compendium see below, p. 426.] — 
and not conversely. 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 419 


ὃ 9. 


TABLE OF THE LITERARY WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 


























We are now in a position to tabulate the various writings of 
ippolytus by the aid of our chief authorities Eusebius, Jerome, 
eorgius Syncellus, Ebed-Jesu, Photius and Theodoret ; and to com- 
are the table thus obtained with the list of works inscribed on the 
hair. It will be noticed that the results are fairly satisfactory. If we 
nay consider ourselves justified in supposing that we have in the 
uratorian Canon and in the Liber Generationis translations of the 
δαὶ εἰς πάσας τὰς γραφὰς and the χρονικὰ respectively (see above, 
p. 258 sq, II. pp. 399, 405 sq), in almost every other case we can 
lentify the works mentioned on the Chair with the help of the several 
ts of Hippolytus’ writings, as they occur in the patristic notices of the 
aint. Of these lists that of Jerome is the most complete. Again, 
_ Kxtracts of some of the works themselves survive in the pages of 
_ Photius, Theodoret, etc., and throw much light on the scope and 
_ }hntents of the several treatises. It would be premature to conclude 
mat an absolute identification has in every instance been established. 
oubtless in the light of fresh discoveries our present results will 
quire modification. But it is fair to say that the table given below 
s been worked out at an expenditure of considerable care and 
‘Ftention. 
The writings of Hippolytus are arranged and numbered in the order 
en in § 5 of this chapter (see above, p. 388 sq), where the arguments 
τ the identification of the various writings will be found stated at 

eater length. 


27-—2 











(5 τι 707) 10pooy.L SPLOUN ong 580 55 
{8 7) “ΠοιΘΙΗ mnomynDpy M2 “τ 





























sppndh 
ΞΌ94 YON SPIMYDL 
SD}OLADL SD\XP 59 τη 202 UT 91 
(re “ΧῈ) sepms ἐ(ο "Χ}}) 5ΌΑΑΡ οΠοῖς 
snusumoyp (0 1 ‘yP) sANOUd (91 you aodym QoL amy 
-y Ff) suiyensny “(Ὁ [8 ‘yP) snukuoiely | ya0y anpaunds | -a amt \Yliavy ἸῸΝ 279: 07 Iq cr 
; Xana Say, ῬΦΡΊΧΡΥΙ ylurwas ay, gor lidar 519 γι 
(409 
Tun tg ° manruasaf ur *Uuso, €1 
140 ‘19g “wassy) mnruadel τι: 9 ae 
(6 "οι “yP) }210PO2L, τοσν ADL PYXOU S79 τ 27.5.00 Ul τι 
24|71.4021} 
nLvnod Ὁ. 515} -Μ.2. 1,222 49.0.47 wrod QL $79 1 
225792922227 I Σ o1 
(FE 
“yP) SepING soLamrloyog spynrodnu Spt 519 s1tgdanoad 2 6 
: (q “8 "οἱ ἐ 
*y PR) Χιχο SATKX “ΠΙΧΧ ‘1 "sq JeIOpOIyL, s2ujosq a snonyn[ A 540. $73] 8 
. ee ΠΣ 0g 
-ογ 92 1NDS 961 -andsovk[hp as 551} ἃ 
(q “8 “τ “YP) 
JOIOpoosy, toaay, at YN AADAVT, a+ 515 9 
iq 0s a7) ΡΒ : 
Ἴ Δ) ppyng (0. 10 3. 70 
(nipndgy, Ἵ "Δ) Mpoyra gos mIAOVE dane ¢ 
aodanil. aodart 
(0 58 “ΧΕ snuAuor1H ~03? ake Ὅ19 Ὁ. 519 aussouay uz | -¥0}2 alt Ὁ 1971 RL 59 € 
(3 ‘p 8 “ΧῈ) snukuosat yy aodanin32 aks $79 | uosamavxazy Ul aodann32 alt $73 os zt 
5 
[μορὉ unisozvanpy | -ndA spt spon sayooh| 1 
OILGOaAXY ANV ἸΝΟΙΊΒΙΕ Ὑ 
SATTZI 
SHINNOS XAHLO nsglagqd@d | -νας τηἱϑάύοσο | SAWANOXGIH SQIMASNT ΓΗ FHL 








SYUOM 














(8 “τῇ 
“ΧΕ snnoyd 50ρ Ασα ΘΟ “Ὀαϑηλοφορογ)ῷ 
(te "Ψ}») eT 
“OU0D sroliAk39 wXopu oL 59 «(τὸ “ΧΡ) 
“yoseg “πο χορ aojhy anor dau 


EF "ἃ opavBery noshon aoadz0 ale 5)9 

(0 “01 "Χ7}}} JoI0poay.y, sogaidaguoy 
5007, : (8 "τ -ypr) snnoyg nammady 
soedu $(€1 ΧΡ) SNISvIIX) 2ι7225)2. 49 
vison (4 "1 “}) snnoyg 4ordng 
“gig ams0zdyp ὉΔῸΝ ἐ{τὸ “yP) “"yoseg 
“UOIYD wndvLago s1393d1 50.. svovuy Sod 


[seeorqosouay 12927] 
(91 ‘YF) (6) πος πμζο 


EF "ἃ aprese] »᾽ϑαρῴοθρ mip Ὁ. 519 
(0 “τῇ 
"ὦ Ε) Βῃ ΠΟΙ ἃ 201.0;dX1.Lap pow nord y rau 


(+2-y py) ‘seuy svz0dnggp row SmaonLovap 
Wau ἐ(τὉ “7 yey ὍΠΟ snjzhoyorg rau 
(56) 28 -d ἀς Ἴδαν unanuUnyy py 
(9 ‘q ‘er yp) 
ἸΘΙΟΡΟΘΙΓΙ, YYoL01w2 var ὈΡ) ΟΌρΡΙ sodu 
& "If ΧΡ) 
snnoyd ‘(4 ΓἹ ‘ayy) sniAjoddrzy saz090 
SQLamu NOL Skt ydau 10 ‘soLanu noL Wau 


$njr/020N70 η09.ν 








namin 500. 


$13.9 
“p00 Spuroy 50. yox 


ὈΛΟΛΌΝ 
wXopu n0L aon 
-1u.t9104397033 aot 














DYISUT IT 


1uau 
-ΟἹ 0} V4JuOD 


29 )42 91 
SIumO SHSAIapP 


uouns unsogutag 
ja avyssog ouvoy 


OpsteyIUyUp aq 
StLOJDAOS* UOC] ap 
-207T ap nn m0000.u 


2240222,.4. 4725 9.7 ACT 





ὌΧ not ru 


namxdoy sodu 


$13.03 


“Ὁ SRL snopun sodu 


‘Ly akpndhnap 
alt amagdX ams ᾧ 
a9 wXopu gor you 



































[13 
te 
sr00gpdne ἰμγγγο...0 
“op amspriodnX rox 1€ 
AgNO QL 
4399 ἸῸΝ ΠΟρΘΌΛ Ὁ. yan of 
Pl 4 
62 
TVOISOTOISAY ALL ‘d 
Ἰ) 47. che 
a3 [pL] ὉΔῸΝ vXopu 
Q0L amagdX si31399.up gz 
acmy1aodX le 
IVOINOLSI FT 
ANV ‘TVOIDOTIONOUHD ἊΨ 
gz 
Sz 
Spj[rloaoyjo 109. te 
Sm3.0pLonap 
Sexdno ἸῸΝ 4090. au [7 
anmadug 
9Zz Sod senrtusdLodu Ze 
SQLADL QOL 





au ἸῸΝ (0 namipy yy 
od. 7Ὸ τυ, SOC 


δέ 














422 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


§ το. 


EARLY AND MIDDLE LIFE OF HIPPOLYTUS. ᾿ 3 




















At different points in his life Hippolytus was brought into persons 
contact with two great fathers of the Church, in youth or early manhog 
with Irenzeus, and in middle age with Origen. If we are able approxi 
mately to fix these dates, we shall obtain chronological landmarks 6 
some value, where all is uncertain. : ἢ 

τ. The connexion of Hippolytus with IrEN&us is obvious on al 
hands. To Irenzus he was largely indebted in both of his genera 
heresiological works—in his early Compendium, which was avowed 
founded upon the lectures of Irenzeus, and in his later Philosophumena, it 
which he borrows large passages, sometimes with and sometimes withou 
the name, from the written work of his master. Moreover it is hardl 
possible to read any considerable fragment of his other extant work 
without stumbling upon some thought or mode of expression 
reminds us of Irenzeus or the Asiatic elders. 

When and where then was this personal communication held ? 
polytus might himself have migrated, like Irenzeus, from Asia Minor 
early life ; and thus the instructions which he received from his ma: ι 
‘may have been given in his original Asiatic home. But his extat 
writings contain no indication that he was ever in the East, and ν 
therefore look to Rome itself, or at all events not farther than the Sou 
of Gaul, for the place of his Christian schooling. We are thus led - 
enquire when Irenzeus is known to have settled in the West, and mo 
especially when he is known to have visited Rome. 4 

If the story in the Appendix to the Moscow ms of the Leéter g " 
Smyrneans be correct, Irenzeus was teaching in Rome at the time 
Polycarp’s death a.p. 155’. At all events he paid a visit of lo 
shorter duration to the metropolis about A.D. 177, at the time of of 
persecutions in Vienne and Lyons, after which he himself beca 
bishop of Lyons in succession to the martyred Pothinus*. But ther 
no reason for supposing that these two occasions exhausted Ἶ 
residence at Rome. a, 

. On which occasion can Hippolytus have attended his lectu 
Irenzeus’ extant work on Heresies was written as far as the 3rd_ 
ram 


(iii. 3. 3) during the episcopate of Eleutherus (c. a.D. 177—190) @ 


: 
ee 
Τ 


1 Jenat. and Poly. I. p. 432 ed. 1 (1. εἄ, 2). 
448 ed. 2); I. p. 986 ed. τ (III. p. 402 2 Euseb. H.Z. v. 4.5. 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 423 





























he leaves the reference to this episcopate untouched (viv...rov τῆς 
ἢ ἐπισκοπῆς. ..κατέχει κλῆρον ᾿Ελεύθερος), it is a reasonable, though not an 
ἢ absolute, conclusion that Eleutherus was still living when the work was 

finally published. The earlier work however of Hippolytus, the 
3 Compendium, was founded on the lectures, and (as we may infer from 
the notice) betrayed no knowledge of any published work of his 

master. On the other hand the later treatise, the PAdlosophumena, 
ἡ quotes large passages, sometimes by name, from the extant work of 
Irenzeus. These facts seem to show that the Compendium of Hippolytus 
was written before the publication of the latter, 1.6. at all events before 
A.D. 190. And we should probably be right in assuming that the 
lectures were held not later than Α.Ὁ. 177, and before Irenzeus became 
bishop of Lyons. 

2. We are told by Jerome (AR. 8. b) that Hippolytus held in 
presence of ORIGEN who was then at Rome ‘a homily on the Praise of 
the Lord (προσομιλία de Laude Domini Salvatoris').’ Of Origen we 
are told in his own language that he had ‘desired to see the ancient 
} Church of the Romans’ (εὐξάμενος τὴν ἀρχαιοτάτην Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίαν 
ἰδεῖν), and that accordingly he went there in the time of Zephyrinus 
(c. A.D. 199—217), and after staying a short time (οὐ πολὺ διατρίψας) he 
returned to Alexandria (Euseb. H. £. vi. 14). It would seem from 
J this language that it was his only visit to the capital of the world. 
Considering the chronology of Origen’s life, who was born about 
A.D. 185 or 186, this visit would probably be paid towards the close 
of Zephyrinus’ episcopate. 

At this time Hippolytus must have been at the height of his 
activity. Before the close of the previous century, as we shall see, he 
was probably consecrated by his patron Victor to the episcopate with 
the charge of the miscellaneous population at the Harbour of Rome ; 
and, when Origen visited the metropolis, his feud with the heads of the 
Roman hierarchy must have been raging. 

It will be observed that, in repeating this incident, Photius (4707. 
121) by a strange blunder has ascribed to Hippolytus (42. 31. b) what 
Jerome (42. 8. b) tells us of Ambrosius, and thus makes Hippolytus 
the ‘task-master’ (ἐργοδιώκτης) of Origen. He must have misunderstood 
Jerome’s words ‘in hujus aemulationem.’ 


1 On the possible identity of this in the list of Hippolytus’ writings on the 
homily with a work (περὶ οἰκονομία) Chair, see above, p. 398. 
mentioned by Ebed-Jesu, and included 


424 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


§ 11. 
WAS HIPPOLYTUS A NOVATIAN? am 


























About the year 407 the Spanish poet Prudentius paid a visit to 
Rome. Among other sanctuaries which he visited were the basi 4 
and cemetery of Hippolytus on the north side of the Tiburtine Roa ad, 
just beyond the walls of the city, of which he has left us an elabors at 
description in one of his poems (4A. 10). Among other statements 
he tells us distinctly (ver. 19 sq) that Hippolytus ‘had once da ie 
with (attigerat) the schism of Novatus’; that he was afterwards con- 
demned to be executed; that on his way to martyrdom the crowds 
of Christian friends who accompanied him enquired of him, ‘which 
was the better party’ (‘quaenam secta foret melior’), the Novatians 
or the Catholics; and that he replied, ‘Flee from the accursed schism οἱ 
Novatus; restore yourselves to the Catholic people; let one only 
faith flourish, the faith that resides in the ancient temple which Paw 
claims and the chair of Peter. I repent me that I taught what | 
did; I discern as a martyr that reverence is due to that which I on Ὡς: 
thought alien to the service of God.’ It is unnecessary to enq ire 
at present whether Prudentius in his description confuses two on: 
temporaries bearing the same name, Hippolytus the soldier an 
Hippolytus the presbyter. Recent archzological discovery has show! 
that this charge of Novatianism belongs to Hippolytus ‘the presbyter’. 

Among the many archeological gains which we owe to De Rossi, 
not the least is the restoration of the inscription placed by popt 
Damasus [a.D. 366—384] in this sanctuary of Hippolytus and t 
by Prudentius. Though he has amplified the words of Damasus (a 
the exigencies of his poem suggested) the close resemblances betweer 
the two forbid us to doubt about the source of his information. No 
Damasus tells us (42. 7. a), likewise in verse, that ‘Hippolytus 4 
presbyter, when the commands of the tyrant pressed upon him. ὴ 
reported (fertur) to have remained all along (semper) in the sch isi 
of Novatus, what time the sword wounded the vitals of our Moth 
(the Church)’; but that ‘when as a martyr of Christ he was jo nf 
to the realms of the saints, the people asked him whither they m 
betake themselves (procedere posset), he replied that they ought all 
follow the Catholic faith.’ So he concludes ve Ἷ 


Noster meruit confessus martyr ut esset ; 
Haec audita refert Damasus. Probat omnia Christus ; 





























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 425 


‘Our saint by his confession won the crown of martyrdom. Damasus 
ells the tale as he heard it. All things are tested and proved by 
hrist.’ 

It was very natural that the discoverer and restorer of the in- 
cription, which was the sole foundation (so far as we can see) of 
he story in Prudentius, should claim undue authority for its statements. 
Ὁ De Rossi it seems incredible that Damasus could have been mis- 
ken about events which occurred at least some 120 or I50 years 
fore he wrote (according as the schism of Hippolytus was Novatianism 
r not, i.e. according as it dated from the age of Cornelius or from 
hat of Zephyrinus and Callistus), especially as he had been reared 
rom childhood amidst the services of the Church. But frs¢ it must be 
bserved that Damasus simply reports this as hearsay, emphasizing 
his fact by reiteration and leaving the conclusion to the judgment 
f Christ—for there is no ground for the inference that the ‘hearsay’ 
efers not to the lapse into Novatianism but only to the subsequent 
epudiation of it; and secondly we must remember that the whole 
istory of Hippolytus was shrouded in obscurity to the Roman Christians 
the age of Damasus; so much so that his much more learned 
ut somewhat younger contemporary Jerome (4A. 8. b), though in 
ossession of a large number of works by Hippolytus, confesses 
is ignorance respecting the name of the writer’s see. This is a 
tling fact, and must be taken into account. Indeed the discovery 
f the inscription of Damasus is the more valuable, because it justifies 
e solution, which many had proposed on the publication of the 
hilosophumena to explain the account of Prudentius, namely that the 
panish poet had confused together an earlier outbreak of puritanism at 
ome under Zephyrinus and Callistus with a later outbreak thirty years 
terwards leading to the appointment of the schismatical bishop 
ovatian. The Novatianism of Hippolytus was a mere rumour which 
as circulated in Rome some four generations after his death. We 
therefore entitled to weigh it on its own merits. Here two im- 
rtant considerations must be taken into account. 

(1) The Novatian schism broke out in Rome in Α.Ὁ. 250 and led 
mediately to the consecration of Novatian as anti-pope. A full 
of light is suddenly poured upon this chapter in the internal 
litics of the Roman Church by the correspondence between Rome 
d Carthage preserved in the Cyprianic letters. The minor vicissitudes 
the schism are there revealed; names are freely mentioned; the 
fections and recantations are recorded; and in short there is no 
iod in the history of the Roman Church, until we are well advanced 


426 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 

































in the fourth century, of which we know so much. Even the Eas em 
Churches of Alexandria and Antioch took an active part in the contro 
versy, and are represented in the extant literature of the schism. 
from first to last there is not a mention of Hippolytus, the most learned 
man in the Roman Church before the time of Jerome ; whose lapse am 1 
repentance, emphasized still further by his martyrdom, would accentuate 
his position with respect to the schism. Who can believe it? Is the 
error of Damasus, who frankly acknowledges mere rumour as his 
informant, a difficulty at all commensurate to this ἢ ἢ 
But besides the documents bearing directly on the Novatian schism, 
there is another place where we should almost certainly have found 
reference to this passage in Hippolytus’ life, if it had ever occu ed. 
The earliest western list of the bishops of Rome (given above, 
1. Ρ. 253 54) was drawn up either by Hippolytus himself or by som : 
contemporary, and ended with the death of Urbanus and accession Οἱ 
Pontianus [A.D. 230, 231]. Its first continuator extends the record 
from Pontianus [a.D. 231—235] to Lucius [a.p. 253, 254] and must 
have written immediately after the death of Lucius (see 1. p. 263). He 
starts with a notice of the deportation of Pontianus the bishop am 
Hippolytus ‘the presbyter’ to the ‘unhealthy island of Sardinia,’ men 
tioning the divestiture or resignation of the former. In the interregnum 
between Fabius (Fabianus) and Cornelius [a.p. 250—251] he state: 
that ‘ Moyses and Maximus the presbyters and Nicostratus the dea cOr 
were apprehended and sent to prison,’ and that ‘at that time Novatus 
arrived from Africa and separated Novatian and certain confessors fron 
the Church after that Moyses had died in prison’ after a captivity ὁ 
nearly twelve months. Again under Cornelius [a.p, 251—253], hi 
mentions that during his episcopate ‘Novatus outside the Chure 
ordained Novatian in the city of Rome and Nicostratus in Africa,’ an 
that thereupon the confessors who separated themselves from Cornelii 
with Maximus the presbyter returned to the Church. These are neatl 
all the notes which this continuator inserts in the period for which he 
responsible, besides dates and numbers ; and they have reference eit 
to Hippolytus or to Novatianism (see I. p. 255 sq; comp. p. 286 5 
Why does not this contemporary writer connect the one with the oth 
if history had connected them by the signal fact of Hippolytus’ adhes 
and recantation ? Ε 
(2) But secondly; the extension of the life of Hippolytus bey τ 
the middle of the second century which would be required i 
Novatianism were true, introduces a serious difficulty into his chror Ν 
I have already shown (1. p. 413 sq) that his early work, the ¢ 





HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 427 


pendium on Heresies, was probably written at all events before A.D. 190. 
But, if the Novatianism be accepted as true, he must have lived more 
than sixty years after this work was published. Moreover the last 
notice, which we have of any event connected with his life, is the state- 
ment given above from the Papal Chronicle, which belongs to the year 
A.D. 235. Yet, if he were really a Novatian and perished in the Decian 
persecution (A.D. 250—252), he must have been alive some sixteen 
years afterwards. Not to mention, that the notice itself, by dwelling 
on the ‘unhealthiness’ of the island, suggests that he perished, as 
Pontianus also perished, an exile in Sardinia—a too probable result 
of such banishment to an octogenarian. 

I should add also that, though history does repeat itself, we need 
something more than a hearsay of the age of Damasus to convince us 
that the same Hippolytus should have fw7ce been in schism with the 
rulers of the Roman Church on the same ground of puritanism, and 
} have ¢wce suffered cruel persecution from the heathen rulers, whether 
as a confessor or as martyr. 

We may therefore safely accept the conclusion of those critics, 
Bunsen, Dollinger, and others, who explained the story of Prudentius 
by the facts related in the Phélosophumena'—confirmed as this conclu- 
sion has subsequently been by the discovery since made that the story 
had no better foundation than a late rumour. 


§ 12. 
THE SEE OF HIPPOLYTUS. 


Hippolytus speaks of himself as a bishop. He is so designated by 
others. What then was his see? Rome was the sphere of his activity 
while living. At Rome he was commemorated after death. All his 
recorded actions are connected with Rome or at least with Italy. 
Whether history or legend be interrogated, the answer is the same. We 
are not asked to travel beyond Italian ground, nor for the most part 
beyond the immediate neighbourhood of the world’s metropolis itself. 

Hippolytus was by far the most learned man and the most prolific 
writer which the Roman Church produced before Jerome. It is there- 
fore the more remarkable that any uncertainty should rest upon the 
name of his see. It is still more strange that the writers who lived 


1 Wordsworth however (p. 158 sq) obliged to prolong the life of Hippolytus 
strives to maintain the accuracy of Pru- accordingly. 
entius on this and other points, and is 


428 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 

























‘nearest to his own time and locality should most frankly confess heey 
ignorance. Ἐ 

Yet this is so. Eusebius (42. 3. d), who wrote within some eigh A 
years of his death and was acquainted with several of his writings, tells” 
us that he was a bishop somewhere or other (ἑτέρας που... προεστὼς 
ἐκκλησίας). Jerome, who wrote a little more than half a century later 
than Eusebius, is equally at a loss (AR. 8. b). He is not dependent 
on this occasion, as on so many others, on his predecessor; he shows a 
larger acquaintance with the works of Hippolytus; he had habitually 
trodden the same ground, which Hippolytus trod when living. Yet he 
frankly confesses that he has ‘not been able to find out the name of the ~ 
city’ of which Hippolytus was bishop. Bunsen indeed (1. p. 420) 
suggests that he could not tell, because he would not tell, and that his | 
reticence in fact means ‘Non mi ricordo.’ For this imputation how- j 
ever there is no ground. ‘The one man of all others, whose antecedents — 
placed him in the most favourable position for ascertaining the details 
of the earlier history of the Roman Church and who took special pains” 
to preserve memorials of the martyrs—among others of Hippolytus- 
himself—Pope Damasus, the older contemporary of Jerome, “ 
nothing about his see, but calls him simply the ‘presbyter’ (42. 7. a), 
a term of which I shall have to speak presently (see below, p. 435 56). He 

At length when this silence about the see of its most illustrious” 
writer is broken by the Roman Church, the notice betrays the grossest 
ignorance. Gelasius followed Damasus in the papacy after a lapse of 
about a century (A.D. 492—496). He refers to the Treatise on Heresies 
as written by ‘ Hippolytus bishop and martyr of the metropolis of the 
Arabians,’ i.e. of Bostra (42. 13). But this notice, though blundering, 
is explicable and highly instructive. Eusebius, describing the chief 
writers of a particular period, mentions that Beryllus was bishop of the 
Arabians in Bostra, adding ‘in like manner Hippolytus presided (as 
bishop) over some other church’ (ἑτέρας που). In translating this 
passage Rufinus (AR. 9) drops the ἑτέρας που and renders vaguely, 
‘episcopus hic [Beryllus] fuit apud Bostram Arabiae urbem maximam. 
Erat nihilominus et Hippolytus, qui et ipse aliquanta scripta dereliqui 
episcopus.’ This might imply to a casual reader who had not thi 
original before him that Hippolytus was a predecessor or successor 0 
Beryllus in the same see of Bostra. ἮΝ 

The origin of this curious blunder has thus been satisfactoril 
explained, and it need not therefore give us any further (τοῦθ. 
Nevertheless it has given rise to some modern speculation, whi 
cannot be passed by without a mention. Le Moyne (Varia Saer 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 429 
prol. p. 28 sq, ed. 2) with much learning and ingenuity maintained that 
the see of Hippolytus was not the Port at the mouth of the Tiber, 
which he calls Portus Ostiensis’, but Portus Romanorum or Emporium 
Romanum, the modern Aden, on the Red Sea’; and he succeeded in 
persuading several writers of great repute such as Cave, Spanheim®, and 
others*. Latterly this view has found no supporters. Of a recent 
attempt by Erbes to utilise this supposed connexion with Bostra— 
though shown to be a blunder—in support of his own chronological 
theories, I have had occasion to speak already. The real value of the 
notice of Gelasius is the evidence which it.affords, that even in his 
time nothing was known at Rome of the see of Hippolytus. 

The general opinion however makes him bishop of Portus the 
haven of Rome. ‘This view prevailed before Le Moyne attempted to 
transfer him from the mouth of the Tiber to the mouth of the Red 
Sea. But Le Moyne’s attempt called forth a vigorous championship of 
the received view. At the instigation of Card. Ottoboni, bishop of 
Portus, his librarian Ruggieri, a man of learning and ability, addressed 
himself to the subject in a treatise De Portuensi S. Hippolyti Episcopi et 
Martyris Sede, which after many vicissitudes appeared at length as a 
posthumous work (Romae, 1771). This work has given its direction to 
later opinion on the question; and in our own generation, when the 
interest in Hippolytus was revived by the publication of the Phzloso- 
} phumena, there was a very general acquiescence on this point among 
those who differed most widely in other respects. 

Nevertheless it must be confessed that the ancient evidence is very 
defective. We cannot overcome our surprise that, if his see had 
been within fifteen or twenty miles of Rome itself, the popes Damasus 
and Gelasius should have been ignorant of the fact. But the difficulty 
culminates in the case of Jerome. He was well acquainted with the 
various works of Hippolytus. His own friend Pammachius built at 
this very Portus a ‘xenodochium”’ or ‘hospital for foreigners,’ which 




















1 He does not however confuse Portus 
and Ostia (see p. 29 sq), as Wordsworth 
seems to think (p. 259, note 7). 

2 There is however, so far as I have 
seen, no evidence produced to show that 
the place was called Portus Romanus, 
its common name being Zmforium Ro- 
anum. 

3 Op. 1. p. 777, Lugd. Bat. 1701. 
4 Not however Tillemont (as Words- 
orth says, p. 259), at least in my edition, 


Mém. τττ. p. 239, 672 sq. 

5 The circumstances attending the his- 
tory of the composition and appearance 
of this work will be found in Words- 
worth, p. 260 sq. It is inserted in Lum- 
per, Hist. Sanct. Patr. Tom. viii, and 
again in Migne, Patrol. Graec. X. p. 395 
sq). 

6 Hieron. Z fist. Ixvi. § 11 (1. p. 410) 
‘Audio te [Pammachium] xenodochium 
in Portu fecisse Romano,’ Zés¢. lxxvii. 


































430 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


became known far and wide and in which Jerome expresses the greatest 
interest. Did Portus retain no memorial of its most famous bishop, ἫΝ ; 
died a martyr only a century and a half before? Ἢ 
Indeed the earliest authority for placing his see at Portus appez ' 
not at Rome nor in Italy, but in Constantinople and the East, two 
centuries and a half later than Jerome’s Cafalogus. In the Chronivon 
Paschale [c. Α.Ὁ, 630] he is described as bishop ‘of the place called’ 
Portus near Rome’ (AR. 21)’. From this time forward he is 
occasionally so called, as for instance by Anastasius the Apocrisiarius 
or Papal Nuncio at Constantinople Α.Ὁ. 665 (4. 23); by Georgiu 
Syncellus c. a. Ὁ. 792 (AR. 28); by Nicephorus of Constantinople” 
ta. Ὁ. 828 (AR. 29); and other later writers. The statements of 
Anastasius and of Nicephorus seem to be founded on the heading to a Ms" 
of the spurious treatise Against Vero, which they both quote (see above, - 
p- 403 sq). We may indeed suspect that this Constantinopolitan MS. 
containing an often quoted and highly important dogmatic treatise 
(if it had only been genuine) was the single source of the story of the 
Portuensian episcopate, which seems to have been derived sole! ly 
through Byzantine channels. The statement is found also in catenx 5. 
and in other manuscripts containing extracts from Hippolytus. 4 
It should be added also that, besides the defective evidence, 
argument which placed Hippolytus in the see of Portus was weighted 
with another serious objection, which was urged with fatal effect by 
Dollinger. Bunsen (1. p. 422 sq, 468 sq) projected into the times of 
Hippolytus an arrangement of the later cardinalate, by which th 
bishops of the suburban sees presided as titulars of the pring : 
churches in the City itself. Thus Hippolytus, according to Bunse 
view, while bishop of Portus, would have been likewise a member of tl the 
Roman presbytery. This solution was highly tempting ; for it seem es 
to explain how Hippolytus, having a diocese of his own, should i 
fere actively in the affairs of the Church of Rome in the mann 
described in the Philosophumena. It is sufficient to say that B val 
view involves an anachronism of many centuries. The developmer 
in the relations between the suburban sees and the papacy is ti act 
i 
8 τὸ (I. p. 465), Ixvii. § τὸ (I. p. 466) di Archeol. Crist. IV. p. 50 Sq, Ρ. Ὁ 
‘Xenochium in Portu Romano situm (1866). ‘tin 
totus pariter mundus audivit; sub una 1 On the mistaken supposition : 
aestate didicit Britannia quod Aigyptus have here the words of Peter of A 
et Parthus noverat vere.’ For an in- andria, who flourished more than th 
teresting account of the extant remains centuries earlier, see above, P. 344: 
of this xenodochium see De Rossi δ με, 


+: 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 431 


by Dollinger (p. του 54); and the late growth and character of these 
frelations are fatal to Bunsen’s theory. 

Here Dollinger was treading on solid ground. But, when he 
aintained that Portus was not at this time and did not become for 
any generations a place of any importance (p. 77 sq), he took up a 
Osition which it is impossible to hold. The rapid growth of Portus, 
rom the time of its foundation, is sufficiently shown by the excavations 
f the present generation’, even if the extant notices had been in- 
ufficient. There is no @ Prior? reason why it might not have been 
n episcopal see in the age of Hippolytus if there had been a tittle of 
vidence to the fact. 

On the other hand Déllinger had his own solution of the difficulty, 

ot less tempting but even less tenable. He supposed Hippolytus to 
nave been not bishop of Portus, but of Rome itself. This was in fact 
he first papal schism, and Hippolytus was the first antipope. 

Against this solution three serious and indeed fatal objections lie. 
1) It is not justified by anything in the language of Hippolytus himself. 
f he had put forward these definite claims, he must have expressed 
hem in definite terms. On the contrary he only mentions vaguely his 
bligation, as a bishop, to stand forward as the champion of the truth. 
f his adversaries he never says that they are not the lawfully con- 
tituted bishops of Rome, but implies that by their doctrinal and 
ractical irregularities they have shown themselves no true bishops. 
is very vagueness is the refutation to this solution of a rival papacy. 
2) The entire absence of evidence—especially in Rome and the West— 
fatal to the supposition. There were several papal schisms in the 
ird and fourth centuries—one more especially within less than twenty 
ears of his death. Yet in none of these controversies is there any 
ference to this one which (if it had existed) must have set the deadly 
recedent. Moreover we have several lists of the popes dating from 
e third, fourth, and fifth centuries, but in not one of these is there a 
int of Hippolytus as an antipope. (3) The evidence, when it does 
me, is hardly less conclusive than the silence. It is late; it comes 
om the East; and it means nothing or next to nothing. The first 
itness quoted is Apollinaris about a.p. 370 (AR. 6). It is a passage 
a catena, ascribed, and perhaps rightly ascribed, to this father. But 
should require far stronger evidence than we possess, to justify the 
aprobable supposition that one who had the papal lists of Eusebius 
ore him would have called Hippolytus ἐπίσκοπος Ῥώμης, meaning 
ereby that he was bishop of the metropolis of the world. We must 
1 See esp. De Rossi Bull, di Archeol. Crist. wv. pp. 37 sq, 63, 99 (1866). 




























432 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 































therefore suppose that part of the heading at all events is a late 
addition. After this we have no earlier witnesses than Eustrs it 
c. A.D. 578 (AR. 18) and Leontius c. Α.Ὁ. 620 (AR. 20). cma 
ing the late date of these writers, we must regard them as absolut 
valueless to prove such a conclusion; more especially as the y ite = 
would know that Hippolytus was a bishors and that he lived in or nea 
Rome, so that ἐπίσκοπος Ῥώμης would occur as a loose designatio 
if they did not take the pains to see whether his name was actuall 
in the papal lists. a 


But, though the testimony which makes Hippolytus bishop of Porta 
is late and valueless, the evidence connecting him with Portus is of 
very different quality and much earlier in time. Prudentius, who visite 
the shrine of S. Hippolytus on the Tiburtine Way as we have seen Bi 
after A.D. 400, and gives an account (doubtless imaginary in its mai 
features) of the martyrdom, speaks of the persecutor as leaving Rom 
to trouble the suburban population and as harassing the Christians a 
the mouth of the Tiber (‘Christicolas tunc Ostia vexanti per Tiberina 
viros’). The tyrant, he continues, ‘extended his rage to the coast ¢ 
the Tyrrhene shore and the regions close to sea-washed Portus.’ a 
devoting some thirty lines to describing the punishments inflicted th 
he says that an old man (‘senior’) was brought before the tribunal a 
denounced by the bystanders as the chief of the Christian folk (‘Christ 
colis esse caput populis’). If this does not distinctly name him f 
bishop of Portus, it implies that he held a leading position in the Chui irc 
and that this was the scene of his clerical activity. Again after ti 
martyrdom we are told of the disposal of his reliques ; 


Metando eligitur tumulo locus; Ostia linquunt : 
Roma placet, sanctos quae teneat cineres. 


Of his later connexion with Portus a few words will be necessary he 
after. It is sufficient to say here, that for many centuries his mem 
has been intimately connected with this town. 4 

If then the see of Hippolytus was neither Portus nor Rome, 
was it? But before seeking the answer, we are confronted with 
vious question. Had he any see at all, in the common ances 
the term? It is now the received theory of the Christian Chur 
a settled Christian land should be covered with sees, conterm 
τ not overlapping one another; that each is independent of its n 
and that an zmperium in imperio in an intolerable anomaly. ' 
culties created at times by this theory are great. The Ro 
overcomes them by consecrating bishops zm partibus. The Ro 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 433 


gregations in England in our own time were ruled (owing to legal 
difficulties) for many years, much to the amusement of Englishmen, by 
a great Cardinal who was bishop of Melipotamus—a place of which 
they had never heard. The Anglican Church solves this difficulty in 
nother way. Its exigencies require that there should be a bishop to 
superintend the English congregations of Asia and Africa; he is 
‘Anglican bishop in Jerusalem and the East,’ but Jerusalem is not his 
see. Still more necessary is it that the congregations on the conti- 
nent of Europe should have episcopal supervision. This is committed 
to the bishop of ‘Gibraltar.’ Here indeed Gibraltar is properly a see ; 
but the theoretical diocese consists of a garrison and its belongings, a 
harbour, two or three miles of rock, and whole troops of rabbits and 
monkeys. The main body of the human flock, which the bishop 
᾿νορρωμῇ is scattered about Europe and the Mediterranean, and would 
not be found more in Gibraltar itself than in the moon. When the 
Wbishop some years ago went to Rome to confirm the English residents 
there, Pio Nono is reported to have said humorously that he did not 
know till then that he was in the diocese of Gibraltar. No doubt 
when Hippolytus lived, the practice of the later Church had already 
become general, but it cannot have been universal. Indeed from the 
very nature of the case, the development of the system must have been 
ore or less gradual; though it was the ideal at which the Church 
ould aim. Less than a century had elapsed, when Hippolytus was 
born, since Timothy exercised episcopal functions in Ephesus, and 
itus in Crete ; but they were itinerant, not diocesan bishops. Even at 
he close of the second century exceptional cases would be treated in 
n exceptional way. The harbour of Portus, now fast supplanting Ostia, 
as thronged with a numerous and fluctuating population, consisting 
argely of foreigners—sailors, warehousemen, custom-house officers, 
Wdock-police, porters, and the like. A bishop was needed who should 
ke charge of this miscellaneous and disorderly flock. He must be- 
ore all things be conversant in the manners and language of Greece, 
he Jingua franca of the East and indeed of the civilized world. Hippo- 
ytus was just the man for the place. He was probably appointed by 
ishop Victor (c. A.D. 190—200); for his relations to Victor’s successors, 
phyrinus and Callistus, forbid us to suppose that he owed any pro- 
otion to them, and indeed his account of Victor generally leads us to 
ook upon this bishop as his patron. This hypothesis accords with his 
wn language speaking of his position. He distinctly designates himself 
holding the high-priestly or in other words the episcopal office ; he 
as described either by himself or by another’ as having been appointed 
1 Photius AR. 32. a; see above, p. 348. 






















CLEM. II. 28 


434 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 





























bishop of the Gentiles (ἐπίσκοπος ἐθνῶν), thus indicating that he had 
charge of the various nationalities represented at Portus. This is 
obviously an archaic expression and may have originated in the time of 
Hippolytus. At all events in his extant great work, the so-called Philo- 
sophumena, he appeals in his concluding address (AR. τ. 1) to ‘Greeks 
and Barbarians, Chaldaeans and Assyrians, Aegyptians and Libyans, 
Indians and Aethiopians, Celts and Latins on foreign service (οἱ ozpary- 
yotvres Λατῖνοι), and all those who dwell in Europe, Asia and Libya” 
as their counsellor; where the limitation of the Latins seems to sugge: t 
that planted at Portus as his head-quarters, he regarded himself by 
virtue of his commission as a sort of episcopal Chaplain-general of πθ΄ 
Forces. Moreover my theory harmonizes very well with another fact. 
The earliest bishop, connected with Portus after the age of Hippolytus, 
was present at the Council of Arles (a.p. 313); but unlike the other 
bishops mentioned in the same list (de civitate Eboracenst, de civitate Ui ica, 
etc.) he is called not de civitate Portuensi, but Gregorius episcopus de low 
gui est in Portu Romae', as if the same arrangement still prevailed, 
Portus being the residence of this Gregorius, but not strictly speaki 
his see. : 
Occupying this ground, Hippolytus needed nothing more. Here 
was a sufficient fulcrum for his ecclesiastical lever. He was senior as 
bishop even to his ecclesiastical superiors Zephyrinus and Callistus. He 
held that, as a successor of the Apostles, he had a special gift of thé 
Holy Spirit. By virtue of his office, he was an appointed ‘guardian 
of the Church’ (φροῦρος τῆς ἐκκλησίας). He was a man of fiery dogmatic 
and moral zeal ; and, when he saw, or fancied that he saw, the occupa at 
of the Roman see swerving both from the one and from the other, h 
let fly at them at once. His position is quite intelligible. There is n 
evidence that he regarded them as deposed and, from his puritanica 
point of view, himself substituted in their place. But his language 
implies that in some sense he looked upon them as no true bishops 
Probably, if he formulated his views at all, he would have said tha 
their doctrinal and moral obliquities had placed their episcopal offi 
and functions in abeyance for the time. a 
If such was his position, we can well understand why Jerome cot 1 
not discover his see. In fact he had no see to be discovered. But t ¢ 
the supposition that he was either a schismatical bishop of Rome or t 
lawful bishop of fei: no explanation of this ignorance can be give 


1 Labb. Cone. 1. p. 1454 (ed. Coleti). which bishops of Terracina, Prae 
The previous year a Roman synod was Tres Tabernze, and Ostia are present, 
held under Miltiades (24. I. p. 1427), in ΠΟ bishop of Portus; see Dollinger, 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 435 


§ 13. 
HIPPOLVTUS THE PRESBYTER. 


























Hippolytus, the famous writer, unmistakeably describes himself as 
a bishop. He is so called also by all those from Eusebius and Jerome 
downward, who were acquainted with his writings. Yet in the only 
contemporary Latin document—indeed the only contemporary document 
}—he is called ‘the presbyter.’ This is the designation which he bears 
also in Damasus, the next Latin writer who mentions him ; and from 
#Damasus it is adopted by Prudentius. What does this title mean? 
The contemporary document indeed seems to accentuate the appellation. 
The compiler of this portion of the Liberian Chronicle (c. Α.Ὁ. 255) 
peaks of ‘ Pontianus the bishop and Hippolytus the presbyter.’ 
The position and influence of Hippolytus were unique among the 
oman Christians of his age. He linked together the learning and the 
raditions of the East, the original home of Christianity, with the 
marvellous practical energy of the West, the scene of his own life’s 
abours. Not only was he by far the most learned man in the Western 
hurch, but his spiritual and intellectual ancestry was quite exceptional. 
hough he lived till within a few years of the middle of the third 
entury, he could trace his pedigree back by only three steps, literary 
s well as ministerial, to the life and teaching of the Saviour Himself. 
irenzeus, Polycarp, 5. John—this was his direct ancestry. No wonder 
f these facts secured to him exceptional honour in his own generation. 
The meaning of the word πρεσβύτερος, ‘the presbyter’ or ‘ elder,’ 
ust be explained by the language of the school in which he was brought 
p. It does not represent office, but it expresses venerable dignity such 
is accorded to those who are depositaries of the wisdom of the past. 
en Papias speaks of elders’, he means the Apostles and immediate 
isciples of the Lord—those who were ‘fathers of the Church,’ as we 
ould say, to his, own generation. When Irenzus speaks of ‘the 
lessed elder,’ he means Papias or his own master Polycarp or others 
longing to the generation of Polycarp and Papias, albeit their younger 
ntemporaries. When descending a generation lower still, we arrive 
Hippolytus himself, we find that his favourite designation of his 
aster Irenzeus is ὁ μακάριος πρεσβύτερος. In the fragment agaznst 
oetus (p. 43, Lagarde) again Hippolytus uses the same language ‘the 
byters,’ ‘the blessed presbyters.’ The idea of clerical office, if 
olved at all (which I very much doubt) in this use of the term, is 





1 See Essays on Supernatural Religion, p. 145. 
28—2 


436 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 






























certainly not prominent. Assuredly Hippolytus does not confuse the 
presbyterate with the episcopate ; still less does he deny that Irengeus 
was a bishop, which everyone allowed him to be. This leading co 1 
ception of ‘venerable authority’ then seems to have been inherited by 
Hippolytus’ own scholars and younger contemporaries in their use of 
the term. There was no man of his own age and surroundings who ad 
the same claims to this title of distinction. An octogenarian, a widely 
learned divine, and a most laborious and influential writer, with such 
a spiritual pedigree—what member of the Roman Church, nay what 
Christian throughout the world, could compete with him? ᾷ 
When therefore the chronographer, who wrote less than twenty 
years after his death, states that in the year 235 ‘ Pontianus the bishop 
and Hippolytus the presbyter were banished together, he does not 
directly or indirectly disparage the latter in comparison with the former 
Pontianus is ‘the bishop’ simply, for there was only one bishop ¢@ 
Rome. But Hippolytus has a title of his own, more honorable thar 
any conferred by any office; just as Bede is called the Venerable. 
There are many bishops and many archdeacons, but there was only one 
Hippolytus and only one Bede. 
But, though this was the meaning of Hippolytus’ contemporaries, i 
does not follow that later generations understood the terms in the sam 
sense. When nearly a century and a half later Damasus speaks 
‘presbyter Hippolytus,’ he probably accepted the designation as h 
found it, but understood it according to the usage of his own time, ὁ 
the priestly office or second order of the ministry; and Prudentit 
followed Damasus. Neither the one nor the other knew anythin 
except vaguely, about the history of Hippolytus, as their statement 
show. 
Thus therefore the use of the term in the Liberian Chronicle do 
not imply, as we might suspect (see 1. p. 262), a denial of Hippolytu 
claims to the papacy, thus supporting Déllinger’s view that he was t 
first antipope. Still less does it imply that, though a bishop of 
suburban see, he was a member of the Roman presbytery, according 
Bunsen’s view. } 


§ 14. 
LATER YEARS, BANISHMENT, AND DEATH. 
The episcopate of Victor was conterminous, roughly speaking, 1 


the last decade of the first century. Dying towards the close of 
century, he was succeeded by Zephyrinus. Zephyrinus held 




































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 437 


episcopate for eighteen years or thereabouts; Callistus for five. After 
Callistus succeeded Urbanus about a.p. 230. Victor had been the 
friend and patron of Hippolytus. With his successors Zephyrinus and 
Callistus, our saint had a deadly feud. What may have been his 
relations to Urbanus we know not; but, as his quarrel was not with the 
pontificate but with the pontiffs, we may presume that harmony was at 
length restored. If any formal reconciliation was needed, it would now 
take place; and hence would arise the story of his exhorting all 
Christian people to unity, which afterwards was connected (as we have 
already seen) with his supposed lapse into Novatianism. From the 
ἢ accession of Urbanus we may suppose that there was a cessation of 
those dissensions within the Church of which Hippolytus had been the 
champion and ringleader. 

At the same time the Church of Rome enjoyed peace from external 
persecution. Early in the year 222 Alexander Severus succeeded to 
the throne. If he was not a convert himself, he was favourably disposed 
towards Christianity. The ladies of his family more especially held 
close relations with the great Christian teachers. Not only Origen in 
§ Alexandria, but Hippolytus in Rome, corresponded with one or other 
of the princesses. ‘The thirteen years of the reign of Alexander marked 
an epoch of progress and development for the Christian Church. With 
Hippolytus himself it seems to have been the most fertile period of his 
literary life. The peace of the Church within and without left him more 
leisure for literary pursuits ; and the growing physical infirmities of age 
would direct him towards his intellectual resources, which he would be 
‘eager to turn to account for the instruction of the Church. In the first 
‘year of Alexander was published his famous work,- the Paschal Cyde, 
which was afterwards chosen to decorate the Chair of his Statue, as his 
greatest claim to the recognition of posterity. In the thirteenth and 
last year of this same emperor was finished his almost equally famous 
Chronicle of the World (see 1. p. 259), which must have been about the 
Pilatest literary product of its author. During this same period also he 
‘Bmust have written his now famous Refutation of all the Heresies, which 
“Phas laid these latest generations. of Christian students under the deepest 
“Bdebt of gratitude and which perhaps remained incomplete when he was 
overtaken by banishment and death. To this same time belongs also 
Bthe correspondence with Mammea. 

ἰ At length this long, laborious, and troubled life was closed by banish- 
ment and death. In the year 230 or thereabouts Urbanus had been 
succeeded by Pontianus as bishop of Rome. ‘In February 235 the 
emperor Alexander was slain at Mayence together with his mother and 





438 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 3 




























chief adviser Mammeea, the correspondent of Hippolytus and Origer ξ 
His successor Maximin adopted a wholly different policy towards e 
Christians. ‘The Roman bishop was banished to Sardinia; and with 
him was sent the venerable Christian father Hippolytus. This was in” 
the consulship of Severus and Quintianus, a.p. 235. Those mode n 
critics who assign the position of antipope to Hippolytus give a plau- 
sible reason for this companionship in exile. They infer that the new 
emperor desired at once to rid the metropolis of the two rival leaders 
of the Roman Church, and so to restore peace in the city. No su ᾿ 
explanation is needed. ‘The pre-eminent influence of Hippolytus as ὃ a 
Christian teacher in the Western world would alone have singled him out. 
for this exceptional distinction conferred by the persecuting tyrant’ 
We should do too great honour to Maximin, if we were to attribute to 
him any policy of statecraft. He was a fierce, blood-thirsty soldier, 
whose only idea of government was coercion*®. Against the friends and 
adherents of Alexander and his mother Mammea he waged 
implacable war. To have been a friend of Mammea was to be th 
unpardonable foe of Maximin. But Hippolytus was known to have 
corresponded with, and been trusted by, the deceased empress-mother. 
To Maximin, or to his adherents anxious to secure his favour in Rome, 
this would be sufficient to convict him*. It was not necessary that the 
emperor himself should have visited Rome. There were friends a 
hand ready to execute, or to anticipate, his commands in this matter. { 
In the Liber Pontificalis (1. pp. 64, 145, Duchesne) the banishm en 
of the two exiles is attributed to Alexander, the names of the sa m 
consuls being given as in the contemporary record. This is unques 
tionably a mistake. Maximin became emperor in March this 
(A.D. 235); and the banishment was the result of the reversal of his pr 
decessor’s policy (see I. p. xciv). 
Our contemporary chronicler says nothing of the subsequent fa e 
Hippolytus. He was concerned only with the Roman episcopate, ai 
the mention of Hippolytus is incidental. Of Pontianus he states, at 
Sardinia he divested himself of the episcopate at the close of Septemb 
in this same year (iv Kal. Oct-), and that Anteros was consecrated t 
months later (xi Kal. Dec.) in his place. Of his subsequent | fate 
1 Of the persecution of Maximin see 3 7, 9, ‘Omnes Αἰωω δ minis 
Allard Zes Chrétiens dans Empire etc. variis modis interemit: dispositic 
p- 418 sq. eius invidit: et dum suspectos hi 
2 Capitolin. Maximin 8 ‘Erat enim ei amicos et ministros eius crudelior fi 
Deena nisi crudelitate i pe EN non est.’ 
teneri.’ 


~~ 
ra 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 439 


says nothing; but by describing the place of banishment as ‘insula 
nociva’,’ he implies that it was fatal to both exiles. 

Sardinia was to Rome, what Portland is to England—a station of 
convicts who were condemned to hard labour in the quarries. By the 
irony of history, only a few years before, it had been the place of exile 
of Callistus, the great enemy of Hippolytus ; but Callistus had been 
pardoned, and returned to Rome, to succeed to the papacy (AX. 1. ἢ). 
Sardinia had been a favourite place of deportation for the tumultuous 
Jews who troubled the peace of the city. On one occasion Tiberius 
had banished no fewer than 4000 to this island*. When the displeasure 
of the Romans was transferred from the Jews to the Christians, the 
place of exile remained the same. Hence Jewish and Christian Sibyllists 
alike denounce this dread island. With the freedom of unverifiable 
prophecy they foretell that it shall be overwhelmed in the sea, shall be 
extinguished in ashes, and so forth, at the great retribution’; 





































Σαρδώ, viv συ βαρεῖα μεταλλάξῃ εἰς τέφρην. 


The old Greek proverb of ‘sardonic’ laughter—whether originating in 
the hideous grin produced by the bitter herbs of Sardinia or in some 
other way*—receives a new force and significance on the lips of these 
doleful prophets. Sardinia, the exultant persecutor, shall ‘laugh on the 
wrong side of her mouth,’ when the day of vengeance comes’. 


The same collection (A.D. 354), which contains the notice of the 
banishment of the two exiles, comprises another document (see 1. p. 
249 sq), certainly not later than A.D. 335, and perhaps (so far as regards 
the particular notice) contemporary with the reference to the exile. This 
latter document deals with the depositions of the popes and martyrs. 
From it we learn that Hippolytus was buried on the Tiburtine Way and 
Pontianus in the Cemetery of Callistus on the same day, the Ides of 
August. The close of the episcopate of Pontianus, whether by depri- 
vation or by resignation (see 1. p. 286), was Sept. 28, 235. The Liber 
Pontificalis (1. pp. 64, 145, Duchesne) places his death on Oct. 30, 
A.D. 236. If this date be accepted, the translation of the bones of the 


1 This might be true of the convict 
stations, but of the island generally very 
different language is held; Pausan. vii. 
17. 2 Σαρδὼ γὰρ τὴν νῆσον εἰς τὰ μάλιστα 
εὐδαίμονα ἀντὶ Ἑλλάδος σφίσιν ἀπέδωκεν, 
said of an exchange of provinces which 
ero made with the Senate; see Mar- 
quardt Adm. Staatsverw. 1. p. 97. 

_ 3 Joseph. Antig. xviii. 3. 5. 


Σ 











3 Orac. Sibyll. vii. 96 sq; comp. also 
iii. 477. 

4 Virg. Ζ εἶ. vii. 41 ‘Sardois amarior 
herbis’; see Pape-Benseler Griech. Wor- 
terb. 5. v. Σαρδώ. 

δ Orac. Sibyll. i. 182 Σαρδόνιον μείδημα 
γελάσσετε ὅποταν ἥξῃ τοῦτο κιτιλ. The 
words are put into the mouth of Noah. 


























440 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


two confessors must be deferred. As an imperial rescript was necessary 
before removing the body of an exile (see 1. p. 287), the day of deposi- 
tion could not be before the Ides of August 237, as De Rossi places it. 
But on the other hand, as I have pointed out (I. c.), the date of Pon- 
tianus’ death in the Lzber Pontificalis is open to the suspicion of 
confusion ; and prudential reasons might have led the friends of the 
exiles from applying for the necessary permission during the tyrants 
lifetime. Maximin was slain in April or May 238 (Clinton’s Fast. 
Rom. τ. p. 252). On the whole therefore Aug. 238 seems more probab Θ᾽ 
than Aug. 237. The death of Hippolytus may have occurred at any 
time from A.D. 235 to A.D. 238. 


§ 15. 
THE STATUE OF HIPPOLYTUS. . 


In the year 1551 a mutilated statue of a sitting figure was discovered 
in the Ager Veranus. The head and upper part of the body were 
wanting, and there was no name to identify it. Nevertheless its iden- 
tification as a figure of Hippolytus was undeniable, and has never been 
seriously questioned. It was found in the very place where Hippolytus 
had his chief sanctuary; it was evidently the representation of an eccle 
siastic and a divine, and (as the chair suggested) probably of a bishop 
it presented on the back and sides of the chair a list of theologica 
writings, most of them known to be the works of Hippolytus; more 
especially there was a Paschal Canon constructed in the first year ¢ 
Alexander. This completed the identification. ΩΝ 

This statue is now in the Lateran Museum, the upper part bein 
restored. It is figured in several works relating to Hippolytus (6: 
Fabricius Of. 1. p. 36 sq; Bunsen 1. frontispiece, see pp. 333, 423. Ἶ 
460; Wordsworth, frontispiece, see p. 29 sq; and in other books (e. 
Kraus Dée Christliche Kunst p. 111, 187; Real-Encycl. der Christ 
Alterth. 1. p. 660). The inscription—so far as it bears on our investig 
tions—has been given above (AR. 2). a 

But what is the date of this erection? It has been variously assign 
to different epochs from the third to the sixth century. I cannot dou 
however that Déllinger (p. 291) and Funk (Zv%eolog. Quartalschr. 18 
p. 104 sq) and Salmon (Dict. of Christ. Biogr. s.v. Hippolytus Ror 
nus Il. p. 96) are right in giving the earliest date. The phenom 
indeed are quite inexplicable i in any later century. For ida 

(1) The statue is strictly historical. So far as it gives informat 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. AAI 
































this is borne out by what we know from other sources. But the notices 
of Damasus and Jerome and Prudentius show that the historical Hip- 
polytus had disappeared in the fourth century.. Those twin giants— 
Ignorance and Myth—had piled their Pelion on Ossa, and stormed the 
citadel of the Truth with only too deadly effect on this occasion. The 
inscription on the statue would be possible in Hippolytus’ time or in 
the next generation ; but we can hardly conceive it at a later date. 

(2) ‘The details of the inscription point to a contemporary record. 
The Paschal Chronicle is given the chief place, being evidently regarded 
as the chef d’ceuvre of the author—his great claim to posthumous fame. 
The cycle is calculated for the years a.D. 222—333. But long before 
this latter date the Romans had been obliged to abandon this cycle, if 
they ever adopted it, for a more correct system of calculation. Even 
as early as the year 243 there is evidence that its erroneousness had 
become too patent to be overlooked, and that a different cycle was 
calculated in order to take its place. In the year 236, the probable 
year of its author’s death, the full moon, as calculated by Hippolytus, 
‘ought to have fallen on April 5th, whereas it really took place very early 
in the morning of the 9th. In the course of eighty years Hippolytus’ full 
moon would coincide with the actual new moon. See the calculations 
of Salmon Chronology of Hippolytus in Hermathena τ. Ὁ. 82 sq. 

(3) ‘These arguments seem conclusive. If any archeological con- 
siderations should appear to point in the opposite direction, they must 
be very strong to produce conviction. But in fact none such have been 
alleged. Some again have supposed that an older statue—intended for 
some one else—had been utilised and transfornied into Hippolytus. 
For this there is no ground. But even, if it had been so, the fact 
would not affect the questions with which we are concerned. ‘The 
arguments remain as strong as ever for the conclusion, that it could not 
have been transformed into Hippolytus and set up in the Ager Veranus 
to represent him after the third century, and probably not after the 
middle of the century. 

As I shall have occasion to show presently (p. 443), this parcel of 
ground on the Tiburtine Way, which became the Cemetery of Hippoly- 
tus was probably his own property. Thus his friends would be able to 
set up the statue without interference ; so that there was nothing to pre- 
vent its erection during his own life-time, though probably it belongs to 
some date immediately after his death, 
᾿ς By a curious coincidence we have a contemporary representation 
not only of Hippolytus, but also of his great enemy Callistus. De Rossi 
(Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1866, pp. 17, 33) gives a contemporary pic- 





























442 EPISTLES OF 5, CLEMENT. 


ture on glass which figures this pope’s head. If any reliance can be 
placed on the likeness, he was a person of grave and venerable appear 
ance. -At all events it is a singular phenomenon that the two earliest 
ecclesiastics of whom contemporary representations are preserved are 
these two deadly enemies. We only regret the more that the head of 
the Hippolytean statue is lost; but perhaps future excavations may 
disinter it. Ἂ 


§ 16, 
POSTHUMOUS HONOURS AND SANCTUARIES. 


We have seen that the bodies of the two martyrs who had died in 
Sardinia—Pontianus and Hippolytus—were brought back to find a 
resting place amidst the scenes of their former life and work. T 
were companions in their burial, as they had been companions in their 
banishment. The same Ides of August, presumably in the year 237 OF 
238, saw them both deposited with all honours in the suburban Ceme- 
teries. But, though the day was the same, the place was different. 
Pontianus, the pope, was laid in the papal crypt then recently con- 
structed in connexion with the Cemetery of Callistus on the Appia 
Way, but already occupied by his successor Anteros who died afte! 
occupying the papal throne a few months (a.D. 236) and thus preceded 
him to his grave. His companion in exile Hippolytus found his grave 
on another of the great roads which stretch across the Campagna—tht 
Tiburtine Way. He was laid in a catacomb constructed on the Ag 
Veranus—an estate doubtless so called from some former owner. 

On this way to Tivoli, not far from the Pretorian camp and 
than a mile from the City gate, we are confronted, at least as early ὃ 
the fourth century, with two famous cemeteries standing almost face q 
face, each with its proper sanctuary, on either side of the road, 
here runs roughly speaking from West to East. On the south 
right side is the more famous of the two, the Cemetery of S. 
connected with which stands the Basilica of S. Laurentius select d 
the latest of the popes, whose long tenure of office and notable car 
alike single him out from the long line of his predecessors, as his Iz 
resting-place by the side of the famous deacon of Rome. On the! 
hand of the same road and therefore to the North, between this ] 
Tiburtina and the Via Nomentana, is the site of the Cemetery and E Bi 
lica of 5. Hippolytus. The two Cemeteries with their ΕΟΡΕΟΗ͂ΝΝ 
tuaries are quite distinct in ancient authorities; but owing to the 





HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 443 


that the shrine and Cemetery of S. Hippolytus were ruined and obscured 
or obliterated at a comparatively early date, and that many monuments 
were transferred from it to the larger and more distinguished sanctuary 
on the south side of the road, its memory was absorbed in the fame of 
the Basilica of S. Laurentius, and modern writers have inextricably 
fused and confused the two. The discoveries of recent years, inter- 
preted by the archzeological genius of De Rossi, have corrected the 
error, and established the distinction beyond dispute. 

The sanctuary and cemetery of Hippolytus therefore, with which we 
are directly concerned, had no connexion originally with the famous 
basilica of S. Laurentius. Its site is on the sloping ground or ‘mons,’ 
as it is called on the left of the road, and therefore between the 
Cemeteries of 5. Agnese on the Via Nomentana to the North and 
that of S. Laurentius (or more properly of S. Cyriace) on the Via 
Tiburtina to the South. Dated inscriptions have been found in these 
catacombs, ranging from the close of the third century to the beginning 
of the fifth’. As it appears to be called the Coemeterium Hippolytt, 
and as the genitive in such cases generally denotes the owner or 
founder of the place of sepulture, not the principal saint whose 
cultus was celebrated there, De Rossi reasonably conjectures that this 
cemetery was Hippolytus’ own possession*®. This seems highly pro- 
bable for many reasons. It would account for the selection of the 
spot for his own grave; whereas the circumstances of his burial would 
have suggested some other locality, in closer proximity to Pontianus 
his companion alike in exile and in death. It would account, as I 
have already pointed out, also for the unique honour which was done 
to him in the erection of a statue on the spot, whether soon after his 
death or even during his life time, for it would be erected on his 
own estate. Considering his hostile relations to the heads of the 
Roman hierarchy during his life time on the one hand, and the 
persecutions to which he was subjected from the civil powers on the 
other, the circumstances must have been very favourable in other 


1 See Bull. di Archeol. Crist. Ser. iv. 
I. p- 49. 

2 See Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1. c. p. 
15 sq (1882); comp. Rom. Sott. 1. p. 
116 sq. The earliest notice of his burial 
(see above, I. p. 251) in the Defositio 
Martyrum of the Liberian Catalogue 
gives ‘ Ypoliti in Tiburtina et Pontiani in 
Calisti,’ where according to De Rossi we 
should understand ‘in ejusdem coeme- 





terio’ after ‘Ypoliti.” De Rossi gives 
other notices indicating that the proper 
name of these catacombs was Coemeterium 
S. Hippolyti. In the Martyr. Hieron. 
xiii Kal. Jul. the reading of the Berne 
MS is ‘Rome, in cimiterio Yppoliti via 
Tiburtina,’ where the common text has 
‘Romae Hippolyti,’ thus substituting an- 
other martyr Hippolytus for the place of 
burial. 


444 EPISTLES OF S, CLEMENT. 






























respects to enable his friends to do him this honour. However great 
their zeal, they must have been secure from molestation on εἰ 
side; and only the absolute possession of the ground could have given τῇ 
them this security. 
Here then he was deposited on the Ides of August the same day on 
which he was commemorated in after ages for some centuries. But 
evil days soon overtook the Church of Rome. The next century was | 
crowded with other cares and interests, and the past was forgotten. A 
sponge passed over the records of Hippolytus and his times; and only 
the confused smear remained of a once exceptionally vivid and character- 
istic portraiture. ‘There were the schisms and feuds within the Roman 
Church itself—popes and antipopes; there were the persecutions which | 
assailed the Christians from without, and bred endless perplexities 
of discipline within; there were the great dogmatic controversies which 
harried the universal Church from one end to the other; last, but not 
least, there were the first rumblings of the dark thunder-cloud 1 
the Northern sky, the earliest inroads of those barbarian hordes who 
were destined before long to sweep away old Rome in desolation 
and ruin. At length towards the close of the fourth century on the 
accession of Damasus came a respite; when men could breathe again 
and their interest in the past revived. ‘ 
τς Damasus (A.D. 366—384) was a great restorer of the sanctuaries of 
Rome. The catacombs more especially, as the resting places of th 
martyrs, received his attention. In this pious work he was ably 
seconded by the famous calligrapher Furius Dionisius Filocalus, whe 
describes himself as the ‘cultor atque amator’ of Damasus. Rarel 
if ever, in the history of the Church, has a great leader been fired 
with such zeal for recording the Christian heroism of the past an 
found so accomplished an artificer to carry out his designs. Rarely, i 
ever, has history stood in sorer need of such a chronicler’. Our onl 
regret is that the knowledge of Damasus was not commensurate to. 
enthusiasm. ἥ 
Among the many saints of the past whose memory profited by} h 
reverential zeal, was the martyred father of the Church, the venera 
Hippolytus. Already a sanctuary enclosed the remains of the sa in 
but it was enlarged and beautified by Damasus, when on the defe 
of the rival faction which had supported the antipope Ursicin 5. ; 
received the allegiance of the whole Roman Church. The inscripti 
commemorating the event runs as follows a 
1 For an account of the inscriptions of | graphy—see De Rossi in Bull, di Ar 
Damasus—their composition and calli- Crist, Ser. iv, III. p. 7 54: led 





HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 445 


LAETA DEO PLEBS SANCTA CANAT QVOD MOENIA CRESCVNT 
ET RENOVATA DOMVS MARTYRIS HIPPOLITI’. 


It is conjectured that he received the submission of the opposite 
party in this very building. There would be a singular appropriateness 
in its selection for this purpose; since he supposed that Hippolytus 
had at one time favoured the antipapal schism of Novatian—a fore- 
runner of Ursicinus—and afterwards by an opportune recantation had 
recalled the people from the paths of error to the unity of the Church. 
This supposed incident in the saint’s career he commemorated in 
another inscription set up in the same building, to do honour to 
‘Hippolytus the elder*” 

But Damasus knew little or nothing beyond the fame of Hippolytus 
as a martyr, and probably as a writer. A confused rumour had reached 
his ears that Hippolytus had not been always on friendly terms with 
the popes his predecessors. He concluded therefore, being ignorant 
of the chronology of the saint’s life, that he must have been an adherent 
of the Novatian party (see above, p. 424 sq), the chief precedent, 
which history recorded of rival claimants to the papal throne, before the 
papal schism which amidst disgraceful and murderous riots had ushered 
in his own elevation to the see of S. Peter. 

At the beginning of the next century occurred the visit of the 
Spanish poet Prudentius to this shrine. 

His collection of hymns entitled Pert Stephanon or De Coronis, 
‘the crowns of the martyrs,’ consists of fifteen poems. Most of these 
commemorate Spanish martyrs like Vincentius and Eulalia, or martyrs 
already celebrated by festivals in the Spanish Church. But the largest 
space (2152 verses out of 3875) is devoted to four martyrs especially 
honoured in Rome, Laurentius, Romanus, Hippolytus, and Agnes, 
besides a short poem (66 lines) on the passion of S. Peter and S. Paul. 
Rome therefore may be said to have inspired the collection. But it 
will be observed that all the four were celebrated in the catacombs 
lying on the Tiburtine Way or near it. The celebration of the three 
former moreover took place at the same time of the year within five 
days of each other (Aug. 9, Aug. 10, and Ατρ. 13) and in the same 
locality, in the twin sanctuaries which stood vis ὦ vis on the Tiburtine 
Way. 

Of the connexion between the cultus of S. Laurence and S. Hippo- 

-lytus I shall have much to say hereafter. But who was the other member 








ἢ 1 AR. 7.b; see above, p. 329. 2 AR. 7. a3 see above, p. 328. 


446 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


of the trio? Romanus is a strictly historical person. He was a deacon 
and exorcist who suffered in the persecution of Diocletian (A.D. 303), 
a native of Czesarea in Palestine or the neighbourhood, but actually 
martyred in Antioch and therefore unconnected originally with Rome, 
His fame is especially associated with a miracle, which (whatever may 
be the foundation of fact) is recorded by his contemporary and fellow- 
countryman, the historian Eusebius ; he astounded the bystanders by 
speaking distinctly after his tongue had been cut out’. | 

This was unquestionably the Romanus who is celebrated in the poem 
of Prudentius. The poet dwells at great length on this very miracle, 
embellishing it with many hideous accessories. Moreover he adds the 
incident of a little child—a mere infant—being summoned by Romanus 
from among the Christian bystanders and invited by the saint to bear 
testimony to Christ. The child did this to the edification of the by- 
standers, though at the cost of its own life. The incident of this” 
infant martyr has no place in the contemporary record of Eusebius; 
but it was attached to the story of Romanus at a very early date. I 
think I see the origin of this edifying appendage to the contemporary 
account of Eusebius. Some eulogist of Romanus, when he described 
the constancy of the saint under the threats of the tyrant, would apply” 
to him, perhaps would put into his own mouth, the scriptural words: 
Ps. viii. 2 ‘Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast Thou 
ordained strength because of Thine enemies, that Thou mightest still 
the enemy and the avenger.’ As a matter of fact S. Chrysostom, wha 
nevertheless betrays no knowledge of the infant-martyr, uses this very 
text in his extant oration on Romanus’. It was only a single step to 
go from the abstract to the concrete, and to produce the babe in 
person. Accordingly another orator, apparently a younger contem- 


(a 


















* 


1 Euseb. Mart. Palaest.§ 9, in the form 
of this work attached to the Zeclesiastical 
History. See also the other recension, 
preserved only in the Syriac which is 
translated by Cureton (pp. 6, 54). The 
story of Romanus is told likewise in the 
spurious work de Resurrectione, preserved 
only in Latin and ascribed to Eusebius, 
Of. VI. p. 1097 sq (Migne). The part 
relating to Romanus is given also in 
Ruinart Act. Sinc. Mart. p. 392. Evi- 
dently this is not a genuine work of 
Eusebius, as is apparent (if for no other 
reason) from the fact that Romanus is 
made not a cleric, but a soldier; of which 


‘(see the next note). 










transformation I shall have to speak pre 
sently. Nevertheless it was written ort 
ginally in Greek, as it shows again and 
again ; e.g. ‘ forte proferentium Judaeoru 
tres pueros’, a literal translation of th 
genitive absolute (προφερόντων τῶν "Io 
δαίων, ‘the Jews alleging the case of th 


sense in the Latin. It betrays the infh 
ence of S. Chrysostom’s genuine orati 


Theodoret (Zpist. 130, IV. p. 121 
Schulze) mentions the name of t 
martyr, but nothing more. J 

2 Chrysost. Of. 11. p. 616 (ed. E 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 447 


porary of the golden-mouthed, preaching likewise at Antioch on 
the Day of S. Romanus in a sermon which is wrongly ascribed to 
S. Chrysostom himself, makes Romanus ask that a babe (βρέφος) 
shall be brought in from the market-place, taken (it would appear) 
at hap-hazard; and a child is brought, testifies, and suffers accord- 
ingly’. At all events this addition to the original story must have 
been circulated before the age of Prudentius. Prudentius however 
#knows nothing, or at least says nothing, about the infant’s name. By 
Plater martyrologists it is called Barulas or Baralas. This name appears 
in the Latin Martyrologies of Ado and others. 

Of the connexion of this Romanus—a Palestinian by birth and an 
Antiochene by martyrdom—not only with Rome but with the sanc- 
uaries on the Tiburtine Way, we have ample proof, even if it might 
ot have been inferred from his prominence in the collection of 
Prudentius. In the inscription, which was put up in the 13th century 
in the basilica of S. Laurence, we read 




























CONTINET HOC TEMPLVYM SANCTORVM CORPORA PLVRA 
A QVIBVS AVXILIVM SVPPLEX HIC POSCERE CVRA. 


Then, after mentioning Xystus and Laurentius with the first martyr 
tephen, the inscription enumerates Hippolytus with his nurse Concor- 
ia and his family. ‘Then follows next in order 


ROMANVS MILES. 


Of this inscription I shall have to say more presently*, For my 

mediate purpose this mention is sufficient. The time also of the 
estival of 5. Romanus nearly coincided with those of S. Laurence 
nd 5. Hippolytus as appears from this notice in the Old Roman 
artyrology (AR. 40. g), where we have in juxta-position 


v Id Aug. Romae, Romani militis 
Vigilia sancti Laurentii. 
Romae Laurentii archidiacon. martyris et militum clxv. 
Romae, Hippolyti martyris cum familia sua, et 


S. Concordiae nutricis ejus ; 


iv Id Aug. 
Idus Aug. 


1 Op. τι. p. 618. The festival of S. οἵ style; but the Benedictine editor adds 


omanus was evidently a great day at 
tioch and would give occasion to 
hts of Christian oratory which influ- 
the transmission and embellish- 
ent of the story. The oration of our 
do-Chrysostom is one of these. Its 
snuineness is condemned on the ground 








(for reasons given) ‘ crediderem...esse 
cujusdam presbyteri Antiocheni, qui sub 
Flaviano alternas cum Chrysostomo con- 
cionandi partes ageret’; see also Tille- 
mont Aém. v. p. 206. 

2 See below, p. 461 sq, 469 sq. 


448 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 






























and we meet with similar notices in Florus-Beda and in Ado and 
the later Roman Martyrologists. Ἧ 

There can be no doubt therefore that the Romanus of Prudentius an¢ 
of the Roman Martyrologists is the same person with the Romanus Ὁ 
Eusebius and Chrysostom. But, if so, how do we explain two dif 
ferences? (1) The Romanus of Eusebius is a cleric, a ‘deacon an 
exorcist’; but the Romanus of the Roman Martyrologists is a soldier 
(2) The Romanus martyred at Antioch was commemorated on Nov. 18, 
but the Romanus of the Tiburtine way and of the Latin Church 
generally on Aug. 9, the eve of S. Laurence. a 

(1) As regards the profession of Romanus the testimony of Eusebius 
is quite distinct. This martyr was a deacon in one of the villages in the 
neighbourhood of his own Czesarea; but in all authors after Eusebiu: 
his clerical status has disappeared. Even Chrysostom, who was mos 
favourably situated as to time and place for ascertaining the truth, seems 
have regarded him as a soldier. He tells how Romanus kept togethe 
the army (στρατόπεδον) of Christ and shifted the shame of defeat from 
the Christians to the heads of the foes (rds τῶν πολεμίων κεφαλά 
Ρ. 613). He represents the devil as desiring, by cutting out the 
martyr’s tongue rather than depriving him of life outright, to make hi r 
a witness of ‘the lapses and the disaster of his own soldiers’ (τώ 
πτωμάτων καὶ τῆς συμφορᾶς τῶν οἰκείων στρατιωτῶν, Ὁ. 614). The secon 
passage at all events does not look like a metaphor, though we mig 
be inclined so to interpret the first. But whatever may have be 
Chrysostom’s own meaning, this figure of Christian warfare was dout 
less the bridge of passage from Romanus the cleric to Romanus # 
soldier. This appears in the development of the story, when we arti 
at the pseudo-Eusebius, who may not improbably have written bef 
the close of the fourth century and whose account appears to | 
influenced by the eulogium of 5. Chrysostom. We are there told th 
Romanus arriving at Antioch, and finding that ‘many soldiers belongi 
to the Church had lapsed’ (multos milites cecidisse ecclesiae), p 
sented himself before the judge, and said; ‘Thou shalt not dep | 
exulting, for God has soldiers who cannot be forced to submit’ (ha 
enim Deus milites qui superari non possunt). This ‘soldier Οἱ ri 
Lord’ (Domini miles) accordingly resolves to show his own const 
by resistance. Though Romanus is not distinctly called ‘a sok 
here, the language implies his military profession. To this accou 
the pseudo-Eusebius, which we have only in a Latin translation, 
Latin .Martyrologists seem from several indications to have 
indebted. With them at all events he is unmistakeably a soldi τι 
































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 449 


Of the profession of Romanus the Spanish poet tells us nothing. 
So far as his direct language goes he might have been either a cleric or 
a soldier, but he describes him as a noble of ancient lineage (vetusta 
nobilem prosapia) who by his many services had won the first rank 
among the citizens (meritisque multis esse primum civem); and at 
he suggestion of the attendants, the offensive crowd (noxialem 
tipitem) are removed by the judge, that a man of illustrious rank 
ight not be condemned by a plebeian sentence—a description which 
ll assorts with a simple deacon ministering in an obscure village of 
alestine. We may reasonably assume therefore, that Prudentius too 
egarded Romanus as a soldier, if he had any distinct conception at all 
n this point. The poem on Romanus is the Aitce de resistance of the 
ollection. It occupies not fewer than 1140 lines, nearly a third of the 
hole number. It is made the vehicle for an elaborate attack on the 
bsurdities of idolatry, after the names of the apologists, with an 
ccompanying defence of Christianity—neither the attack nor the 
efence wanting in vigour and eloquence of a certain kind. We may 
uspect that Prudentius, having little to tell of the saint himself, poured 
into this poem the contents of his poetical common-place book. But 
he immediate impulse to the poem seems to have been given: by the 
Festival which he witnessed on the Tiburtine Way. 

(2) But what shall we say of the time of the festival, Aug. gth? 
usebius again is quite explicit as to the day of the martyrdom. His 
omanus suffered at Antioch in the first year of Diocletian’s persecution 
n the 16th Dius, equivalent to xv Kal. Dec. (Nov. 18), or the 7th (it 
hould be the 17th) later Teshri, as given in the Syriac recension, 
he same day on which his fellow-countrymen Alpheus and Zacchzeus 
ere martyred at Czesarea. Accordingly we find this day assigned to 
im in the ancient Syriac Calendar, which must date from the latter 
of the fourth century (the extant Ms bearing date 412). The 
stival therefore, as celebrated at Rome, must be the commemoration 
some translation—probably the deposition of the reliques in this 
oman sanctuary on the Tiburtine way. But the Roman Martyrologies, 
om the Martyrologium Hieronymianum onward, preserve elsewhere 
e record of the true day of martyrdom. The fact is that the contents 
the Syriac Martyrology, or of some allied Calendar, or both, were 
ovelled into this valuable refuse-heap of martyrological records which 
s the name of Jerome, and so we find: 

xv Kal. Dec. In Caesarea natalis sanctorum...Alphaei, Zacchaei, 
Romani. 
xiv Kal. Dec. In Antiochia civitate, Romani monachi, Baralae ; 

CLEM. II. 29 






























450 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


f 
where we have a double entry of the same person. The correspondin 5 
notice in the Vetus Romanum is . 


xiv Kal. Dec. Antiochiae Romani monachi et martyris, 


where the clerical character of Romanus is still preserved in ‘mo- 
nachus.’ Again in the later Martyrologists, Ado and his companions, 
the notice of Romanus of Antioch appears on one of these two days in 
December, where he is correctly described as a martyr in the persecution 
of Diocletian, where the prefect’s name Asclepiades is given (after 
Prudentius), and where the story of the child Baralas is likewise told. 

We are now in a position to say something more generally about 
this journey of Prudentius to Rome, so fertile in its poetical results; 
and the investigation is not uninstructive. On his way from Spain to 
the eternal city he stops at Yorum Cornelii or Forum Syllae, the modern 
Imola; and there he pays his devotions at the shrine of the local saint, 
to which the cathedral of Imola is still dedicated—Cassianus the 
school-master martyr who was beaten to death with the tablets and 
stabbed with the stiles of the ungrateful urchins whom he had taught, 
Here he saw a picture—not less vivid and doubtless not less truthful 
than the representation of Hippolytus’ sanctuary of the Tiburtine Waj 
which he describes afterwards—of the pedagogue done to death by th 
beardless monsters in revenge for the castigations of the rod which the 
must have richly deserved. This is the only poem in the wholl 
collection which commemorates a martyr not connected either with hi 
native Spain or with Rome the object of his visit. At Rome he woul 
probably arrive before the festival of the Passion of S. Peter and S. Ps 1 
(June 2918). This indeed might have been the immediate aim of ἢ 
journey, and would determine the time of his arrival in the city. FE 
describes the unwonted stir among the Roman people, 


Plus solito coeunt ad gaudia; dic, amice, quid sit a 
Romam per omnem cursitant ovantque. q 


He pictures, though briefly, yet notwithstanding some difficulties w 
the vividness of an eye-witness, the two basilicas of 5, Peter and S. Ps 
on either side of the river—their position and features ; he describes | 
‘sacerdos,’ probably the Roman bishop, as busied from morning 
night (so we may perhaps paraphrase the word ‘pervigil’), celebrat 
the sacred rites, first at the one and then at the other; he speak: 
himself with the rest of the crowd as hurrying from the one to 


Nos ad utrumque tamen gressu properemus incitato, 
Et his et illis perfruamur hymnis ; 

































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 451 


and he concludes by appealing to all strangers, visitors like himself in 
the holy city, to profit by the occasion ; 


Haec didicisse sat est Romae tibi; tu, domum reversus, 
Diem bifestum sic colas memento. 


This poem was, it would almost seem, written for the occasion. But 
his chief interest gathers about the three festivals celebrated in the 
middle of August on the Tiburtine way—those of 5. Romanus, 5. 
Laurentius, and S. Hippolytus. The poem on S. Agnes was suggested 
probably by its proximity; for her martyrdom was celebrated at a 

different time of the year—in January. ‘The eulogy of S. Cyprian may 
ἢ also have been prompted by this Roman visit ; for his commemoration 
was celebrated in the cemetery of S. Callistus on xviii Kal. Oct. (Sept. 


15); but, as Prudentius himself says, Cyprian was celebrated all the 
world round, 





Praesidet Hesperiae, Christum serit ultimis Iberis. 


He was, writes the poet, though ‘proprius patriae martyr,’ yet ‘ore et 
amore noster.’ 


From this long digression on the hymns of Prudentius and more 
especially on Romanus, of which the motive will appear presently, 
I return to Hippolytus. Prudentius gives us a minute and accurate 
description of what he saw at the commemoration on the Tiburtine 
Way. ‘There was the picture of the martyrdom over the tomb of the 
martyr, painted in vivid colours; the mangled limbs scattered here and 
there; the thorns and thickets stained with the vermilion blood; the 
weeping friends, following in the rear and gathering the remains into 
their bosom; one fondling his snow-white head, others his mutilated 
arms and legs; others wiping up with their clothes or with sponges 
he blood-bespattered ground, that nothing might be lost of the precious 
emains. He then describes the sanctuary itself; the crypt with its 
ark galleries, not far from the city walls; the subterranean recesses 
ighted here and there with windows in the roof, so that the sun’s 
ys poured in. Thither the martyr’s body was brought from Ostia, 
here the martyrdom took place, and there deposited in a shrine 
leaming with solid silver. Lining the recess were slabs of smooth 
arian marble adorned with gold. From morning to night the tide 
f worshippers flowed in constant succession, Romans and foreigners ; 
issing the precious metal and pouring fragrant ointment on it, their 
es bedewed with tears. Nobles and common-folk jostled each other 
oulder to shoulder ; visitors, clad in festive white, thronged from all 


29—2 


452 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 































parts; the roads poured in their contingent from every side—from 
Picenum and Etruria, the rude Samnite, the Campanian from lofty 
Capua, the citizens of Nola—husbands, wives, and children. Wide 
though the space, it was all too little for the dense multitudes. But 
hard by there is another temple ready to receive the crowds, towering 
upward with its lofty walls; a double range of columns supports 
the gilded beams of the roof; the aisles end in curved recesses; the 
central nave rises to a greater height; in front is a lofty tribunal 
approached by steps, whence the chief priest preaches God. With 
difficulty does even this larger edifice receive the surging and heaving 
crowds, thus opening a mother’s bosom to gather and cherish her 
children. ‘If my memory serves me aright,’ the poet adds, ‘beautifu 
Rome worships this saint on the Ides of August’; and he urges his 
bishop, Valerianus of Zaragoza, to whom the poem is addressed, to 
give a place among the annual festivals to Hippolytus, as places were 
already given to Cyprian, to Chelidonius, to Eulalia. ‘So,’ he con- 
cludes, ‘when thou shalt have filled the folds with milk-white lambs, 
mayest thou be borne aloft and join the company of holy Hippolytus.’ 
Evidently the cult of S. Hippolytus was at its zenith, when Prudentius 
visited the shrine; as it naturally would be after the recent architectural 
and decorative splendours lavished upon it by Damasus. β. 

Of the scene of this multifarious gathering no question can now ἢ : 
entertained. Recent excavations have laid open the subterranean basilice 
of S. Hippolytus on the north of the Tiburtine Way—the specus excep 
tionally spacious for underground sanctuaries of this kind, lit fron 
windows in the roof, substantially as it was seen by the eyes of Pruden 
tius. Of this however I shall have to speak presently. But what wa 
the larger edifice which received the throngs too great for the caver 
beneath? Was it another basilica of S. Hippolytus above ground ὁ 
or near the same site? Or was it the more famous sanctuary « 
S. Laurence on the south side of the road? Not unnaturally criti 
have inclined to this latter view. The excavations in the cemetery ( 
Hippolytus have not proceeded far enough hitherto to enable us 
form a confident opinion. But it must be remembered that at th 
remote age only the Constantinian basilica of S. Laurence existe¢ 
not a very spacious building on any showing. The churches of Xys 
III (a.D. 440), of Pelagius II (a.p. 578), and of Honorius III | (a 
1216), were still unbuilt. The actual condition of the basilic Ἶ 
S. Laurence in the eye οὗ Prudentius—a subject beset with consider 
difficulties—will demand a few words of explanation presently. 

But what was this picture of the martyrdom so vivid in its det 


/ 






































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 453 


which Prudentius saw and described? ‘The most improbable supposi- 
tion of all is that it represented the actual event. ‘It is more like a 
poet’s or a painter’s than a prefect’s deed,’ it has been truly said’, ‘to 
tear an old Christian with horses, whether because of his own un- 
luckily suggestive name or because of the tale of his namesake ’—the 
hero of the ancient Greek myth. Some have supposed therefore that a 
classical sculpture or painting of the son of Theseus, the hero of Greek 
tragedy, torn to pieces by horses, was discovered in the neighbourhood 
(Dollinger, p. 39 sq), or removed from elsewhere and placed in the 
}chapel of his namesake. This is a tempting explanation ; but unless 
Prudentius has far exceeded the license of poets in his description, 
it will not suit the details. What are we to say of the collection 
Hof the reliques? What of the ‘venerable white head’ fondled in 
the lap of the disciples? What of the sopping and sponging up 
the blood? Obviously we have here not a work of Greek or Greeco- 
roman art, but a product of Christian piety, resembling in its gross 
ealism and bad taste, as well as its intensity and devotion, the pictures 
f martyrdom with which we are familiar a few centuries later. Cer- 
ainly it was not a sculpture, unless it had been painted over by some 
hristian artist; for Prudentius speaks of the vivid colouring, the purple 
d vermilion, of the scene. Moreover, though we should accept this 
xplanation of the picture on the Tiburtine Way, we have still to account 
for the similar painting which the poet saw on this same journey at 
mola—the martyrdom of Cassianus not less realistic and described with 
qual vividness. The martyrdom of Cassianus at all events had no coun- 
erpart in ancient Greek legend. De Rossi thinks and gives reason for 
hinking*, that this representation of Hippolytus’ martyrdom was painted 
nm a very small scale—like a miniature or a Dutch work of art. This 
eems not improbable ; though no stress can be laid on the fact that 
cent explorations have not as yet brought to light any traces of its 





_ §xistence. Even if it had been a large fresco, we could not hope to 


iscover any vestiges remaining in a place which has passed through so 
ny vicissitudes as the sanctuary of 5. Hippolytus. The most pro- 
ble explanation seems to be that, the manner of Hippolytus’ death 
ing unknown and some concrete representation being necessary, this 
ly Christian painter selected the fate of his mystical namesake as ‘a 
‘Kictorial mode of writing above the shrine HIPPOLYTUS MARTYR®*.’ 


1 Benson Yourn. of Class. and Sacr. this article On the Martyrdom and Com- 
lol. τ. p. 192. memorations of S. Hippolytus, which 1. 
2 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p.73sq- have more than once quoted, was written 

Benson p. 210. I should say that without the knowledge of recent dis- 



























A54 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


After the visit of Prudentius we find no notice of this cemetery and 
crypt of S. Hippolytus for nearly a century and a half. Then, du ing 
the papacy of Vigilius (A.D. 537—555) a record is preserved of its 
restoration by one Andreas a presbyter, in an inscription of which 
fragments have been found on the spot itself and of which the co 1 
cluding lines are’ 


PRAESVLE VIGILIO SVMP[SERVNT] ANTRA DECOREM 
PRAESBYTERI ANDREAE CVR[A] PEREGIT OPVS. a 


It was a season of great trouble and disaster to the Roman Church 
in many ways. Rome stood two sieges from the barbarians during 
this single episcopate, the one from Witiges in a.p. 537, 538, the other 
from Totila in a. Ὁ. 546, 547. The suburban churches and cemeteries 
were devastated and laid in ruins. It must have been on one of thes 
occasions that the renovation of which the inscription speaks took 
place. 

As the writer apparently speaks of a ‘second’ devastation (ITERVM) 
it would seem to have been after the invasion of Totila that thest 
repairs were undertaken*. This accords with the language above quoter 
which gives only the name of Vigilius as dating the epoch (‘ praesul 
Vigilio’); whereas in another case, when the restoration took pla 
presumably after the former siege by Witiges, we are told that po 
Vigilius himself ‘hostibus expulsis omne novavit opus®.’ Vigilius W; 
absent from Rome during the last years of his life. The writer in h 
account of these restorations under Vigilius mentions the skylights | 
the roof admitting the sun, which were a special feature of this st 
terranean church and which Prudentius had described a century al 
a half before—here specified as three in number—‘trinum stupuit ἢ 
specula lumen.’ 

Connected with this group of saints commemorated in August 
the Tiburtine Way was the cultus of S. Genesius, the Roman acto 
pantomimes who is said to have suffered in the persecution of Dioclet 
He is mentioned in the medieval itineraries in the entourage 
Hippolytus as lying near Concordia, between Triphonia and Cyt 
He must therefore have been buried in the cemetery of Hippoly 


N 


coveries, when it was still possible to rectly supplied in an earlier nv ᾿ 
maintain that the original Hippolytus of 1881, p. 40. ἣ 
the Ager Veranus was not a cleric, but a 2 See Bull. di Archeol. Crist. τὶ 
soldier. 61 sq. 9 

1 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 59 8 Comp. 7b. 1873, p. 46 54; τὶ 
sq, where the inscription is given in its 126. 
correct form. The lacunz were incor- 4 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 188: 

























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 455 


His day was viii Kal. Sept. (Aug. 25th). Nearly two centuries later 
than the above mentioned restorations of Vigilius, we find a successor 
of Vigilius, Gregory III [a.p. 731—741], restoring the roof of the 
Church of S. Genesius, and erecting an altar of the Saviour there 
(AR. 15 Ab). This was presumably some above-ground building erected 
in honor of Genesius within the precincts of the cemetery of Hippolytus, 
but we have no adequate information. 

Again there is silence for some centuries respecting the basilica of 
S. Hippolytus; but meanwhile important works were carried out on the 
opposite side of the Tiburtine Way in the more famous sanctuary of 
S. Laurentius, which in course of time had a fatal influence on the 
decadence and obliteration of the humbler cemetery and shrine. As 
the fate of the two is ultimately connected together, and as some 
account of the history of the Church of 5. Laurence is therefore 
necessary for the appreciation of my particular subject, this will be a 
convenient point for a very few words of explanation. 





- The honour paid to S. Laurence, the deacon of Sixtus III, who 
perished with his master in the Decian persecution, dates from the 
earliest times. He was the Stephen of the Western Church. ‘Quam 
non potest abscondi Roma,’ says Augustine, ‘tam non potest abscondi 
Laurentii corona’.’ ‘De beati solemnitate Laurentii,’ says the prayer 
in the oldest Roman sacramentary, ‘peculiarius prae caeteris Roma 
laetatur; cujus nascendo civis, sacer minister, dedicatum nomini Tuo 
munus est proprium’ (Ziturg. Rom. Vet. τ. p. 398, Muratori). His 
festival had a special vigil, which was celebrated from the earliest times— 
a peculiar honour bestowed on few saints besides. His name appears 
in calendars which can hardly date more than a generation after his 
death. It is no marvel then that the aureole which encircled the 


sq; comp. Rom. Sott. 1. p. 178. There 
were two martyrs of this name; (1) A 
‘notary of Arles who suffered under Dio- 
cletian, A.D. 303; (2) A pantomime actor 
f Rome who suffered in this same year 
(as some think) A.D. 285 or 286. They 
e both celebrated on the same day viii 
1. Sept. (Aug. 25) in Ado and the 
tin Martyrologists; or on successive 
ys, Aug. 24 and Aug. 25. De Rossi 
c.) says that the Genesius of the Ager 
eranus was the actor. It would seem 
me difficult to say that there was no 
fusion between the two. In the Mar- 














tyrologium Vetus both the two are named 
on the same day Aug. 25, ‘Genesius mi- 
mus’ and ‘Genesius Arelatensis’; in the 
old Carthaginian Calendar only the 
former. In Prudentius (Feristeph. 4), 
who was fresh from the Ager Veranus, 
Genesius of Arles is mentioned (ver. 36) 
among other martyrs at Czesaraugusta 
(Zaragoza). Was there only one Gene- 
sius after all—first notary and then actor ; 
just as there was only one Romanus and 
only one Hippolytus (see p. 462 sq, 
p- 460 sq)? 

1 Serm. 303, Op. V. p. 1233, ed. Bened, 


456. 


heads of other neighbouring saints and martyrs—even of the famo ; 
Hippolytus himself—should have paled in the light of his unique 


splendour. 


How much truth there may be in the current story about the mode 
of S. Laurence’s martyrdom, we need not stop to enquire. 
was the fourth before the Ides of August, three days before the com- 
As the deposition of Hippolytus on the 
opposite side of the Tiburtine Way probably took place some years 
before his death, we must regard the circumstance which brought them 
into close connexion in time as well as place, as a mere coincidence. 
But it was fraught with momentous consequences to his posthumous 


memoration of 5. Hippolytus. 


fame. 


The architectural history of the basilica of S. Laurence is strangely 


years, interpreted by the archeological knowledge of De Rossi a 
others, have gone far to solve the problem’. 

The original basilica of Constantine stood over the tomb of the 
It occupied, roughly speaking, the same site as the present 
chancel, i.e. as the basilica of Pelagius II. 


martyr. 


same way—the apse being at the West end, and the narthex at the East 
At the same time that this pope built this church over the tomb, ne 
adorned the crypt itself, in which the body lay, with exceptional splen: 
dours and endowed it with costly gifts. 
with gifts which he commemorated in an inscription on the spot 


HAEC DAMASVS CVMVLAT SVPPLEX ALTARIA DONIS 
MARTYRIS AEGREGII SVSCIPIENS MERITVM’*. 


Before the close of the century [c. a.D. 400] we read of some work 
executed by one Leopardus, a priest—not unknown to us for his ze 
on behalf of other sanctuaries—and commemorated by an inscription*. 

Towards the middle of the next century, the reigning pope Sixtus I 


1 Beschreibung der Stadt 111. Pt ii. p. 
312 sq. The error of these older writers 
in connecting this basilica with the name 
of Galla Placidia and thus throwing the 
architectural chronology into confusion is 
explained by De Rossi, Bull. di Archeol, 
Crist. 1864, p. 433 Ζεῦ. Christ. Urb. 
Rom. 11. Ὁ. 105. 

? See especially De Rossi Bull. di Ar- 


EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. ᾿ 




















His é ay 


It was orientated in 


Damasus adorned his alta 


cheol. Crist. 1864, Ὁ. 42 sq; 1876, p 
sq: and the important notes of Duchesi 
Lib. Pont. 1. p. 197 54, 235 Sq, 310. 
3 Inscr. Christ. Urb, Rom. τι. pp.‘ 
117. i 
4 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1867, Ῥ. 
sq; comp. Juscr. Christ. Urb. Rom. 


᾿ΠΡ. 155+ 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 457 


(A. D. 432—440) made a highly important addition to the buildings on 
this ground (AR. 15 Bb). He not only adorned the existing confession 
of S. Laurentius with columns of porphyry and in other ways, the 
previous work of Constantine having probably suffered in the pillage of 
A.D. 410 under Alaric; but he built an entirely new and more spacious 
basilica to the West of the Constantinian church, so that the apses of 
the two buildings—the old and the new—stood back to back. This 
building of Sixtus corresponds with the nave of the existing basilica. 
Its apse was at the East end, and its narthex at the West. This 
basilica was termed ‘Dei genetricis,’ ‘of the Mother of God’; a 
designation which would seem especially appropriate at a time when 
the Nestorian controversy was agitating the Church. This is the 
‘basilica major,’ which in the Itineraries of the seventh century is 
distinguished from the ‘basilica ubi ipse modo requiescit’ (4.R. 38 b). 
It bears this name in two inscriptions of the fifth century found on the 
spot [IN B]ASSILICA MAXIO[RE], IN BASILICA MAIORE AD DOMNV 
LAVRENTIVM '. 

Again Pelagius II [a.p. 579—590] enlarged, raised, and generally 
rebuilt, the smaller basilica to the East, which rose over the body. The 
Liber Pontificalis τ. p. 309 (Duchesne) speaks of this work as ‘basilicam 
a fundamento constructam,’ and the existing building shows this 
language to be hardly an exaggeration. Owing to its superior splendour, 
when thus renovated by Pelagius, this building is described as ‘ basilica 
speciosior,’ ‘basilica nova mirae pulchritudinis, in the Itineraries 
(AR. 38 a Ὁ) to distinguish it from the larger basilica—the erection of 
Sixtus III to the West. We are told moreover that Pelagius dedicated 
his building to S. Sixtus, S. Laurentius, and 5. Hippolytus. But there 
is reason to think that this threefold dedication is earlier than Pelagius. 
When Sixtus III built his new basilica ‘Dei Genetricis,’ he would 
naturally turn his attention to the dedication of the older building, 
which likewise owed new splendours to his munificence, and in which 
he himself was ultimately buried. What more natural then than that 
he should have associated in the dedication his martyred predecessor 
and namesake Sixtus II, who had been associated with S. Laurentius 
in his life and in his death? If so, Pelagius only accepted the triple 
dedication as he found it. But he commemorated it in a remarkable 
way. Over the arch of the apse he placed a mosaic representing the 
Saviour seated in the centre, while right and left of him were the two 
Apostles 5. Peter and S. Paul, and the three saints of the dedication, 
with himself peLAGivs EPisc. the builder of the church somewhat in the 


1 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1876, p. 22 sq. 





































458 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


background. The point to be observed is that 505 YPOLIT, as he οι 
represented, has not yet lost his proper personality. Though associated 
with 5. Laurence, he still remains the priest with the clerical tons 
not the soldier with the military cloak ; the doctor of the Church, not 
the warder and convert of 5. Laurence. Ὶ 

The last and greatest change was yet to come. Hitherto there were 
two basilicas, back to back ; the larger—the building of Xystus—facing 
westward, and the smaller—the original erection of Constantine 15. 
rebuilt by Pelagius—facing eastward. In 1216 Honorius III broke’ 
through the apses and fused the two. Thus the building of Sixtus 
became the nave, and the building of Pelagius the chancel, of the 
combined basilica, as it still exists. The orientation therefore now 
conforms to our northern type, the chancel being at the East end and 
the vestibule at the West. Accordingly the mosaic set up by Pelagius, 
though undisturbed in its main features, no longer looks down the 
church according to the original design, but looks inward towards the 
east end. 


» 
“id 


But, while the basilica of S. Laurence thus grew to greater magnifi- 
cence, the basilica of S. Hippolytus dwindled from small to less. In 
the middle of the eighth century the Lombards under Astolph swe ot 
over the land, extinguished the exarchate of Ravenna, and besiege d 
Rome itself. The invader dug up and carried off the bodies of the 
saints and martyrs, as trophies, into his own country. What could the 
Romans do to meet these successive desecrations of the sanctuaries? 
The siege of Astolph was in a.p. 756. Of the succeeding popes som : 
like Paul I (a.p. 756—767) and Paschal I (a.p. 817—824) anc 
Leo IV (A.D. 847—855) pursued the more timorous, but safer co 
of removing the sacred reliques from the suburban cemeteries to 
churches within the city. This was only a more respectable form of 
body-snatching than the Lombard plundering itself. On the other he n 
Hadrian I (a.p. 772—795) and Leo III (a.p. 795—816) adopted th 
bolder policy of restoring the extra-mural sanctuaries. Of Nicolas 
(A.D. 858—867) it is recorded that he made a visitation of the churche 
and cemeteries (‘sanctorum ecclesias ac coemeteria circuibat’)’; bt 
whether this resulted in any definite policy with respect of the small 
suburban sanctuaries, we have not, so far as I know, any inform: tic 
We read of this same pope as making certain gifts to the church 
S. Laurence without the walls*. 4 
_ These vicissitudes of the papal policy were felt in the cemetery 


1 See Rom. Sott. 1. p. 221. 2 Lib. Pont. 11. p. 166 (Duchesne). Ὁ 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 459 


S. Hippolytus. Paul I, between a.p. 757 and a.p. 761, founded the 
church and monastery of S. Silvester in Capite, so called from the head 
of 8. John the Baptist which was its most precious relique—opened 
several suburban tombs, and transferred to his new foundation the 
bodies of the saints and martyrs’. In the portico of the church he 
affixed two tablets containing respectively the names of the male and 
female saints thus translated; among whom are several from the 
cemetery of Hippolytus, more especially the body of Hippolytus him- 
self. Those parts of the inscriptions which refer to the saints buried 
in the Ager Veranus, will be found above (4.2. 37 Ὁ). 

On the other hand in the Life of Hadrian I (a.p. 772—795) we are 
informed that this pontiff ‘restored the parts of the cemetery of 
S. Hippolytus which had fallen into decay from ancient times’, and 
likewise ‘the church of S. Stephen close to the aforesaid cemetery’ 
(AR. 15 Acc). It is not clear what building is meant by this last 
designation—whether the basilica of S. Hippolytus itself called the 
church of S. Stephen for some unknown reason or some chapel annexed 
to this basilica and dedicated to 5. Stephen’. At all events it must 
be distinguished from the church of S. Stephen in the cemetery of 
S. Cyriaca on the opposite side of the Tiburtine way; for the 
restorations of the two several churches of S. Stephen are mentioned 
separately in the Life of Hadrian (Zid. Pont. τ. p. 508, 511), and the 
situation of each is described *. 

Again ; under Leo IV (a.p. 847—855) the policy of translation is 
substituted for the policy of restoration. This pontiff, having restored, 
enlarged, and beautified the basilica of the Quatuor Coronati on the 
Ceelian, in order to invest it with greater honour, deposited under the 
altar the body of Hippolytus and his family with others (42. 15 A e). 
This is the second body of S. Hippolytus, the first having already been 
translated by Paul I to S. Silvester. 

Lastly; at some later date, whether when Honorius III carried out 
his works in the basilica of S. Laurentius (A.D. 1216) or at some earlier 
point of time, the reliques in the cemetery of S. Hippolytus seem to 
have been swept wholesale into the church of S. Laurentius, probably 
because their own proper resting-place had now fallen hopelessly into 
ruin. An inscription, though probably a later (13th cent.) copy of the 


1 Bull. di Archeol, Crist. 1882, p. 32 [A.D. 468—483] Zid. Pont. 1. p. 249. On 

56. the two churches of 5. Stephen see Bul/. 
2 7b. 1882, p. 23 sq, P+ 53- di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 43 Sq, Ρ. 52 
3 The church of S. Stephen connected 54. 


4 with 5. Laurence was built by Simplicius 




































460 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


earlier monument, was read by the pilgrims of the 13th and 14th ce 7 
turies (AX. 37 a), which enumerates these precious treasures and amon; 
them is a third body of Hippolytus. Ὁ 
Thus our saint and doctor appears as ἢ 
forma tricorporis umbrae 

even in Rome itself; while, as we shall see presently, other bodies o 
Hippolytus were laid in other cities of Europe. I need not stop to 
enquire how far this multiplication of bodies was due to the practice of 
calling any limb of a saint the ‘body,’ even though it might be only a 
small portion, and how far it arose from the zeal which led to the eager 
identification of any remains which lay near the supposed place of oes 
ture with the saint who was the object of search. 


But, while the body of S. Hippolytus was undergoing this processill 0} 4 
multiplication, his personality also was being subjected to a transfor- 
mation. Baronius accused even an early writer like Prudentius of 
confusing together the personalities of three distinct namesakes (p. 412): 
(1) the divine and father of the Church; (2) the martyr of Antioch; 
(3) the soldier and gaoler of S. Laurence. He supposed that the Spanish q 
poet had borrowed the Novatianism from the second, and the con- 
nexion with the Ager Veranus from the third, and had falsely attribute εἰ 
both the one and the other to the first, thus rolling the three into. 
one. Other later writers also have adopted this view, with or ra 
modifications. Possessing information which was not within the reach 
of Baronius, we are able to exculpate Prudentius from both thes 
robberies. The attribution of Novatianism, as we now find (p. 424 “a 8 
much older than Prudentius; and, as a matter of fact, is attributed to the 
Roman divine some centuries before it is attached to the Antioche . 
martyr, so that the robbery is on the other side. Again, the supposed 
appropriation of the sepulchre in the Ager Veranus has arisen from 
an entire mistake; which it will be worth while now to explain. 

De Rossi has shown satisfactorily that the supposed confusion Οἱ 
Hippolytus the doctor and divine with Hippolytus the gaoler anc 
convert of S. Laurence is not a confusion at all but a substitution 
In fact they do not co-exist. We find no traces of Hippolytus th 
gaoler in connexion with the Ager Veranus—or indeed, any traces Ὁ 
his existence at all—till the 7th century at least. With Damasus ar 
Prudentius the Hippolytus of the Ager Veranus is a priest. On the sz 
cophagus of Apt (see below, p. 467), which may date from the fo 
fifth century, though connected with S. Sixtus, he is not only a pi ie 
but a writer. He is a priest still in the mosaics put up by Pel 








HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 461 


when this pope restored the basilica of S. Laurentius (c. a.D. 580); for 
he is clad in priestly robes. He is so represented likewise in other 
contemporary works of art, for instance in the mosaic in 5. Apollinaris 
at Ravenna. The earliest work of art to which De Rossi can point as 
departing from this mode of representation is the Celimontane picture 
of the time of Formosus (A.D. 891—8g6), where he is clad in the 
military chlamys’. 

What is the meaning of all this? As the basilica of S. Hippolytus 
dwindled into insignificance and fell into ultimate ruin, the cultus con- 
nected with it was transferred to the imposing church of S. Laurence 
on the opposite side of the way, while the bodies of the saints and 
martyrs, or such as still remained in the cemetery of Hippolytus, 
were transferred thither. Hence the desire to connect with S. Laurence 
historically those who were connected with him locally; and the various 
Acts of the Laurentinian Cycle started into being. Of these the most 
famous was Hippolytus himself, who had the chief place assigned to him 
in these Acts; while the other members of his entourage, such as Con- 
cordia, though originally they may have had no historical connexion 
even with Hippolytus himself, yet were woven into the story, owing to 
the fact that they were buried in the same cemetery. In the Martyr- 
ology of Ado ( a.p. 874) we have embedded great part ofthe Passion 
of S. Sixtus, S. Laurentius, and S. Hippolytus, which included likewise 
the martyrdoms of these minor saints grouped around them, and seems 
to have served as a guide book for the pilgrims to this Ager Veranus’. 

But how was this transformation from the cleric to the soldier 
effected ? What was the main instrumentality which brought it about? 
I seem to myself to be able to answer this question with a reasonable 
degree of probability. 

At an earlier point in this investigation (p. 446 sq) I discussed the 
honours paid to the martyr Romanus in the Ager Veranus, though him- 
self connected with Czesarea and Antioch. I there pointed out that, 
though known to have been a cleric on contemporary authority, he was 
transformed into a soldier within two or three generations of his death; 
that some reliques were possessed or supposed to be possessed in the 
basilica or cemetery of S. Laurence; and that he was one of the group 
of martyrs celebrated in the Ager Veranus in August. His day was the 
eve of 5, Laurence, as it appears in the Martyrologium Vetus (AR. 40 g); 


v Id. Aug. Romae, Romani militis 
Vigilia sancti Laurentii, 


1 Bull. di Archeol. Crist, 1882, p. 34. 2 AR. 38; see below, p. 473. 


462 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 
























but in a list of the reliques on an ancient tablet found in S. Lauren ce 
(AR. 37 a), we read a 


POST HOS IPOLITUS COLLIS RE 
LIGATUS EQUORVM 
CUM NUTRICE SUA CUM CUNC 
TA PLEBE SUORVM 
ROMANUS MILES, 


where the proper name would be easily overlooked and explained 
‘a Roman soldier’ as descriptive of Hippolytus. Though this actual 
tablet is probably not older than the 13th century, it is apparently οὖ 
copy of an earlier inscription; and at all events the same connexion of 
names would appear in other documents relating to these martyrs, 
Thus, having himself been transmuted from a cleric into a “ 
Romanus handed on the same transmutation to Hippolytus. 

I am the more encouraged to believe that this is the real account of 
the change, because I find that in all essential respects Hippolytus : 
soldier is the mere double of Romanus the soldier. Both the one and 
the other suffer under Decius; both the one and the other belong to the 
band guarding Laurence; both the one and the other are cut to e 
quick by the good confession of the martyr-deacon, and seek baptism at 
his hands; both the one and the other are put to death; both the one 
and the other are buried by Justinus in the Ager Veranus. Only in 
the manner of their death there is a difference. While Romanus suffers 
in a common-place way, being beheaded, Hippolytus in accordance 
with the picture of the martyrdom seen by Prudentius is torn to pieces 
by horses. ὴ 

Moreover, there is much confusion about the day. The day 0 
Romanus is first given by Ado as the eve of S. Laurence (p. 322), an 
he is mentioned in direct connexion with Hippolytus in the scene 
immediately preceding the martyrdom of 8. Laurence (p. 324). The 
again he is stated (p. 325) to have suffered ‘on the very day (ipso di 
on which the blessed Laurence suffered.’ This confusion is not insigt 
ficant. 

Then again; there is a notice in the account of Hippolytus’ marti 
dom, which seems to be a faint echo of the transformation undergo 
by Hippolytus. Decius orders him to be ‘stripped of the dress rh 
he wore as a Christian’ (‘veste qua induebatur habitu Christiano ἢ 8 
‘to be clothed in the soldier’s dress which he wore as a Gentile’ (‘ves 
militari veste qua gentilis utebatur’). ‘Be our friend,’ says the emp 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 463 


to him, ‘and in our presence resume the profession of a soldier which 
thou didst always follow’ (in conspectu nostro utere militia pristina 
quam semper habuisti)’. These Acts seem to have been written as I 
have said, specially for the use of pilgrims to the Ager Veranus; but in 
the church of S. Laurence the mosaic of Pelagius might still be seen, 
where Hippolytus was represented as a tonsured priest. Did not this 
discrepancy need some such reconciliation as the words here ascribed 
to Decius suggest ? 

Connected with the transformation of the priest into the soldier is 
the ‘familia,’ notably his nurse Concordia, who were martyred with him 
in the later form of the legend. The earlier calendars and liturgies 
speak of Hippolytus alone. In later documents and in later mss of 
the older documents, he is surrounded by his companion martyrs’. 



















After the close of the ninth century we read nothing more of the 
basilica or cemetery of S. Hippolytus. Mention indeed is made of the 
‘Mount of 5. Hippolytus’,’ the hill at the back of the cemetery in the 
11th century; but it is mentioned simply as a locality, without any re- 
ference to the sanctuary which once existed there. When Martin V in 
1425 gave permission for the removal of slabs and stones from the 
desolate suburban catacombs to construct the pavement of S. John 
Lateran*, the cemetery of 5. Hippolytus was one of those rifled for this 
purpose, as the stones now embedded in the Lateran pavement show 
(see above, p. 329); though it is not mentioned by name. Yet the 
rifling was not complete; for the lower part of the statue of Hippolytus 
was discovered on the spot in 1551. At the revival of learning the 
individuality of the cemetery of Hippolytus had so entirely disappeared, 
that the basilicas and cemeteries on the two sides of the Tiburtine Way 
were hopelessly confused by historians and archeologists under the 
general name of the ‘Ager Veranus’; and so long as this confusion 
existed, no satisfactory results were possible. This hopeless state of 
things continued for more than three centuries. Only in our own gene- 
ration was this confusion dissipated by the archeological discoveries, 
interpreted by the antiquarian penetration and learning of De Rossi, 
The excavations more especially, which have been made since the year 
1880, have furnished a final answer to the main questions. 

On this Ager Veranus, to the left side of the Tiburtine Way, to one 
journeying from Rome to Tivoli, had been discovered three centuries 


1 See above, p. 358 sq. 8 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 42; 
5. See the illustrations given by De Rossi comp. Rom, Sott. 1. Ὁ. τότ sq. 
Bull, di Archeol, Crist, 1882, p. 31 sq. 4 7). 1881, p. 39 54; 1882, p. 42. 


464 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


ago, as we have seen, the actual statue of Hippolytus. Here also, at 
later date, was found an inscription REFR[I]GERI[0]. TIBI. DOMNVS. IPPO- 
LITVS . SID (sit). Hence also probably came later still a sepulchral stone 
bearing the words AT. IPPOLITV. SVPER . ARCOSOLIV, which found its w 
into the Vatican Museum* At length in 1881 the excavations were 
commenced on this site in right earnest*, and resulted not only in 
discovery of the inscriptions recording the works of Damasus (a.D. 366— 
384) and of Vigilius (A.D. 537—555), as mentioned already (pp. 328 sq, 
424, 454), but in the actual disinterment of the subterranean basilica 
of Hippolytus, as described by Prudentius and as repaired by Vigilius. 
It is much larger than such subterranean chapels to the Catacombs 
generally, as the description of Prudentius would lead us to expect. It 
exhibits the isolated altar on the bema of the apse, as described by this 
same poet. It shows traces of the three windows overhead ‘trinum per 
specula lumen,’ as specified by Vigilius, so as to throw a flood of light 
into this under-ground church, a feature which impressed Prudentiu: 
though he does not mention the actual number of these lights. τ 
is obviously however not in the state in which it was left by Damasus, 
but bears traces of the subsequent repairs of Vigilius. Thus inscrip- 
tions of the age of Damasus, and later, no longer stand in their origina 
position, but have been displaced, so that in some instances they are 
partly concealed. One such Damasian inscription TIMOTEVS. PRESBYTE: 
in the true Filocalian character (see above, p. 444) must have stooc 
originally in the front of an ‘arcosolium.’ It is now used to construc 
one of the steps to the bema*. Again the walls, as seen by Prudentiu 
were lined with glistening white marble; they are now covered wil 
plaster’. 























Three other sanctuaries of S. Hippolytus in Rome and Italy de Εἰ 
a passing notice. 
(1) During the papacy of Siricius (A.D. 384—399) one πιοῦν : 
presbyter erected all the buildings which were to be seen in conn oxi 
with the church and monastery of S. Pudentiana along the V 
Patricius (now the Via Urbana), beginning with the MEMORIA 8 ν 


1 Bull, di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 45. 

2 7b. p. 48. 

8 7. p. 56 54. 

4 See Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 
68, Tav. 1, ii. 

5 This Timotheus must have been a 
person of some importance in the history 
of the Church. Our first impulse is to 


identify him with the Timotheus of Os 
whose ‘depositio’ is Aug. 22 (xi Kal. Se 
in the Liberian list. He would thus 
another to the saints of the Ager Vers 
celebrated in August. This ; 
however is stated by Ado (and the 
is implied in the Liberian list) to 
been buried in the Cemetery of Osti 


» 
nay 








HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 465 
MARTYRIS IPPOLYtI’: This was the period, as we have seen (p. 452), 
when the fame of Hippolytus reached its zenith owing to the devotion 
of Damasus; and Siricius, the next successor of Damasus, was the very 
man to give further encouragement to it, since it is especially recorded 
in his honour on his tomb that the malcontents of the anti-Damasian 
action were at length united under him*. The same reason therefore 
ich had led Damasus to show his reverence for Hippolytus in the 
anctuary on the Tiburtine Way, as the champion of unity in the Church 
in the midst of schism, would lead Siricius also to heap additional 
honours upon him. But why the selection of the Vicus Patricius and 
he church of S. Pudentiana for this memoria? De Rossi (Bull. di 
rcheol. Crist. 1882, p. 16) answers that Hippolytus probably lived in 
he Vicus Patricius or gathered a Christian congregation there for 
orship. This must be taken as a mere conjecture, like the similar 
onjecture respecting the house and memoria of Clement which I have 
ealt with elsewhere (1. p. 94). But the connexion of the suburban 
emeteries on the Tiburtine way with the priests of the ‘title’ of this (the 
ird ecclesiastical) region—on the Esquiline including S. Pudentiana 
nd S. Praxedis—from the fifth century at least is a matter of certainty. 
hese priests seem to have served these cemeteries, and grants of 
aves were made by them or their prior. Thus we have mention in a 
pulchral inscription dated a. Ὁ. 491 of a grave acquired by one Fausta 
) the cemetery of Hippolytus a. prs. TIT. [P]RAx[sEDIS]*. Elsewhere 
) this same cemetery was found belonging to the year 528 the grave 
one HILARVS. LICTOR (lector). TT. PVDENTIS*; and again another of 
6 PB. PRIOR’, whose name is mutilated and who doubtless belonged 
this same region and title. It is probable therefore that the presbyter 
ndreas, who under Vigilius (see above, p. 454) repaired the basilica of 
Hippolytus, was the prior of this title ®. 

(2) The next Italian sanctuary, which claims a mention in con- 
xion with Hippolytus, is Portus, the haven of Rome. From what I 
































2 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1877, p. 15 
; 1882, p. 15 sq. 

See Duchesne 22d. Pont. 1. p. 217. 
Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 65 


Resoconto dei Cultori di Archeologia 
istiana 1883, April 1, (Roma 1888). 
Bull. di Archeol. Crist.1.c. 

On the connexion of the cemeteries 
the Tiburtine Way with the ‘tituli’ of 
region see Kom. Sott, 111. p. 516 sq. 


CLEM. II, 


Of pope Simplicius (A.D, 468—483) we 
are told that he arranged respecting the 
service at ‘regio ΠῚ ad sanctum Lauren- 
tium’ among other similar arrangements 
in other ‘regiones’. On the tituli ‘Prax- 
edis’ and ‘ Pudentis’ (or ‘Pudentianae’) see 
also Duchesne Votes sur la Topographie de 
Rome au Moyen Age p. 22 sq (Rome 1887), 
extracted from the A/danges d’ Archéo- 
logie. 


30 


466 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 






























have said already and shall have to say hereafter, it will be apparent tha 
whether he was actually bishop of Portus or not, no other place—hard 
even the Ager Veranus—is more closely identified with his name b 
history and tradition alike. The tower of a ruined church in Portus- 
a landmark seen afar over the surrounding waste—still bears his am 
Of Leo ΠῚ (A. D. 795—816) we are told that he gave certain cloths 1 
the ‘basilica beati Yppoliti martyris in civitate Portuense,’ one to coy 
his body (super corpus ejus), and another for the great altar (Zz. “OM 7 
Il. p. 12, Duchesne). Whether it is mentioned at an earlier date, 
know not. The ruins are said to belong to the eighth century. Ἷ 
well is also shown, in which according to the Portuensian version of th 
legend his body was drowned. It is in the Zso/a Sacra’, the islat 
made by the original mouth of the Tiber and by the channel cut fe 
the works of Claudius and Trajan at the new Port. Of the identificatic 
of Hippolytus with an early Portuensian martyr Nonnus, and of ἢ 
association with the virgin Chryse in the spurious Acts of the latter, 
shall have to speak presently (see below, p. 474 sq). P 

Though events were preparing the way, as I have shown, for 
bishopric at Portus in the age of Hippolytus, the permanent see see 
not to have been established till the next century. In the middle ag 
and afterwards it ranked second of the suburbicarian sees, Ostia taki1 
the precedence. a 

(3) At the ancient Forum Semproni, the modern Fossombrone, 
the valley of the Metaurus on the Flaminian Way about 165 miles ro 
Rome, there exist to the present day two castles called respectively 
the names of S. Hippolytus and S. Laurence—the same two saints wl 
were celebrated on the Tiburtine Way in the middle of August. Ni 
we find in the Hieronymian Martyrology® under Feb. 2nd a 


an 
iv Non. Feb. Romae Foro Sinfronii, via Flaminia, miliario ab τ 
centum septuaginta quatuor Laurentii, Hippolyti, om 

and again under Aug. 6 a 


viii Id. Aug. Laurentii, Hippolyti, et militum centum Sexa ig 
duorum, ε᾽ 


in the common text, or as it is otherwise read ‘militum clxv.’ — 
paring these notices one with another and with the actual fact rel 
Υ oy 
1 For the ancient works at Portus see medieval and later condition comp. 
Lanciani Ancient Rome in the light of — Analisi τι. p. 602 sq, and see 1 
Recent Discoveries p. 231 sq. For the ourn. of Class. and Sacr. Philo 
Christian remains esp. De Rossi Bull. di 202 sq. 
Archeol. Crist. 1866, p. 37 sq. For the 2 See above, p. 356. 


‘ hs 
Wee’ 
by 


































HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 467 


ἴο Fossombrone, we cannot doubt that De Rossi is right in reading 
‘milliario’ for ‘militum’ in the second passage, the word having been 
contracted into ‘mil’'; and in the first passage we should probably 
substitute clxiiiii for clxiiiii Indeed the 165 soldiers cannot be ex- 
plained otherwise; for they have no relation to the more modest 
‘familia’ of 18 or 19 persons which forms the entourage of our 
. Hippolytus in the later form of the legend. With this correction 
e earlier notice (Feb. 2) will in all likelihood represent the anniversary 
the dedication of the sanctuary of these two saints at Fossombrone, 
hither probably the oil- or some other relique of them was taken, 
while the latter (Aug. 6) represents the annual celebration of their 
proper festival in the Ides of August celebrated likewise at Fossombrone, 
5 it was celebrated at Rome. In fact both these notices seem to have 
een introduced into the Hieronymian hodge-podge from some Umbrian 
r North Italian document. 


_ The reverence paid to this saint outside of Italy need not occupy us 
png. We have seen (p. 452) that Prudentius recommended his own 
perior, the Archbishop of Zaragoza, to introduce the cultus of Hippo- 
ytus; but whether the advice was taken we do not know. At all events 
ie has a place in a Carthaginian Calendar of the fifth or sixth century, 
here the usage was closely allied to that of the Spanish Church ; and 
the Gothic Missal, which exhibits the liturgical practice of the Visigoths 
Spain in the seventh or eighth centuries (42. 39, 40). In France the 
markable sarcophagus at Apt near Avignon is proof of the spread of 
s fame’ in the fifth(?) century. Again we find at Arles an early 
τοῦ dedicated to him. In the year 973 one Theucinda petitions the 
‘Echbishop of Arles to be allowed to ‘rebuild and restore’ ECCLESIAM 
HONORE BEATI YPOLITI DEDICATAM, which must therefore have been 
existence long before*. But his greatest fame in this country is 
nected with the great Abbey of S. Denis near Paris. About the 
764 Fulrad Abbot of S. Denis brought the bones of S. Hippolytus 
m the Ager Veranus and laid them for a time in his newly founded 
bey Fulrado-Villiers, thence called St Hippolyte or St Bilt; whence 
were translated shortly after his death (c. 785) to S. Denis. 
Bppolytus was here celebrated as at Rome on the Ides of August, and 
_ & martyrdom was represented as in the picture seen by Prudentius in 
Ager Veranus. But he was no longer the cleric, but the soldier, 


Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 36. 3 See De Rossi Zuscr. Christ. Urb. 
ἢ 2. 1866, p. 33 sq; 1882, p. 35- Rom. τι. p. 267. 


30—2 
























468 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


no longer the doctor of the Church but the convert of S. Laurence : 
for the transformation had already been made. About the year 11: 
pope Alexander III visited S. Denis and, on enquiring whose bones 
certain reliquary contained, was told those of Hippolytus. ‘I dor 
believe it, I don’t believe it,’ said the pope bluntly, ‘I supposed th 
he lay still in the City.’ He had only too much reason for his scepi 
cism ; for he might have known that Rome itself contained no k 
than three bodies of S. Hippolytus, one in 8. Silvester, a second 
the Quatuor Coronati, and a third in 5. Laurence. The saint hims 
however would stand no trifling. His bones rattled and rumbled | 
the reliquary, like the roar of thunder, till the pope cried out in te ro 
‘I believe it, my lord, I believe it, my lord; do keep quiet.’ TI 
pope made his peace by erecting a marble alist in the oratory of t 
saint’. ἢ 
Nor was this the only body of Hippolytus outside Rome. 
was, or is, another in the church of S. Julia at Brescia; and ano th 
in S. Ursula at Cologne; besides heads and limbs here and the 
elsewhere. if 


§ 17. 
SPURIOUS ACTS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 


The only Acts of Hippolytus which can pretend to retain evel 
faint echo of genuine history are those given in the poem of Prudent 
(see p. 332 sq); and even at this early date as we have seen fac 
choked by fiction. The later Acts have no historical value at all; 
they throw some light on the legendary Hippolytus. τῇ 

These later Acts belong to two separate cycles ; (1) Zhe Laure 
(2) Zhe Portuensian. The connexion with the true Hippolytus 
both cases local, not historical. In the former the link is the - 
Veranus, the site of Hippolytus’ burial place; in the latter it i 
Port of Rome, the site of his practical activity while living. ity 

q 
(i) Acts of the Laurentian Cycle. 


y ἫΝ 


We have seen already (p. 458 sq) that owing to the de 
ruin of the basilica and cemetery of S. Hippolytus the chief Ἢ et 
of the saints and martyrs once existing there were transferres od 


1 Acta Sanct. Bolland. Aug. Ul. Ρ. 9; 1- p. 191. 
comp. Fourn. of Class. and Sacr. Philoj. 
























HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 469 


neighbouring sanctuary of S. Laurentius. The effect of this trans- 
erence made itself felt on the legend. Henceforward Hippolytus 
ecame more than ever a companion and attendant of S. Laurentius, 
hile at the same time he was gradually transformed from a cleric into 
a soldier. 

The extant inscription in the Church of S. Laurentius (42. 37) is 
an instructive comment on this developement. The enumeration of 
he sacred reliques there deposited begins with the names of the three 
persons to whom the church was dedicated by Pelagius (see above, 
. 457) together with 5. Stephen the first deacon and prototype of 
5. Laurence. It ends with the popes who were buried there, Hilarus, 
osimus and Sixtus III,’ together with Pelagius who built the enlarged 
basilica. Of these it is not necessary to say anything more. Our 
oncern is with the intermediate names ; 


Ipolitus collis religatus equorum ; 
Cum nutrice sua cum cuncta plebe suorum 
Romanus miles, Triphonia, Virgo Cirilla, 
Et quadraginta quos passio continet illa, 
Justinusque sacer defunctos qui tumulabat, 
Ciriace vidua quae sanctos clam recreabat, 
Cujus matronae fuit haec possessio cara, 
Ipsius nomen specialiter optinet ara, 
Martir Ireneus qui tecum, martir Abundi, 
Decedens sprevit fallacis gaudia mundi. 


The ancient itineraries show us that of the persons here named, 
oncordia and the supposed ‘familia’—the ‘cuncta plebs suorum’—were 
iginally buried in the crypt of Hippolytus, as were also Tryphonia 
nd Cyrilla, the reputed wife and daughter of Decius Czesar (4 2. 38 b). 
‘Wn the other hand, Romanus and Justinus, Abundius and Irenzus, lay 
1 the cemetery on the opposite side of the way in which stood the 
asilica of S. Laurence, as did also Cyriace who, as here stated, was 
robably the original possessor of the ground and gave her name to 
Mis cemetery. 

Of those buried in the cemetery of Hippolytus, Concordia, as we 
arn from the itineraries, lay ‘ante fores,’ i.e. of the crypt or chamber 
here Hippolytus himself lay. In another chamber (‘altero cubiculo’), 
y the two martyrs, Tryphonia the wife and Cyrilla the virgin daughter 
Decius—both done to death by this tyrant’s command. ‘Thus the 
:pulchre of Concordia was between the vault of Hippolytus and that 


“΄ 
"4 


ens 


ae 


“΄΄ν. δὲ a detain 


1 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1881, p. 86 sq. 


470 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 























of the two royal martyrs—‘between the two,’ as one of the itinera ri 
says (AR. 38 Ὁ, where read ‘inter utrosque’). Concordia is commonl 
called the nurse (‘nutrix’), but in the earliest of the itineraries the wif 
(‘mulier’) of Hippolytus. These date from the 8th century. As 1 1 
record is found in history of any wife and daughter of Decius (whicheve 
Decius is meant), who bore the names Tryphonia and Cyrilla, it he 
been proposed to read ‘ancillae mulieris’ for ‘mulieris’ in the Ma 
logies: so as to bring the statement within the range of prone y 
but we are dealing with romance, not with history, and in romance s ς 
conjectures are futile as well as unnecessary. Who Concordia ma 
have been, we have no means of ascertaining. It is not probable ha 
she had any other connexion with Hippolytus except the double prox 
mity of the place of sepulture and the time of celebration. This loc 
and temporal neighbourhood would be sufficient to suggest the histori¢: 
connexion, of which there seem to be no traces before the eighth cel 
tury. But what shall we say of the ‘familia’ xviiii (or xviii) in numbe 
The attachment of this ‘familia’ to Hippolytus seems to be later 
though probably not much later—than his connexion with Concord 
herself; for it occurs in the Old Roman Martyrology. In the earli 
of the itineraries, where she is the ‘mulier’ of Hippolytus, the ‘famili 
is not mentioned at all. Even in the Hieronymian Martyrology—t 
great storehouse of martyrological notices, historical and legendat 
early and late—it has not yet found a place. The number was origi 
ally xviiii (=xix) and not xviii, as appears not only from the oldest 
the itineraries in which it is mentioned, but also from Ado and othe 
A figure would be easily dropped by transcribers. I believe t 
see the origin of this number xviiii (xix). The next day to Id. Aug 
xix Kal. Sept. But the Ides of August is the day of Concordia, as ὃ 
as of Hippolytus. What if the ‘familia’ of Hippolytus has originat 
in some calendar for August set up either in the Ager Veranus ore 
where, which ran thus : 
ID. AVG. HIPPOLYTI ET CONCORDIAE ET FAMILIAE uel 
ΚΑΙ. SEPT, EVSEBII PRESBYTERI ET CONFESSORIS etc. a 
the next important celebration being the festival of Eusebius on 
Kal. Sept. at least in some calendars, e.g. the O/d Roman (Patrol. 
ΟΧΧΙΙ. p. 166, Migne), and the xix has got detached from the fo! mM 
words and appended to the preceding? I should add that Ic 
lay the same stress as De Rossi on the notice in the Hieron 
Martyrology, which gives under viii Kal. Mart. . 


t 
4 


Romae via Tiburtina ad sanctum Laurentium natalis sanct: sta 
cordiae, 4 


ee 


HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 471 


































as though this gave the original day of S. Concordia’. It seems to me 
that the confusion of the cemetery of S. Laurence with that of S. Hip- 
polytus shows the comparatively late date of this notice and therefore 
deprives it of any special value. Whoever she may have been, her 
original connexion seems to have been with the Hippolytean cemetery 
on the Tiburtine Way; and there she was celebrated on the Ides of 
August. I suppose therefore that we have in the Hieronymian Mar- 
tyrology a confused notice of some translation of Concordia similar to 
those which we have already considered in the case of Romanus (p. 449) 
and of Hippolytus himself (p. 439 sq). Even if De Rossi were right 
about her proper ‘natal day,’ my explanation would hold equally well: 
since it depends solely on the date of her celebration on the Tiburtine 
Way, about which there can be no doubt. 

Whoever Tryphonia and Cyrilla were, they need give us no trouble. 
Their days are respectively xv Kal. Nov. (Oct. 18) and v Kal. Noy. 
(Oct. 28) in the Calendars and Martyrologies, e.g. Ado. ‘They may 
perhaps have suffered in the Decian persecution about the same time 
‘with S. Laurence; though there is some confusion between Decius and 
Claudius (Gothicus) in the notices of the persecuting tyrant (as for 
instance in Ado); but their connexion with the Hippolytean legend is 
due to the fact of their graves being situated near the chambers of 
Hippolytus and Concordia. 

Nor need I spend any time on investigating whether the saints 
buried on the right side of the Tiburtine Way in the cemetery of 
Cyriace were historically connected with S. Laurence. Of Romanus 
I have spoken already (p. 446 sq). 

The full-blown legend of S. Laurence and S. Hippolytus is found 
in Ado, and runs as follows : 

On the roth of August-(iv Id. Aug.) S. Laurence suffered. Sixtus 
on his way to martyrdom had entrusted all the treasures of the Church 
to him. A certain widow Cyriace, living on the Ceelian, had hidden 
several clerics and others in her house from the persecution and with 
her he deposited the treasures, at the same time healing her miraculously 
of many pains in the head. In the Vicus Canarius he found many 
Christians congregated in the house of Narcissus; he distributed money 
among them; and he restored his sight to one Crescentio who was 
blind. Decius, hearing of these hidden treasures in the keeping of 
Laurence the archdeacon of Sixtus, hands him over to Valerian the 
‘prefect, who puts him in charge of one Hippolytus as warder. 
Hippolytus, seeing him work a miracle on another blind man, one 





1 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1882, p. 24 sq, p- 32+ 


4 
Ἐ 
i 






























472 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


Lucillius, is converted and baptized. Meanwhile Valerian pres: ait 
Laurence to give up the treasures. Asking for time, he gathers 
together the almsmen and almswomen of the Church, and tells Valerian’ 
that these are the treasures. He is beaten and otherwise tortured byDecius 
for his effrontery. Then he is restored to the keeping of Hippolytus, 
One of the soldiers, Romanus by name, seeing the conduct of 5. Laurence, — 
believes and is baptized. He is beaten and beheaded by order of Decius 
on v Id. Aug., the day before S. Laurence. 8. Laurence himself ἴδ᾽ 
then brought before Decius; and after suffering the most excruciati x 
tortures is roasted to death on a gridiron. In early morning Hippolytus” 
carries off the body, wraps it with linen cloths and spices, and delivers” 
it to Justinus the presbyter. The two go by night to the Tiburtine 
Way to the farm of Cyriace in the Ager Veranus—the same widow wi h 
whom Laurence had been at night—and lay him there on iv Id. Aug. — 
The same day at Rome one hundred and sixty-five soldiers suffered, 
Then were martyred Claudius, Severus, Crescentio, and Romanus, on the 
same day as 5. Laurence, the third day after the passion of S. Sixtus. 
On the Ides of August suffered Hippolytus under Decius the emperor 
and Valerian the prefect. This Hippolytus the ‘vicarius’ had been 
baptized as already stated by S. Laurence. Returning home after the 
burial he was seized and carried before Decius. Here he was com- 
pelled to strip off his Christian garment and put on ‘the military dress 
which he wore as a Gentile.’ Then Valerian rifled his house of it 
treasures and dragged out ‘all his Christian family.’ He and his house- 
hold were led outside the walls on the Tiburtine Way. The latter were 
beheaded—male and female—nineteen in number. Hippolytus himsell 
was yoked to untamed horses and thus dismembered. They were al 
buried by Justinus the presbyter in the same plain ‘juxta nympha 
by the side of the Ager Veranus. 
At the same time perished Concordia, the nurse of Hippolytus. 
was put to death by the same Valerian, and her body thrown into th 
sewer. ‘Thirteen days after her death a soldier, Porphyrius by namgé 
came to Irenzus the sewer-keeper (‘cloacarius’), who was secretly 
Christian, and told him where the body might be found having jew 
or gold concealed about it, as he supposed. No such treasure howey 
was discovered ; but Irenzeus, assisted by a Christian Abundius, Οἱ 
the body to Justinus, who buried it by Hippolytus and the others. 4 
1 «Ταχία nympham’ refers tothe springs Ρ. 190. They were near the No net 
of waters in the neighbourhood, which Way and were called S. Petrie "Οὗ 
were found infiltrating the soil in the 5. Peter was reported to have bap 
recent excavations; see Bull. di Archeol. there. Ἢ 
Crist. p. 19, Pp. 523 comp. Rom. Soft, 1. 






















HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 473 


On vii Kal. Sept. (Aug. 26) Irenzeus and Abundius were ordered by 
Valerian to be themselves enclosed in a sewer (‘incloacari’) and so 
perished. They were buried by Justinus ‘in the crypt near S. Laurence.’ 

On xv Kal: Nov. (Oct. 18) died Tryphonia the wife of Decius 
Czesar. Overawed by the divine vengeance which had overtaken her 
husband after his murder of S. Sixtus and S. Hippolytus, she with her 
daughter Cyrilla had sought baptism at the hands of Justinus. She was 
buried ‘ near Hippolytus in the crypt.’ 

On viii Kal. Nov. (Oct. 25) 48 soldiers were baptized together by 
pope Dionysius [the successor of Sixtus, a.pD. 259—268]. They were 
beheaded by command of the emperor Claudius [A.p. 268—270] and 
buried by Justinus the presbyter and John on the Salarian Way ‘in 
clivum Cucumeris’; also other 121 martyrs. Among these were Theo- 
dosius, Lucius, Marcus, and Petrus, who asked the honour of being 
beheaded first. The record is found, adds Ado, in the ‘ Passio sanc- 
torum martyrum, Sixti, Laurentii, et Hippolyti.’ 

On v Kal. Nov. (Oct. 28) perished Cyrilla the daughter of Decius 


by order of the emperor Claudius. She was buried by Justin the pres- 


byter with her mother near 5. Hippolytus. 

On xv Kal. Oct. (Sept. 17) died Justinus, who had buried so many 
martyrs. His place of sepulture was on the Tiburtine Way near 
S. Laurence. Laurence had come to him to the ‘crypta Nepotiana’ 
in the Vicus Patricius, and asked him to distribute the treasures com- 
mitted to him by S. Sixtus to the poor. He won renown by the glory 
of his confession in the persecutions of Decius, Gallus, and Volu- 
sianus. 

It is clear that Ado takes this account of these martyrs from a 
written document, the Passion of S. Sixtus, 5. Laurentius, and S. Hip- 
polytus, to which he refers. It contained not only the Acts of the three 
principal martyrs, and of others belonging to the Tiburtine Way ; but 
also of others who perished and were buried on the Salarian Way. 
These latter seem to have been added, simply because they were reputed 
to have been buried by the same Justinus. 

These Acts quoted and probably abridged by Ado are doubtless the 
document which is called pAssio ILLA in the inscription of the 13th 
century found in the basilica of 5, Laurence (AR. 37). It seems to 
have served as a sort of guide book to the pilgrims in the Ager 
Veranus. 

The Acts, printed by Lagarde (p. xiii sq) from the ms Brit. AZus. 
11880 of the ninth century and bearing the same name, are much 


ἢ briefer. An abstract of them is given above (AR. 45). The two seem 


474 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


























not to have anything in common except the main outlines of the story 
of the connexion of Laurence with Sixtus and of Hippolytus with 

Laurence. Perhaps however they may both have been founded on 
some very simple earlier Acts; but the characteristic of the Adonian 
account—the working up of the history of the saints and martyrs — 
buried in the Ager Veranus into a single narrative—is entirely wanting. 


(2) Acts of the Portuensian Cycle. 


These Acts are quite independent of the Laurentian, and centre 
about the person of one Chryse or Aurea, a virgin martyr and prin- — 
cess of royal blood. Hippolytus only plays a very subordinate — 
part, and (as we shall see presently) his name seems to have been ~ 
introduced as an afterthought. So far as there is any historical back-— 
ground at all, it consists of a group of Portuensian martyrs. No longer — 
the Ager Veranus, but the Port of Rome, is the centre of interest. ~ 
Moreover the personal surroundings of Hippolytus are all different, 
being largely clerics. 4 

The persecutors are Claudius, ‘the impious tyrant, and the ‘vi- — 
carius’ Ulpius Romulus. Our first impulse is to identify the perse-— 
cuting emperor with Claudius Gothicus (a.p. 268—270), because this 
identification reduces the anachronism toa minimum. But this sovereign — 
is not known to have been guilty of any persecution. Moreover Cen-— 
surinus, one of his victims, is represented as saying that Jesus Christ — 
‘condescended to come from the Father in his own times (ἐν τοῖς, 
ἡμετέροις καιροῖς) and to be born of a virgin’s womb.’ It would appear 
therefore that Dollinger (p. 42) is right in supposing that the hagiologist — 
intended the first emperor of this name; or that, if he did not, he con- 


Censurinus, a leading man of the magistracy (τῆς τοῦ μαγιστορίου 
ἐξουσίας), is first apprehended and imprisoned at Ostia. There he 
fed and cared for by Chryse; and receives the ministrations of the p es- 
byter Maximus. Several of his guards, whose names are given—amon 
these ‘aurinus and Herculianus—seek baptism. Then the bis no 


story of a certain shoe-maker (σκυτεύς), whose son is raised from th 
dead, baptized under the name Faustinus, and carefully tended 
Chryse. For this offence she is accused of magic, and subjected to t 
wheel and other tortures. Then Archelaus the deacon, Maximus 











HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 475 


priest, and Cyriacus the bishop suffer. At this point of the narrative 
we hear again of the soldiers, who had been converted by the .ministra- 
tions of Maximus. They are condemned to death and suffer. Of all 
the rest, who are not here again mentioned by name, we are told that their 
bodies were laid near the sea on the Ostian Way on vi Id. Aug.; but of 
Taurinus and Herculianus we are informed that they were buried in 
‘the Port of Rome.’ Chryse’s turn comes at length. After being 
beaten to no effect, as she only received fresh accessions of strength, 
she was drowned in the sea with a heavy stone about her. neck. 
At this point, when the narrative is more than three-fourths over, the 
name of Hippolytus first occurs. Her body floated to the shore, was 
gathered up by ‘the blessed Nonus, also surnamed Hippolytus’ (Novos 
ὁ kal μετονομασθεὶς Ἵππόλυτος), and buried ‘on her own estate, where also 
she lived, outside the walls of the city of Ostia, on the ix Kal. Sept.’ 
Then the torture of Sabinianus the procurator is related for not revealing 
her concealed treasure; whereupon Hippolytus provokes the wrath of 
the persecutor by his denunciations, and is condemned to death for 
this inopportune interference. He is sunk in the pit of the haven called 
Portus (εἰς τὸν βόθυνον πόρτον τὸν avayopevopevov ἸΠόρτον) on xi Kal. 
Sept. Αἱ his death the voices of infants are heard for the space of a 
whole hour giving thanks to God. 

The remaining paragraphs of the story recount the martyrdom of 
Sabinianus and his burial by Cordius (Concordius). 

Now in the earliest extant Western Martyrology, which is embedded 
in the work of the Liberian Chronographer (A. Ὁ. 354) and which itself 
cannot be later than A.D. 335 (see above, I. pp. 248, 250), we have this 
notice, which throws a flood of light on the Acts of Chryse: 


Non. Sept. (Sept. 5th) 
Aconti, in Porto, et Nonni et Herculani et Taurini. 


These were doubtless genuine martyrs of Portus, though whether 
they suffered in the Decian persecution or later we cannot tell. But 
the notice had lost the first name by mutilation before it reached our 
hagiologist ; and the three other names only are utilized. Whence the 
story of Chryse herself was derived, I need not stop to enquire; nor 
is it worth my while to spend time on the other adornments of these 
Acts. 

The real interest gathers round Nonnus. Whether this was the 
Latin word Nonus (like Septimus, Decimus, etc.) or the Greek word 
Nonnus or Nunnus, we may question. Probably it was the latter, but 
anyhow the meaning of the Greek word would attach itself to it, and it 


476 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 























would suggest a cleric. Originally, as is quite evident, the notice had 
nothing to do with Hippolytus, and the connexion required some ex- 
planation 6 καὶ μετονομασθείς or (as it is in the corresponding Latin) ‘qui 
et iam Ypolitus nuncupatur.’ But the great cleric connected with 
Portus, the patron saint of the place, was Hippolytus the theologian. 
Hence Nonnus must be Hippolytus. Moreover he is ὁ πρεσβύτερος ; 
for Portus knew nothing of Hippolytus the soldier, but only of 
Hippolytus ‘the elder.’ 

The remains of an ancient sarcophagus, ascribed to the fourth or 
fifth century and commemorating Taurinus and Herculanus without any 
mention of Nonnus' have been found, which seems to show that these 
two were buried in a separate locality; as indeed the Acts might lead 
us to expect. 

Of the other martyrs mentioned in these Acts some are recognized 
in the Martyrium Hieronymianum, where we have the notices 


xi Kal. Sept. Et in portu Romano peregrinorum martyrum. 
x Kal. Sept. In portu urbis Romae natalis sancti Hippolyti qui 
dicitur Nunnus cum sociis suis. In Ostia natalis 
sancti Quiriaci, Archelai, 


Hippolytus himself having likewise been mentioned on a previous day 
(xiii Kal. Sept.), but without the description ‘qui dicitur Nunnus’ (see 
AR. 40 f). 

The Greek Acts were first published by S. de Magistris, from whom 
Lagarde has taken them. The Latin Acts will be found in Act. Sanct. ὦ 
Bolland. Augustus IV. p. 757 sq. The Greek seems certainly to be — 
the original; the story would probably be compiled in this language 
for the sake of the foreigners frequenting Ostia and Portus. In the © 
Latin the exordium more especially is expanded, so as to give Chryse 
the principal place on the canvas. 


The Aenea borrowed some features from the Laurentian Acts; — 
others from the Portuensian. They are brief, but they show a late ν᾽ 
development of the legend. 4 

We may follow the growth of the legend a step further. [π΄ 
the middle of the fifth century there lived a more famous Nonn 5,. 
bishop of Edessa or of Heliopolis or of both, to whom is due the 
credit of having converted the courtesan Pelagia. S. Peter Damianus 
(c. A.D. 1060) fuses this Nonnus with Hippolytus (42. 45). He 
makes this conversion of Pelagia the crowning feat of Nonnus-Hip- 


1 Bull. di Archeol. Crist. 1866, p. 40. ae 








HIPPOLYTUS OF PORTUS. 477 


polytus after bringing 30,000 Saracens over to the faith of Christ. 
Then he resigns his bishopric, leaves Antioch his native country, and 
retires to the mouth of the Tiber. His glorious martyrdom there 
consummated, and the miraculous voices of the infants giving thanks to 
God, are a proof that the resignation of the episcopate may on 
occasions be possible without offending God. 

The caprices of tradition would not be complete, unless supplemented 
by the conceits of criticism. Baronius (p. 411) surmised that Callistus 
would not suffer so valuable a man as Hippolytus to return to Arabia, 
but created him bishop of Portus, that he ‘might have him ever close 
by his side as an adviser in perplexities’, thus bestowing upon him 
‘a see of no great labour (modicae curae) but of amplest dignity.’ 
Strange irony of fate! 


I have thus attempted to trace the marvellous vicissitudes of this 
strange eventful career—marvellous in life, and still more marvellous 
after death. The appearances of this one personality in history and in 
legend are as manifold and varied as the transformations of his name ; 
Hippolytus with the Greeks and Romans, Iflites with the Syrians and 
Chaldzans, Abulides with the Copts and A®thiopians, Polto with the 
Italians, Bilt with the French. 


πολλῶν ὀνομάτων μορφὴ pia. 








ee wad BF 








A. SAINT PETER IN ROME. 


[This excursus is printed in the incomplete state, in which it was left at Bish 
Lightfoot’s death. ] Ἢ 


B. THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 


[Found among the Bishop’s miscellaneous papers. The essay is undated, Η 
was apparently written before the publication of Gebhardt and Harnack’s edition.] 








A. 


SAINT PETER IN ROME. 


ΠΣ subject which I purpose discussing in the present Appendix is 

essentially mixed up with controversy; but I hope to treat it as 
little controversially as possible. It would be impossible to overlook the 
momentous inferences which depend, or have been thought to depend, 
on the results of the investigation; but I shall pursue it, as far as pos- 
sible, as a historical study. Where it is not a question of history it is 
a question of exegesis. The purely theological aspects, however im- 
portant, have no place here. The first section, which has the closest 
bearing on theological controversy, seemed necessary as an introduction 
to the rest, because it sets forth the incidents which form the basis of 
discussion. 


§ τ. 
THE PROMISE AND THE FULFILMENT. 


Even a cursory glance at the history of the Apostles, so far as it 
appears in the Gospel records, reveals a certain primacy of S. Peter 
among the twelve. He holds the first place in all the lists; he has a 
precedence of responsibility and of temptation; he sets the example of 
moral courage and of moral lapse. Above all he receives special pas- 
toral charges. 

The latest of these is the threefold injunction to feed the flock of 
Christ. He is appealed to by his patronymic the son of Johanan, the 
son of God’s grace (8, John xxi. 15, τό, 17). In the other evangelists 
his father’s name appears under its more familiar abridgement Jonas or 
Jona, thus being commonly confused with the ancient prophet’s name 

CLEM. 11. 31 





482 EPISTLES OF 5. CLEMENT. 


























‘the dove’; but in this latest command, as given by S. John, the name — 
appears in “full, Johanan, the grace of God, because our Lord would 4 
remind him that he bears about with him in his very name the obliga- ὦ 
tion to the pastoral charge and the promise of grace to fulfil the same, ; 
though here again transcribers have substituted the more usual form, — 
thus obscuring the significance. a 
The case is somewhat similar in the earlier charge to S. Peter, with — 
which I am directly concerned, ‘Thou art Cephas, and upon this rock _ 
will I build My Church.’ Here also the Apostle’s name involves a : 
prophecy, which should be unfolded in the future history of the Church. 
It is important therefore to enquire in what sense the Church of Christ 
shall be built upon the rock. δι, 
Patristic interpretations of the earliest and last ages are mainly © q 
twofold. 
(1) The rock is Christ Himself. This was the opinion to which © 
S. Augustine, the great theologian of the Latin Church, inclined. — 
Having frequently, as he confesses, explained the ‘rock’ of 95, Peter 
himself, as his master S. Ambrose had done before him in a well-known ~ 
hymn, he took occasion in his after-thoughts to express his misgivings ἢ 
as to: this explanation, The passage is sufficiently important to deserve ὴ 
quotation in full (Refract. i. 21, ΟΡ. 1. p. 32). Ἵ 


{ 


In quo dixi in quodam loco de Apostolo Petro quod in ill | 
tamquam in petra fundata sit ecclesia; qui sensus etiam cantatur 
ore multorum in versibus beatissimi Ambrosii ubi de gallo galli- 
naceo ait fi 


Hoc ipsa petra ecclesiae 
Canente culpam diluet; 


sed scio me postea saepissime sic exposuisse quod a Domino 
dictum est Zu es Petrus...meam, ut super hunc intelligeretur quem 
confessus est Petrus dicens, Zu es Christus filius Dei vivi; ac sic 
Petrus ab hac petra appellatus personam ecclesiae figuraret, qua¢ 
super hanc petram aedificatur, et accepit claves regni caelorum 
Non enim dictum est illi Zu es petra, sed Tu es Petrus; tr 
autem erat Christus quem confessus Simon, sicut eum tota ecclesi 
confitetur, dictus est Petrus. Harum autem duarum sententiarun 
quae sit probabilior, eligat lector. : ὍΝ 


Here, though he gives the alternative, he himself evidently nl 
the interpretation which explains the rock of Christ Himself. 


xxxiii. 16, ‘His place of defence shall be the munitions of rosa r 








SAINT PETER IN ROME. 483 


shall be given him; his waters shall be sure,’ writes, ‘And it is probable 
that our Lord Jesus Christ is named a rock for us in these words; in 
Whom like a cave or like some sheepfold the Church is meant, which 
has its permanence in prosperity sure and unshaken; for Zhou art 
Peter, says the Saviour, and on this rock I will found My Church’ etc., 
the bread and the water being spiritual sustenance’. 

(2) The rock is connected with S. Peter, being either his confes- 
sion or his faith or some other moral or spiritual qualification, capable 
of being shared by others. 

This alternative has already appeared in the exposition of S. Augus- 
tine. The most explicit declaration of it, however, is found in the 
typical passage of Origen Comm. in Matt. [xvi. 13|'Tom. xu. ὃ 10. ‘But 
if we also, like Peter, say, Zhou art the Christ the Son of the living God, 
flesh and blood not having revealed it to us, but the Spirit from heaven 
having illumined our heart, we become a Peter and it would be said to 
us by the Word, Zhou art Peter and so forth. For every disciple of 
Christ is a rock, from whom all they that partake of the spiritual rock 
which follows did drink; and upon every such rock the whole doctrine 
of the Church and the polity in accordance therewith is built...But if 
thou supposest that the whole Church is built by God on that one 
Peter alone, what wouldest thou say concerning John the Son of 
Thunder, or any one of the Apostles? Otherwise shall we dare to 
say that against Peter especially the gates of hell shall not prevail, but 
that they shall prevail against the remaining Apostles?... Are then the 
keys of the kingdom of heaven given by the Lord to Peter alone and 
shall none other of the blessed Apostles receive them ?...Many there- 
fore shall say to the Saviour, Zhou art the Christ the Son of the living 
God...and if any one saith this to Him, flesh and blood not revealing 
it, but the Father which is in heaven, he shall obtain the promises (τῶν 
εἰρημένων), as the letter of the Gospel says, to that particular Peter, but 
as the Spirit teaches, to every one who becomes like that Peter. For 
all become namesakes (παρώνυμοι) of the rock who are imitators of 
Christ the spiritual rock, etc....and so forth as far as shall not prevail 
against it. What is ‘it’? Is it the rock on which Christ builds His 




























- 1 Cyril. Alex. Zz Zsai. Lib. iii, Tom. γὰρ εἶ Πέτρος κιτιλ. Yet only a little later 
Ill., p. 460 εἰκὸς δὲ δή που καὶ πέτραν in the same work he gives a somewhat dif- 
ἡμῖν ὠνόμασθαι διὰ τούτων τὸν Κύριον ferent interpretation, ‘the unshaken faith 
ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν τὸν Χριστόν, ἐν ᾧ καθάπερ οἵ the disciple’, Zz saz. Lib. iv. Tom. 
τι σπήλαιον ἢ καὶ προβάτων σηκὸς ἡ ἐκ- 11..) p. 593 ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῇ πέτρᾳ θεμελιώσω 
κλησία νοεῖται ἀσφαλῆ καὶ ἀκράδαντον μου τὴν ἐκκλησίαν' πέτραν οἶμαι λέγων τὸ 
ἔχουσα τὴν εἰς τὸ εὖ εἶναι διαμονήν. Σὺ ἀκράδαντον εἰς πίστιν τοῦ μαθητοῦ. 

. 3I—2 


484 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 































Church ; or the Church itself, for the expression is ambiguous; or the _ 
rock and the Church, being one and the same thing?’ Ἷ 

With more to the same effect; where nothing could be fuller or — 
more explicit than the language. 

This with some modification is the universal interpretation of the — 
fathers for many centuries with those few exceptions represented by — 
S. Augustine’s after-thoughts, who explain it of Christ the rock. They — 
understand it to mean 5. Peter’s confession or S. Peter’s faith or 
S. Peter’s firmness. -In other words it is some quality or action in the — 
Apostle at this crisis, which calls forth the Lord’s promise, and to which — 
the same promise attaches wherever it is found in others. Thus Chry- 
sostom says (Jn Matth. Hom. liv. p. 548 A, 11. p. 108, Field) ἐπὶ ταύτῃ 
τῇ πέτρᾳ οἰκοδομήσω μου τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, τούτεστι, τῇ πίστει τῆς ὁμολογίας. 
Thus again Cyril of Alexandria, as we have seen, explains zérpav... 
λέγων τὸ ἀκράδαντον εἰς πίστιν τοῦ μαθητοῦ. 

The lesson which the great Alexandrian father, Origen, draws from © 
the Lord’s promise to Peter is recognised also by his contemporary, 
the great African father, Cyprian. He too distinctly states that nothing — 
is given to Peter here which is not given to all the Apostles; but 
he superadds another inference. From the fact that a single Apostle 
is the recipient of the general promise he derives the further lesson” 
of the unity of the Church. Writing on this special subject (De Unit. 
Eccl. 4, p. 212 ed. Hartel), he explains ‘ 

‘The Lord speaketh to Peter: Z say unto thee that thou art Pet 4 
and upon this rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it....1 will give thee the keys of the kingdom of aul 
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound also in heaven. 
He builds His Church on one, and although He gives equal authority 
to all His Apostles after His resurrection (et quamvis apostolis omnibui 
post resurrectionem suam parem potestatem tribuat) and says, As 27 
Father sent Me, so send I you. Receive the Holy Spirit ; whosesoever sin 
ye remit they shall be remitted, and whosesoever sins ye retain they shall | 
retained ; yet, that He might declare the unity, He arranged the ὁ 
of the same unity to begin from one by His authority (tamen ut u 
tatem manifestaret, unitatis ejusdem originem ab uno incipientem 5 
auctoritate disposuit). The rest of the Apostles verily were what Pet 
was, endowed with an equal partnership of honour and power (p 
consortio praediti et honoris et potestatis), but the beginning f 
ceeds from unity (exordium ab unitate proficiscitur) that the Chu 
of Christ may be shown to be one, which one Church also the I 
Spirit in the Song of Songs defines and says AZy dove is one, etc.” 











SAINT PETER IN ROME. 485 


This statement however was very unsatisfactory to a later age; 
and the sentence ‘et quamvis apostolis etc.’ is interpolated thus 

et quamvis apostolis omnibus parem tribuat potestatem, unam 
tamen cathedram constituit et unitatis originem [atque] orationis suae 
auctoritate disposuit; hoc erant utique et ceteri quod Petrus, sed 
primatus Petro datur ut una ecclesia et cathedra una monstretur : 
et pastores sunt omnes, sed grex unus ostenditur, qui ab apostolis 
omnibus unanimi consensione pascatur etc. 

Again after the words ‘exordium ab unitate proficiscitur’ comes 
another interpolation 

et primatus Petro datur, ut una Christi ecclesia et cathedra una 
monstretur, et pastores sunt omnes, sed grex unus ostenditur, qui ab 
apostolis omnibus consensione pascatur. 

Cyprian also elsewhere (Z/is¢. Ixxv. 16, p. 820, ed, Hartel) has recourse 
to the same argument. 

Qualis vero error sit et quanta caecitas ejus qui remissionem 
peccatorum dicit apud synagogas haereticorum dari posse nec permanet 
in fundamento unius ecclesiae, quae semel a Christo super petram 
solidata est, hinc intellegi potest quod soli Petro Christus dixerit : 
quaecumgue ligaveris super terram erunt ligata et in caelis, et quaecumque 
solveris super terram erunt soluta et in caelis, et iterum in evangelio 
[quando] in solos apostolos insufflavit Christus dicens: Accipite Spiritum 
sanctum ; st cujus remiseritis peccata remittentur illi; et si cujus tenue- 
ritis, tenebuntur. Potestas ergo peccatorum remittendorum apostolis 
data est et ecclesiis quas illi a Christo missi constituerunt et episcopis 
qui eis ordinatione vicaria successerunt. 


But, though for controversial aims there is little to choose between 
the two interpretations which divided patristic opinion for many 
centuries, we cannot let the matter rest here. An essential difference 
lies at the root of the two explanations. We are fain to ask, Is Christ 
the rock, or is Peter the rock, on which the Church is built (however 
we may explain the latter alternative)? Exegetically they have nothing 
in common. 

Now there are two arguments which mainly weigh with those who 
explain the rock of Christ, (1) the one from the e¢ymology ; (2) the other 
from the zmagery. 

(1) The etymological argument is based on the different form of 
the words πέτρα, πέτρος, the rock, the stone. The one should signify 
the whole mass; the other the detached piece. Hence the one 
appropriately denotes Christ the body; the other Peter the member. 


486 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 





























The force of this argument however is altogether shattered on two ᾿ 
considerations ; (i) 5. Peter’s name was Aramaic δὲ 89, before it was — 
Greek Πέτρος, and in the Aramaic form the one word serves for ‘a rock’ — 
and ‘a stone’; (ii) When Grecized, the proper name became perforce — 
Πέτρος, a masculine form being necessary, just as it would have been _ 
Πέτρα, if a woman’s name had been wanted. : 

(2) The zmagery supplies, or seems to supply, another potent ~ 
argument. In the Old Testament the Lord Jehovah is the rock on — 
which His people Israel is built. In the New, Christ is in like manner — 
the solid basis on which the Christian Church rests. More especially _ 
is this the case when the image takes the definite form of a building. 
Should we not expect, that the same application of the image would — 
be carried out here? : 

As a question of fact, however, Scriptural analogy does not subject 
us to the tyranny of one application of the image. The relation of 4 . 
Christ to His Church, regarded as a building, is represented in two ~ 
different ways. 

(i) He is the foundation (θεμέλιος 1 Cor. iii. 12). The Evangelist — 
is the architect who must erect his building on this, that it may stand. — 
In this sense He is not only the foundation, but the only palpable — 
foundation. a 

(ii) He is the chiefcorner stone {ὐλρογώνκαδος Ephes. ii. 20) which 4 
binds the parts of the building together (ἐν 6 πᾶσα οἰκοδομὴ cvvap 
μολογουμένη κιτ.λ.). In the latter sense the Apostles and prophets of {πθ΄ 
Christian ministry are themselves negation as the θεμέλιος on which 
the edifice is built (ἐποικοδομηθέντες ἐπὶ τῷ θεμελίῳ τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ 
προφητῶν). ! 

This latter is the application in the Apocalypse (xxi. 14) where the 
Church is not a house, but a city, and its twelve foundations are the 
twelve Apostles. It appears also in 8. Peter (1 Pet. ii. 4 sq) where stress 
is laid on Christ as the chief corner-stone, though the correspondin 
function of the Apostles as θεμέλιοι is not mentioned. ἥ 

It will be seen then that Scriptural analogy leaves us quite free’ in 
the application of the image; and our only guide is the logica 
connexion of the passage. But here there can be little doubt tha 
the sense points not to Christ the speaker, but to Peter the perso 
addressed, as the rock. After the opening sentence, ‘Blessed art thot 
Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto the 
but My Father which is in heaven,’ which only then obtains its fu 
significance, when we remember (as I have already pointed out) th 
Barjona, as interpreted by the form in the parallel passage in S. J« 











SAINT PETER IN ROME. 487 


means Bar-johanan, Son of the Grace of God, the words which follow 
are directed with all the force which repetition can give them to the 
person addressed. ‘And I say unto ¢hce (κἀγὼ δέ σοι λέγω) that thou 
art Peter (ὅτι σὺ εἶ Iérpos), and upon ¢his rock (ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῇ πέτρᾳ) 
I will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against 
it, and I will give thee (δώσω σ οἱ) the keys of the kingdom of heaven ; 
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven,’ 
etc. 

The promise must therefore, as I understand it, describe some 
historical manifestation which sprang from S. Peter himself, ‘not from 
a confession or ἃ faith or a constancy such as thine, but from /¢hy 
confession, //y faith, ‘ky constancy.’ As a matter of exegesis, it seems 
to be more strictly explained zo¢ of Peter himself; for then we should 
expect ἐπί σοι rather than ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῇ πέτρᾳ; but ‘on this constancy, 
this firmness of thine, to which thy name bears witness, and which has 
just evinced itself in thy confession.’ 

Though it denotes a certain primacy given to S. Peter, yet the 
promise is the same in kind—so far Origen is right—as pertains to 
all the faithful disciples, more especially to all the Apostles. It is 
said of Peter here ; but it might be said, and is said elsewhere, of the 
other Apostles. They too are the θεμέλιοι (Ephes. ii. 20, Rev. xxi. 14); 
they too have the power of the keys (John xx. 22 sq). 

But still it is a primacy, a preeminence. ‘There is a Aistorical, 
as well as a numerical value, in the order πρῶτος Σίμων ὁ λεγόμενος 
Πέτρος (Matt. x. 2) in the list of the Apostles. In what does this 
primacy consist ? , 

Obviously Peter cannot be the rock, in any sense, which trenches 
upon the prerogative of Christ Himself. His primacy cannot be the 
primacy of absolute sovereignty: it must be the primacy of Aéstorical 
inauguration. When we turn to the Apostolic records, we find that 
this work of initiation is assigned to him in a remarkable way in each 
successive stage in the progress of the Church. The same faith, the 
same courage, which prompted the confession and called forth the 
promise of Christ, follows him all along, leading him to new ventures 
of faith. 

But, lest we should misinterpret the position thus assigned to him 
and attribute to it a continuity and permanence which does not belong 
to it, he vanishes suddenly out of sight; another more striking person- 
ality assumes the chief place, and achieves conquests which he could 
not have achieved; his name is hardly ever mentioned. He has 
_ fulfilled his special mission, and his primacy is at an end. 


488 EPISTLES OF 5, CLEMENT. 








































I ventured to say above (p. 481) that the primacy of S, Peter was — 
manifested not only in the preeminence of his faith and courage, but ~ 
in the preeminence of his lapse and fall. Of the eleven faithful Apostles — 
he exhibited the most disastrous failure of faith, a failure which was — 
aggravated by the circumstance that it followed immediately upon his 
confident assertion of fidelity (Matt. xxvi. 35). 

In the Christian dispensation the redemption is the sequel to the 4 
fall. In the individual believer the sense of weakness must precede — 
the gift of strength. ‘When I am weak, then am 1 strong.’ Strength ~ 
is made perfect out of weakness. Peter is warned by the Master 
beforehand (Luke xxii. 31) that he must ‘be sifted as wheat’ by ~ 
temptation. This is the price to be paid, that when at length con- 
verted (σύ ποτε ἐπιστρέψας) and not till then, he may ‘strengthen the ~ 
brethren.’ Hence his fall. Not till after his fall the threefold charge — 
is given him (John xxi. 15—17) to feed the sheep and lambs of Christ’s 
flock. ‘The charge is given specially to him, because he bears a special © 
love to Christ. 

Then comes the resurrection. The Lord is removed, the Apostles — 
meet together with Peter at their head (Acts i. 13). At the first 
meeting of the general body of disciples he takes the initiative, and the — 
vacant place in the college of the Apostles is filled up (i. 15 sq). 
On the day of Pentecost he addresses the multitudes of Jews and 
strangers, but it is especially mentioned that he was not alone re- 
sponsible (σὺν τοῖς ἕνδεκα, ii. 14). As with the appeal, so with the 
response. The conviction and the conversion of the assembled crowd 
is communicated not to Peter alone, but to Peter and the rest of 
the Apostles (ii. 37, πρὸς τὸν Πέτρον καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀποστόλους), though 
Peter is necessarily the spokesman. 5 

So Peter asserts his primacy in the foundation of the Christian 
Church. For a long period it remains a strictly Hebrew Church, as 
the Israelites were a strictly Hebrew people. Here not unnature L 
Peter takes the initiative at all the great crises of its development. 
The first occasion when it exercises its miraculous power of grace an 
healing Peter is the chief agent (iii. 1 sq). Yet even here he is no 
allowed to act alone. The solidarity of the Apostolate is vindicated it 
the Apostolic record. The association of John with him is emphasize 
with almost irksome reiteration at each successive stage in the incide) 
(iii. ver. 1 Πέτρος δὲ καὶ Ἰωάνης ἀνέβαινον, ver. 3 ἰδὼν Πέτρον καὶ Ἰωάνη 
ver. 4 ἀτενίσας δὲ Πέτρος εἰς αὐτὸν σὺν τῷ Ἰωάνῃ εἶπεν Βλέψον εἰς ἡμᾶς, ve 
II κρατοῦντος δὲ αὐτοῦ τὸν Πέτρον καὶ τὸν Ἰωάνην, iv. ver. 19 ὁ δὲ Ter 
καὶ Ἰωάνης ἀποκριθέντες). After the first gift of grace, comes the fi 





SAINT PETER IN ROME. 489 


visitation of anger in the punishment of Ananias and Sapphira. Peter 
asserts his primacy here also (v. 3 sq); and the guilt is punished. 

Between Judaism and Heathendom is a great border-land. There 
are the Samaritans, who can hardly be classified with the one or the 
other. These must be drawn within the fold. It is a fresh venture of 
faith, and Peter has the courage to push the frontier forward into the 
enemy’s country. But here again he does not act alone. The mission 
to Samaria, which gives its sanction to Philip’s action, is the mission of 
the whole apostolate, and here again John is associated with him (vii. 
14 of ἐν Ἰεροσολύμοις ἀπόστολοι...ἀπέστειλαν πρὸς αὐτοὺς Πέτρον καὶ 
Ἰωάνην). But this new conquest involves a new difficulty. The 
Christian Church in the early centuries was assailed by two opposite 
forms of heresy in diverse modifications, Ebionism and Gnosticism, 
the aberrations of Judaic and Gentile thought respectively. The first 
beginnings of both these conflicts are discerned in the infant Church ; 
and in both Peter stands in the van of the fight as the champion of the 
Church. He had confronted the leaders of the Jewish hierarchy (iv. 
18 sq, v. 28 sq); and he was now brought face to face with Gnosticism 
in the person of Simon Magus, ‘the father of the Gnostics.’ Thus his 
primacy was vindicated in the conflict with heresy also. 

But the great conquest of all still awaited him. ‘The Church must 
become a world-wide Church. A thousand religious fences must be 
broken down; a thousand prejudices of convention and tradition must 
be sacrificed; a thousand cherished safeguards, which had hitherto 
been the life and the purity of the nation, must be abandoned. Who 
would have the courage to face a change so mighty? By virtue of his 
primacy Peter is chosen as the recipient of this revelation of revela- 
tions. He is taught by a special vision to regard nothing as common 
or unclean, whereas the law divinely imposed on his country had re- 
garded very many things as common and unclean. Yet unhesitatingly 
he obeys the command. Cornelius the heathen is baptized ; and at 
one stroke all the privileges of the Christian Church are laid before the 
whole heathen world. Do we marvel that this vision, which was at- 
tended by consequences so momentous, was emphasized at the time by 
a triple repetition (x. 16 τοῦτο δὲ ἐγένετο ἐπὶ τρίς), and that the recorded 
vision itself is enforced upon ourselves in the reiteration of the historian 
(x. 10 sq, Xl. 4 sq)? 

Thus the Lord’s promise is fulfilled: the primacy is completed ; the 
foundations are laid on the rock, whether of Peter’s confession or of 
Peter’s courage or of Peter’s steadfastness. From this time forward the 

work passes into other hands. ‘The ‘wise master-builder’ piles up the 























490 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 


later storeys of the edifice, for which his manifold gifts and opportunities 
had fitted him—his Hebraic elementary training, his Greek academic 
culture, his Roman political privileges. Paul completes what Peter had 
begun. The silence of the later Apostolic history is not less significant — 
than the eloquence of the earlier as to the meaning of Peter’s primacy, — 
In the first part he is everything ; in the subsequent record he is no-_ 
where at all. He is only once again mentioned in the Acts (xv. 7), and 
even here he does not bear the chief part. Where the Church at large, 
as an expansive missionary Church, is concerned, Paul, not Peter, is the © 
prominent personage: where the Church of Jerusalem appears as the 
visible centre of unity, James, not Peter, is the chief agent (Acts xii. 17, 
xv. 13, xxi. 18, Gal. ii. 9, 12). Peter retains the first place, as mis- 
sionary evangelist to the Hebrew Christians, but nothing more. 4 

Moreover, when S. Paul appears on the scene, he is careful to” 
declare emphatically his independence and equality with the other 7 
Apostles. ‘I reckon,’ he says in one place, ‘that I fall short in πὸ 
whit of the very chiefest Apostles’ (2 Cor. xi. 5 μηδὲν ὑστερηκέναι Tov 
ὑπερλίαν ἀποστόλων); then again while devoting two whole chapters to 
recording the achievements of his Apostleship, he repeats almost the 
same words, ‘I am become a fool; ye have compelled me; for I fall 
short in no whit of the very chiefest Apostles, even though I am_ 
nothing’ (2 Cor. xii. 11). Accordingly he claims all the privileges of 
an Apostle (1 Cor. ix. 5). Moreover especially, he asserts his absolute. 
equality with Peter (Gal. ii. 7 sq); and he gives practical proof of his 
independence by openly rebuking Peter, when Peter’s timidity en- 
dangered the freedom and universality of the Church. If there was any 
primacy at this time, it was the primacy not of Peter, but of Paul. 


§ 2. 
THE ROMAN VISIT OF PETER. 


The work of the primacy being completed as I have described it in 
the last section, and S. Peter being miraculously delivered from prison, 
we are told that having sent a message to James and the brethren hi 
went out and departed to another place (Acts xii. 17 ἐξελθὼν éropevd 
εἰς ἕτερον τόπον). This has been supposed to mark the crisis when hi 
transferred his residence to Rome and his labours to the far west. Ὁ 

There is nothing in the language itself, except its mysterious vagt 
ness, which could suggest such an inference, which is quite inconsist 2 
with known facts. The simple interpretation is doubtless the corr 

᾿ ; 











SAINT PETER IN ROME. 491 


one, that he retired out of the way of Herod. Indeed so important a 
fact as his visit to the metropolis of the world would not have been 
slurred over in this way. When we meet with him again he is still in 
the East; at the Council of Jerusalem about a.p. 51 (Acts xv. 7); and 
at Antioch a little later (Gal. ii. 11). Indeed his recognised position 
as the Apostle of the Circumcision would suggest Palestine as his head- 
quarters and the East as his sphere of action. Whether within the next 
few years he paid a visit to Corinth or not (1 Cor. i. 12, 2 Cor. 1. 19, 
x. 12 sq) I need not stop to enquire. A personal visit is not required 
to explain the power of his name with a certain party at Corinth; and 
the silence of S. Paul, though not conclusive, is unfavourable to any 
visit to Greece. 

One thing seems quite certain. The departure from Jerusalem 
during the persecution of Herod took place about a.p. 42; the Epistle 
to the Romans was written about a.p. 58. During this period no 
Apostle had visited the metropolis of the world. If silence can ever be 
regarded as decisive, its verdict must be accepted in this case. S. Paul 
could not have written as he writes to the Romans (i. 11 sq, xv. 20—z24), 
if they had received even a short visit from an Apostle, more especially 
if that Apostle were S. Peter. 

Nevertheless reasons exist—to my own mind conclusive reasons— 
for postulating a visit of S. Peter to Rome at a later date, on which 
occasion he suffered martyrdom there. If these reasons are not each 
singly decisive, the combination yields a body of proof, which it is 
difficult to resist. 

(1) InS. Peter’s First Epistle, he sends a salutation at the close 
(v. 13) to his distant correspondents in Asia Minor; ‘The fellow-elect 
(lady) in Babylon greeteth you, and so doth Marcus my son.’ Who or 
what is meant by ‘the fellow-elect’?. On turning to the opening of the 
Epistle, we find that it is addressed ‘to the elect sojourners of the 
dispersion (ἐκλεκτοῖς παρεπιδήμοις διασπορᾶς) in Pontus, Galatia, etc.’ and 
this suggests that ‘the fellow-elect’ at the close is the Church from 
which he writes. Indeed there is no individual woman, for whom we 
can suppose such a salutation appropriate, for we can hardly imagine 
S. Peter’s wife, if she were still living, placed in this prominent position. 
Nor again is the context 7 ἐν Βαβυλῶνι συνεκλεκτή natural as the 
description of a person. I should add also that several early authorities 
(including ») add ἐκκλησία; and that the figurative expressions in this 
epistle (i. 1 παρεπιδήμοις διασπορᾶς, comp. ii. 11) are in character with 
this interpretation. 

The Second Epistle of S. John presents a close parallel. A saluta- 
























492 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


tion is sent in the opening verse to the elect lady (ἐκλεκτῇ κυρίᾳ) ; at 
the close is a message ‘the children of thine elect sister (τῆς ἀδελφῆς σου 
τῆς ἐκλεκτῆς) salute thee.’ The intermediate language shows that we 
have here the personification of the communities. It is not an inter 
change of greetings between individuals, but between Churches; see 
for instance ver. 4, ‘I have found some of thy children walking in the 
truth;’ ver. 6, ‘this is the commandment which ye heard from the 
beginning ;’ ver. 8, ‘look to yourselves’ after the warning of Antichrist ; 
ver. 10, ‘if any one cometh to you and bringeth not this doctrine.’ Ἶ 
But what is this fellow-elect congregation in Babylon? Can we doubt 
that it is the Church in Rome? It cannot be the Egyptian Babylon, 
which was a mere fortress (Strabo xvil. p. 807). If therefore it was not 
the Great Babylon, it must have been Rome. To this latter more 
especially the mention of Mark points; for Mark is designated by 
a very early tradition as S. Peter’s companion and interpreter in § 
Rome. ‘This appears from Papias and the Elders, whose traditions are” 
reported by him (Euseb. H. £. iii. 39) ; from Irenzeus (Haer. 111. 1. 1); 
from Clement of Alexandria (Euseb. H. Z. ii. 15), and from Origen” 
(Op. 11. p. 440 Delarue ; comp. Euseb. H. Z. vi. 25), the writing of his 
Gospel being connected with the preaching of Peter in Rome. This: 
tradition is in full accordance with the latest notices in the New 
Testament (Col. iv. 10, Philem. 24, 2 Tim. iv. 11), which represent: 
him either as staying in Rome or journeying towards Rome. 
Nor was Babylon a new name for Rome, dating from the Neronian 
persecution. It had been a mystical name for this world-wide power 
with the Jews before it was inherited by the Christians. As such i 
appears even in the early Sibylline Oracles (v. 158). ἢ 


Καὶ φλέξει πόντον βαθὺν αὐτήν τε Βαβυλῶνα 
Ἰταλίας γαῖαν θ᾽ ἧς εἵνεκα πολλοὶ ὄλοντο 
Ἑβραίων ἅγιοι πιστοὶ καὶ ναὸς ἀληθής. 


(2) The prophecy in John xxi. 18 ‘ When thou shalt grow ola 
thou shalt stretch out thy hands and another shall gird thee, this H 
said signifying by what death he should die,’ has always been explai 
of the crucifixion of S. Peter; and it is difficult to see what othe 
explanation can be given. Nothing, it is true, is here said about tl 
place of martyrdom. But the crucifixion of 8. Peter is always cc 
nected by tradition with Rome, and with no other place. It wot 
be arbitrary therefore to separate the locality from the manner 
martyrdom. Unless we accept the Roman residence of S. Peter, 
know nothing about his later years and death. a 











SAINT PETER IN ROME. 493 


(3) The reference in the Second Epistle of S. Peter (i. 14) has 
much the same bearing as the last; ‘Knowing that the putting-off of this 
tabernacle is at hand, as the Lord Jesus Christ also declared unto me.’ 
It may be said indeed that grave doubts are thrown on the genuineness 
of this document. If it were otherwise than genuine it would express 
from another quarter the belief of the early Church respecting S. Peter’s 
death ; for it certainly belongs to the primitive ages. 

(4) The Epistle of the Roman Church to the Corinthians, by the 
hand of CLEMENT oF Rog, belongs to the year 95 or 96. ‘The writer, 
turning aside from the Old Testament worthies, of whose heroism he had 
spoken, directs the attention of his readers (c. 5) to the examples of 
Christian athletes who ‘lived very near to our own times’. He reminds 
them of the Apostles who were persecuted and carried the struggle to 
death (ἕως θανάτου ἤθλησαν). There was Peter, who after undergoing 
many sufferings became a martyr and went to his appointed place ° 
of glory. There was Paul, who, after enduring chains, imprisonments, 
- stonings again and again, and sufferings of all kinds, preached the 
Gospel in the extreme West, likewise endured martyrdom and so 
departed from this world. If the use of the word μαρτυρήσας in both 
cases could leave any doubt that they suffered death for the faith, 
the context is decisive. But why are these two Apostles, and these 
only, mentioned? Why not James the son of Zebedee? Why not 
James the Lord’s brother? Both these were martyrs. The latter 
was essentially ‘a pillar,’ and his death was even more recent. Obviously 
because Clement was appealing to examples which they themselves had 
witnessed. Paul was martyred in Rome, as is allowed on all hands. 
Is not the overwhelming inference that Peter suffered in this same city 
also? ‘This inference is all the more certain, when we find that outside 
this testimony of Clement tradition is constant in placing his death at 
Rome. 

(5) Some ten or twenty years later, in the early decades of the 
second century, Icnatius (Rom. 4) on his way to martyrdom writes to 
the Roman Church: ‘I do not command you, like Peter and Paul; 
they were Apostles, I am a condemned criminal; they were free; I am 
a slave until now.’ Why should he single out Peter and Paul? He is 
writing from Asia Minor ; and the locality therefore would suggest John. 
He was a guest of a disciple of John at the time. He was sojourning 
in the country where John was the one prominent name. The only 
ἢ conceivable reason is, that Peter and Paul had been in a position to 

_ give directions to the Romans, that they both alike had visited Rome 
and were remembered by the Roman Church. 





494 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 































(6) Papias of Hierapolis may have been born about A.D. 60>—7o, _ 
and probably wrote about a.D. 130—140. He related on the authority — 
of the presbyter John, a personal disciple of the Lord (Euseb. H. 2. 
iii. 39) that Mark, not being a personal disciple of the Lord, became a 
companion and interpreter (ἑρμηνευτὴς) of S. Peter, that he wrote down 
what he heard from his master’s oral teaching, and that then he— 
composed this record. 

I have no concern here whether this is or is not the Second Gospelll 
as we possess it. For my immediate purpose this notice suggests — 
three remarks; (i) When Mark is called ἑρμηνευτὴς ‘the interpreter” 
of Peter, the reference must be to the Latin, not to the Greek language. 
The evidence that Greek was spoken commonly in the towns bordering” 
on the Sea of Galilee, and that S. Peter must therefore have been well 
acquainted with it, is ample; even if this had not been the necessary 
inference from the whole tenour of the New Testament. (ii) This ; 
notice seems to have been connected by Papias with 1 Pet. v. τὰν Ὶ 
where Mark is mentioned in connexion with the fellow-elect in- 
Babylon, presumably the Church of Rome. Papias was acquainted 
with, and quoted from, this Epistle of S. Peter; for Eusebius tells” 
us that he ‘employs testimonies’ from it: and it is plain also from the 
context of the passage cited by Eusebius that Papias had spoken © 
at greater length about the connexion of Mark with Peter, ‘as I said 
(ὡς ἔφην)"; (iii) Papias was so understood by writers like Irenzeus, who 
had his book before them. It seems a tolerably safe inference there- 
fore that Papias represented S. Peter as being in Rome, that he stated 
Mark to have been with him there, and that he assigned to the latter 
a Gospel record which was committed to writing for the instruction of 
the Romans. ᾿ 

(7) Dionysius or Corintu, from whom Eusebius gives an extrac 
(HZ. £. ii. 25), writes as follows :— im 

‘Herein ye also by such instructions (to us) have united the tree: 
of the Romans and Corinthians, planted by Peter and Paul (τὴν ἀπ 
Πέτρου καὶ ἸΤαύλου φυτείαν γενηθεῖσαν Ῥωμαίων τε καὶ Κορινθίων ow 
κεράσατε).. For they both alike came also to our Corinth and taugh 
us; and both alike came together to Italy, and having taught th 
suffered martyrdom at the same time (κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν). 

This letter was written about A.D. 170 in answer to a co 
cation from the Romans under his contemporary bishop Soter: ( 
I. p. 369). 1 περᾶ not stop to enquire whether the correct reading 
φυτεύσαντες or φοιτήσαντες. The statement may be taken as ref 
senting the belief of both Churches. The expression κατὰ τὸν. : 
καιρὸν need not be pressed to mean the same day or the same year. 








SAINT PETER IN ROME. 495 


(8) Irenaus about A.D. 190 is still more explicit (Haer. iii. 1. 1) :— 

‘Matthew published also a written Gospel (γραφὴν εὐαγγελίου) 
among the Hebrews in their own language while Peter and Paul were 
preaching and founding the Church in Rome. Again after their 
departure, Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, himself also 
handed down to us in writing the lessons preached by Peter.’ 

A little later he says (aer. iii. 3, 2, 3); ‘The greatest and most 
ancient Churches, well known to all men, the Churches of Rome 
founded and established by the two most glorious Apostles, Peter and 
Paul [hand down] announced to mankind that tradition and faith, 
which it has from the Apostles reaching to our own day through its 
successions of bishops. So having founded and built up the Church 
the blessed Apostles entrusted the ministration of the bishopric to 
Linus.’ 

Irenzeus spent some time in Rome about a.p. 177, and appears to 
have paid repeated visits. 

(9) The MuraAToRIAN CANON is generally placed about a.p. 170. I 
have given reasons already (11. p. 405 sq) for surmising that it may have 
been an early work of Hippolytus, the pupil of Irenzeus, in which case 
it may date twenty years later. The writer explains that 5. Luke in 
the Acts of the Apostles only records incidents which took place in 
his presence, and that therefore his silence about the Martyrdom of 
S. Peter, or the journey of S. Paul to Spain, evidently shows that 
he was not present on either occasion. ‘Though the actual text is not 
certain in all points, there can be no reasonable doubt that this is the 
meaning of the words. 

(10) The testimony of CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA (A.D. 193—217) 
in the /yfotyposeis appears from Eusebius (1. Z. vi. 14). He stated 
that ‘when Peter had preached the word publicly in Rome and 
declared the Gospel by the Spirit, the bystanders being many in 
number exhorted Mark, as having accompanied him for a long time 
and remembering what he had said, to write out his statements, and 
having thus composed his Gospel, to communicate it to them; and 
that, when Peter learnt this, he used no pressure either to prevent him 
or urge him forwards.’ See also Adumbr. Ὁ. 1007 (Potter). 

(11) The testimony of TERTULLIAN is chiefly of value as showing 
} the prevalence of the tradition in another important branch of the 
ἢ Church at the close of the second and the beginning of the third 
century. The passages need no comment. 

Scorpiace 15. 

‘We read in the lives of the Czsars, Nero was the first to stain the 


496 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


΄ 



























rising faith with blood. Then Peter is girt by another, when he ἴδ᾽ 
bound to the cross; then Paul obtains his birth-right (consequitur | 
nativitatem) of Roman citizenship, when he is born again there by © 
the nobility of martyrdom.’ 
De Baptismo 4. 
‘Nor does it matter whether they are among those whom John bap- 3 
tized in the Jordan or those whom Peter baptized in the Tiber.’ 
De Praescriptione 32. 
‘The Church of the Romans reports that Clement was ordained by 
Peter.’ 4 
De Praescriptione 36. 
‘If thou art near to Italy, thou hast Rome, whence our author 
also is near at hand. How happy is that Church on whom the 
Apostles shed all their teaching with their blood; where Peter i 
conformed to the passion of the Lord, where Paul is crowned with © 
the death of John, where the Apostle John, after being plunged in 
boiling oil without suffering any harm, is banished into an island.’ q 
(12) Garus the Roman presbyter, of whom I have had something to 
say already (see above, 11. p. 377 56), lived under Zephyrinus and was a 
contemporary of Hippolytus [c. A.D. 200—220] if not actually identical 
with him. Arguing against the Montanists of Asia Minor, who asserted 
the precedent of Philip’s daughters for their special views about pro- 
phecy, he claims for his own Church the authority of the Apostles 
S. Peter and S. Paul, whose martyred bodies repose in Rome:— 
‘But I can show you the trophies (the reliques) of the Apostles. 
For if thou wilt go to the Vatican or to the Ostian Way, thou wilt fin 
the trophies of those who founded this Church.’ 


This shows that at least at this early date the sites of the graves Ὁ 
the two Apostles were reputed to have been the localities where no 
stand the basilicas of S. Peter and S. Paul. 

(13) OrIGEN in the 3rd volume of his Explanation of Genesis ( 
reported by Eusebius H. Z. iii. 1; comp. Orig. Of. τι. p. 24 Delara 
related that Peter ‘appears to have preached in Pontus and Galatia a1 
Bithynia, in Cappadocia and Asia; when at last he went to Rome : 1 
there was gibbeted head downward, having himself asked to suffer si 
and that Paul ‘having fully preached the Gospel of Christ from Jerusal 
as far as Illyricum, afterwards suffered martyrdom in Rome in the t 
of Nero.’ "ἢ 

(14) Lacrantius. ἢ 

Instit. Div. τν. 21. oe 

‘He disclosed to them all things which Peter and Paul prea ch 





SAINT PETER IN ROME. 497 


Rome, and this preaching remained in writing for a record: wherein 
among many other marvellous things, this also etc.’ 


But when shall we suppose that this visit to Rome took place? We 
have seen (see above, 1. p. 491) that as late as a.p. 58, when S. Paul 
wrote to the Romans, his claim to Rome as virgin soil so far as regards 
any Apostolic ministrations is fatal to a prior date for the visit. For 
the next four or five years we have sufficiently precise information in 
the Apostolic records to preclude this period also. 8, Paul spends 
two years in captivity at Cesarea, and in the autumn of a.p. 60 he 
sets sail for Rome, arriving there in the spring of 61. In Rome he 
is detained two whole years a captive, and then presumably in 63 he is 
released. 

His release is not dependent on any one consideration, but is 
inferred from several. (i) Early tradition speaks of his paying the 
intended visit to Spain, of which he speaks in the Epistle to the 
Romans (xv. 28); (ii) He tells the Philippians that he looks forward 
to being released shortly (i. 25, ii. 24), and he is so hopeful that he 
bids Philemon prepare a lodging for him (ver. 22); (iii) The phenomena 
in the Pastoral Epistles cannot in most instances be placed during the 
period included in the Acts; (iv) The date given for his martyrdom by 
the best authorities is the last year of Nero, which was three or four 
years after the fire which led immediately to the persecution of the 
Christians. 

But, if he was released, it must have been before the outbreak of the 
persecution, since so prominent a leader of the Christians could hardly 
have escaped, if he had still been in the hands of his Roman masters. 
During the period then of his first and second captivities, i.e. between 
A.D. 63—67, we are led to find a place for S. Peter’s visit. Thus it will 
not clash with S, Paul’s relations to the Romans, and might well have 
taken place without our finding any notice of it either in the narrative 
_ of the Acts or in the letters of this Apostle. 

S. Peter would then arrive in Rome in the latter part of 63 or the 
beginning of 64. The Neronian persecutions broke out soon afterwards, 
and he would be one of the most prominent victims. This accords 
with the ancient tradition of the different places of sepulture of the two 
Apostles. Gaius the Roman tells us, that whereas Peter was buried in 

the Vatican, Paul found his resting-place on the Ostian Way. The 
Vatican gardens were the scene of the hideous festivities, in which the 
victims of the fire suffered, and among these (we may assume) was 
S. Peter (a.pD. 64). On the other hand an isolated victim who was put 


CLEM. II, 32 
























498 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


to death some years later (say a.D. 67), as was presumably S. Paul’s case, 
might meet his death anywhere. 

On the occasion of this visit to Rome, as we have seen, S. Peter 
wrote his Epistles. As I am desirous of avoiding controverted docu- 
ments, I shall say nothing about the Second—nor indeed is it necessary 
for my purpose—but confine my attention to the First. Do we find — 
then in this First Epistle any confirmation of the view here suggested of 
the date of S. Peter’s visit ? ' 

(1) It was written during a season of persecution. No other book 
of the New Testament, except the Apocalypse, is so burdened with the 
subject. The leading purport of the letter is to console and encourage — 
his distant correspondents under the fiery trial which awaited them. 
Nothing in the ‘previous history of the Church answers to the conditions. 
It was no isolated, capricious attack, but a systematic onslaught. Though ~ 
it raged chiefly at Rome, its effects were felt in the provinces also. More | 
especially was this the case in Asia Minor, which S. Peter had in view. 
The letters to the Seven Churches in the Apocalypse are evidence of — 
this; and the mention of the martyr Antipas (ii. 13) emphasizes the — 
fact. ‘The emperor’s example had let loose the dogs. ' 

“ΝΟΥ͂ for ἃ season, if need be, ye are in heaviness by reason of mani- — 
fold temptations, that the trial of your faith being more precious than οὗ 
gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto ~ 
praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ’ (i. 6, 7). 

‘ Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas — 
they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which — 
they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation’ (ii. 12). ᾿ 

‘If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid 
of their terror, neither be troubled...... having a good conscience, that 
whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may be ashamed 
that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ ; for it is better, if 
the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing than for evil doing 
(iii. 14, τό, 17). (i 

‘Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to 
try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice 
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings’ (iv. 12, 13). ; 

‘If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye ; for th 
Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you; on their part He is ev 
spoken of, but on your part He is glorified...If any man suffer as 
Christian let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on nia 
behalf’ (iv. 14, 16). Ἣ 


Bel 








SAINT PETER IN ROME. 499 


‘Whom resist, stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions 
are accomplished in your brethren which are in the world’ (v. 9). 

These passages point to the crisis, when the persecution had already 
broken out, or was imminent, and therefore were probably written not 
earlier than the summer of 64. 

(2) The date thus suggested agrees with other indications. With 
two Epistles of S. Paul more especially the writer shows a familiar 
acquaintance—the Epistle to the Romans and the Epistle to the 
Ephesians. The one was written to Rome; the other from Rome. 
They both partake of the character of circular letters. They are there- 
fore just the two Epistles which would be most accessible to a person in 
S. Peter’s position. The Epistle to the Romans was written in a.D. 58, 
but the Epistle to the Ephesians not till a.p. 63. 

The following are the parallels to the Epistle to the Romans, and 
the reader may satisfy himself as to their pertinence. 


Romans iy. 24 1 Pet. i. 21 
vi. 7 iv. I, 2 
vi. 18 il. 24 
viii, 18 v. I 
vill. 34 ) ill. 22 
ix. 33 il. 6 sq 
xii. I il. 5 
xii. 2 i. £4 
xii. 3—8 iv. 10, II 
xii. 9, 10 1. 22, li. 17 
xii. 14—19 ili. 8—r12 
xiii. I—7 li. 13, 14 


The parallels to the Epistle to the Ephesians are equally striking, 
We have seen that the oldest tradition, as recorded by Gaius, re- 
presents S. Peter as buried in the Vatican and S. Paul on the Ostian 
Way. But it says nothing about the martyrdom of the two Apostles 
being synchronous. Dionysius of Corinth states that they were martyred 
κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν, but the expression must not be too rigorously 
pressed, even if the testimony of a Corinthian could be accepted as 
regards the belief in Rome. On the other hand Prudentius (Peristeph. 
xii. 5) and others represent them as suffering on the same day, though 
not in the same year. This highly improbable statement must have 
had some foundation in fact. What was it? In the list of depositions 
incorporated by the Liberian chronographer (A.D. 354) we find 
iii Kal Jul. Petri ad Catacumbas 
et Pauli Ostense Tusco et Basso cons. [A.D. 2 258]. 
32—2 


500 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


















Now at one time the bodies of the two Apostles were lying in the 
Cemetery on the Appian Way, properly called ‘Ad Catacumbas,’ in a 
‘loculum bisomum,’ which may be seen to this day and over which 
Damasus (A.D. 366—384) placed the inscription 


Hic habitasse prius sanctos cognoscere debes, 

nomina [limina?] quique Petri pariter Paulique requiris; 
discipulos Oriens misit, quod sponte fatemur : 

sanguinis ob meritum Christumque per astra secuti 
aetherios petiere sinus et regna piorum. 

Roma suos potius meruit defendere cives ; 


by which he simply meant that the East gave these two Apostles to 
Rome, where they became Roman citizens. It is in fact the same which 
Tertullian expresses in a passage quoted above (Scorf. 15). ‘ Paulus 
civitatis Romanae consequitur nativitatem, cum illic martyrii renascitur 
generositate.’ But being strangely misunderstood it gave rise to the 
legend that the Greeks attempted to carry off the bodies of the two 
Apostles, but being pursued threw them down in the Catacombs’. 
Plainly however the day, the 29th of June, was not originally regarded 
as the day of martyrdom of the two Apostles, but the day of their depo- 
sition on some occasion. What then was this occasion? 
The mention of the consulship happily fixes the year. This must 
refer to the temporary deposition of the bodies in the catacombs of 
S. Sebastian ; and the notice probably ran originally 
iii Kal. Jul. Petri et Pauli ad Catacumbas Tusco 
et Basso cons. . 
but the chronographer of 354 or some intermediate copyist knowing — 
that S. Paul’s body lay in his time on the Ostian Way altered it accord- | 
ingly, inserting ‘Ostense’ after the name of this Apostle*. This was a 3 
few weeks before the martyrdom of Xystus II, who suffered Aug. 6, — 
A.D. 258. The two bodies, we may suppose, were deposited in S. Sebas- 4 
tian for a time, while their permanent memoriae were being erected, 
which were afterwards developed into the basilicas of S. Peter’s at the 
Vatican and S. Paul’s on the Ostian Way. But this temporary deposi- 
tion fixed the festival of their common celebration in Rome and gave 
tise to the story that they were martyred on the same day*. On the 


1 See a good article Das Alter der 
Griber u. Kirchen des Paulus u. Petrus 
in Rom by Erbes in Brieger’s Zeitschr. 
J. Kirchengesch, Vil. p. 1 sq (1885). 

2 This is the explanation of Erbes, 
p- 28, and it is accepted by Lipsius 







Apocr. A postelgesch. U. 1. Ὁ. 392 54. 
3 It is actually entered in Ado, und 
June 29, ‘Romae natalis beatorum Ape 
stolorum Petri et Pauli, qui passi si 
sub Nerone, Basso et Tusco consulibu 
See Erbes, 1.6. p. 30, 











SAINT PETER IN ROME. 501 


other hand the true tradition of their suffering in different years survived 
to the time of Prudentius, albeit he assumed that it referred to succes- 
sive years. In connexion with this temporary deposition we may place 
the notice said to be found with exceptional uniformity in all the mss 
of the Hieronymian Martyrology on Jan. 25 


Romae translatio Pauli Apostoli 


which would probably be the day of the restoration to his permanent 
resting-place, but which was ordered at a later date to be celebrated as 
the day of his conversion. 


§ 3. 
THE TWENTY-FIVE VEARS’ EPISCOPATE. 


The twenty-five years of S. Peter’s episcopate had at one time a 
sentimental and might almost be said to have a dogmatic value. It 
was unique in the history of the papacy. Though the records of certain 
periods in its career, more especially its earlier career, are scanty, we 
know enough to say with certainty that no later bishops of Rome held 
the see for a quarter of a century until our own day. Now however all 
is changed. The papacy of Pio Nono has been unique in many ways. 
It has seen the declaration of papal infallibility: it has witnessed the 
extinction of the temporal power; and, last of all, it has exceeded by 
more than a year the reputed term of S. Peter. The twenty-five years 
therefore have ceased to have any dogmatic or sentimental importance ; 
and, in dealing with them critically, we need have no fear lest we 
should be doing violence to any feelings which deserve respect. 

But there is a still prior question to be settled before we discuss the 
length of S. Peter’s episcopate. Was he bishop of Rome at all? He 
might have been founder or joint founder of the Church there, without 
having been regarded as its bishop. No one reckons S. Paul as first — 
bishop of Thessalonica or Philippi, of Corinth or of Athens, though 
these Churches owe their first evangelization to him. 

Now I cannot find that any writers for the first two centuries and 
more speak of S. Peter as bishop of Rome. Indeed their language is 
inconsistent with the assignment of this position to him. When Dionysius 
of Corinth speaks of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul as jointly planting 
the two Churches of Corinth and of Rome, he obviously cannot mean 
this; for otherwise he would point to a divided episcopate. The language 
of Irenzeus (ili. 3. 3) again is still more explicit. He describes the 
Church of Rome as founded by the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, who 


502 EPISTLES OF 8. CLEMENT. 









appointed Linus bishop. After him came Linus; after Linus, Anencletus; 
after Anencletus ‘in the ¢hird place from the Apostles Clement is elected 
to the bishopric,’ and the others, when any numbers are given, are 
numbered accordingly, so that Xystus’ is ‘the sixth from the Apostles,’ 
and Eleutherus the contemporary of Irenzeus ‘holds the office of the 
episcopate in the twelfth place from the Apostles.’ This is likewise the 
enumeration in the anonymous author of the treatise against Artemon 
(Euseb. A Z£. ν. 28) probably Hippolytus, who numbers Victor ‘the 
thirteenth from Peter.’ 


* * * * * 


1 See on this passage the remarks in in the text of Irenzeus see the note on I. 
I. pp. 271, 284. For the discrepancies p. 204. 


desl sit jollass some lite er aes “Ces nt) enoee 


οὐ uw? 2 bag tered 2 ον adi yd ῬΑ σ Ὁ oe iio Ah 





B. 


THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 


ae Epistle, which bears the name of Barnabas, stands alone in the 

literature of the early Church. The writer is an uncompromising 
antagonist of Judaism ; but, beyond this antagonism, he has nothing in 
common with the Antijudaic heresies of the second century. These 
later heretics, Gnostic and Marcionite, took their stand on a dualism in 
some form or other. They postulated an opposition between the Old 
Testament and the New. In Marcionism, which flourished about the 
-middle of the second century, this doctrine assumes its extreme form. 
The Old Testament—so Marcion affirmed—was the work of the 
Demiurge, whose tyranny over mankind Jesus Christ, the son of the 
Good God, came to destroy. The antagonism was absolute and com- 
plete ; the warfare was internecine. Of such a doctrine the Epistle of 
Barnabas exhibits not the faintest trace. On the contrary, the writer 
sees Christianity everywhere in the Lawgiver and the Prophets, He 
treats them with a degree of respect, which would have satisfied the 
most devout rabbi. He quotes them profusely, as authoritative. Only 
he accuses the Jews of misunderstanding them from beginning to end.: 
He even intimates that the ordinances of circumcision, of the Sabbath, 
of the distinction of meats clean and unclean, as having a spiritual or 
mystical significance, were never intended to be literally observed, 
though on this point he is not quite explicit. 

Who then was the writer of this Epistle? At the close of the 
second century Clement of Alexandria quotes it profusely, ascribing it 
to ‘the Apostle Barnabas’ or ‘the Apostolic Barnabas’ or ‘the Préphet 
Barnabas’ ; and, lest any doubt should be entertained as to the identity 


| _ of the person bearing this name, he in one passage describes the author 





504 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 
































as ‘Barnabas who himself also preached in company with the Apostle 
(i.e, S. Paul) in the ministry of the Gentiles’.’ Yet elsewhere* Clement 
himself refers anonymously to the explanation which our Barnabas gives 
of the prohibition against eating the flesh of ‘the hare and the hyena,’ ὦ 
and criticizes it freely. He declares his acquiescence in the symbolical 
interpretation, but he distinctly repudiates the statement on which our 
author founds it as a physical impossibility. It seems clear therefore 
that notwithstanding his profuse and deferential quotations he does not 
treat the book as final and authoritative. A few years later, Origen 
also cites this work with the introductory words, ‘It is written in the 
Catholic (i.e. General) Epistle of Barnabas.’ The earliest notices how- — 
ever are confined to the Alexandrian fathers ; and elsewhere it does not — 
appear to have been received with any very special consideration. — 
Altogether the position, which it occupies in the Codex Sinaiticus, may ἢ 
be taken to represent the highest distinction to which it ever attained. — 
It is there placed, not with the Catholic Epistles, which would have 
been its proper rank, if it had been regarded as strictly canonical, but — 
after the Apocalypse, in company with the Shepherd of Hermas, as a ~ 
sort of Appendix to the sacred volume. . 

This prominence it doubtless owed to the belief that it was written 
by Barnabas the Levite of Cyprus, the companion of 5. Paul. Later — 
criticism however, with very few exceptions, has pronounced decidedly — 
against this view, which indeed is beset with many difficulties. But on 
the other hand this work is in no sense apocryphal, if by apocryphal we ~ 
mean fictitious. There is no indication, direct or indirect, that the 
writer desired to be taken for the Apostle Barnabas. On the contrary, 
when he speaks of the Apostles, his language is such as to suggest that 
he was wholly unconnected with them; and he merely addresses his 
‘sons and daughters,’ as a teacher who had important trusts to com- 
municate. How the name of Barnabas came to be attached to the 
Epistle, it is impossible to say. An early tradition, or fiction, represents 
Barnabas as residing at Alexandria; but this story might have been thi 
consequence, rather than the cause, of the name attached to the letter. 
Possibly its author was some unknown namesake of this ‘Son ¢ 
Consolation.’ 

At all events we can hardly be wrong in ascribing to it an Alexandria 
origin. Its mode of interpretation is Alexandrian throughout ; and it 


1 Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 7 (p. 447 ed. is not beyond. the reach of doukee as 
Potter), 20 (p. 489), v. 10 (p. 683). also Strom. ii. 15, Ῥ.- 464, where. £ 
3 Clem. Alex. Paed. ii. τὸ (p. 220,221 — nabas is mentioned by name. Bs 
ed. Potter). It is true that the reference 





THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 505 


earliest reception, as we have seen, is connected with this Church. 
The beginnings of Christianity at Alexandria are wrapped in obscurity. 
It would be as rash to reject confidently, as to adopt confidently, the 
tradition which represents Mark, the ‘cousin’ of Barnabas, as its 
evangelist. But on the other hand it seems certain that the Alexandrian 
Church was a flourishing community at an early date. Doubtless 
Apollos was not the only ‘learned Jew of Alexandria,’ who was brought 
to the knowledge of the Gospel during the lifetime of S. Paul. The 
Epistle to the Hebrews is steeped in the learning of Alexandria, and 
was probably written by a member of this Church. When Hadrian 
visited this city in the autumn of A.D. 130, he found the Christian 
Church an appreciable influence in society, extending itself and pros- 
elytizing in all directions. ‘I have become familiar with Egypt, which 
you praised to me,’ he writes to his brother-in-law Servianus afterwards ; 
‘it is fickle, uncertain, blown about by every gust of rumour. Those 
who worship Serapis are Christians, and those are devoted to Serapis 
who call themselves bishops of Christ. There is no ruler of a synagogue 
there, no Samaritan, no Christian presbyter, who is not an astrologer, 
a soothsayer, a quack. The patriarch himself, whenever he comes to 
Egypt, is compelled by some to worship Serapis, by others to worship 
Christ’ (Vopiscus Vita Saturnini 8). No stronger testimony to the 
growing power of the Christian Church could be desired than these 
sarcasms of the sceptical emperor. The Epistle of Barnabas may be 
regarded as a product of these conflicts between Jews and Christians 
which Hadrian here describes. ‘The antagonism between the discordant 
elements which made up the population of Alexandria, is a matter of 
history; and in the general mé/ée the feuds between Jews and Christians 
for some generations bore no insignificant part. 

The birthplace of this Epistle then seems tolerably certain ; but its 
date is more open to dispute. It was certainly written after the first 
destruction of Jerusalem under Titus to which it alludes, and it was 
almost as certainly written before the war under Hadrian ending in the 
second devastation, about which it is silent, but to which it could hardly 
have failed to refer, if written after or during the conflict. The possible 
limits therefore are A.D. 70 and A.D. 132. It would be mere waste of 
time to discuss any theories which go beyond these boundaries. But 
within this period of sixty years various dates have been assigned to it. 
Among the advocates of an earlier date we may single out Weizsacker, 
who places it under Vespasian (A.D. 69—79); while Volkmar, who 
throws it forward to the time of Hadrian (A.p. 119—138), may be 
taken to represent the champions of the late date. Of the intermediate 






















506 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


position, occupied by several critics of reputation, Hilgenfeld may be ~ 
regarded as a typical champion, who dates it during the reign of Nerva 
(A.D. 96—98). 

The conclusion depends mainly on the interpretation of two pas- 
sages in the Epistle itself. 

The first is the more important. The writer warns his readers that 
‘the last scandal, or offence, is at hand,’ in other words that the great ~ 
and final conflict, which is destined to try the faith of the believers, — 
is fast approaching, and he calls their attention to the signs of the last 
days, as foretold in Daniel, in the following words :— 

‘And so also says the prophet; Zen kingdoms shall reign upon the — 
earth, and after them shall rise up a little king, who shall lay low three of — 
the kings in one (τρεῖς ὑφ᾽ ἕν τῶν βασιλέων). In like manner Daniel saith 
concerning the same; And J saw the fourth beast wicked and strong and ὦ 
untoward beyond all the beasts of the earth, and how that ten horns sprang — 
up out of it, and out of them a little horn (as) an offshoot (παραφυάδιον), 
and how that it laid low three of the great horns in one (ὑφ᾽ ἕν τρία τῶν ὦ 
μεγάλων κεράτων). Ye ought therefore to understand’ (ὃ 4). 

The first passage is taken from Daniel vii. 24: the second from an ~ 
earlier verse in the same chapter. But, like the Old Testament citations 
in this writer generally, they are quoted with a degree of freedom which 
is, or ought to be, highly suggestive when we come to deal with q 
evangelical quotations in the earliest fathers. i 

Of the interpretation the so-called Barnabas says nothing. He is 
evidently referring to the Roman emperors, and common prudence ~ 
therefore gags his lips, when he would speak of their overthrow. He — 
leaves the solution to the intelligence of his hearers. F 

When we attempt to read the enigma, we must remember that thei 
writer applies to his own times language which was intended to describe 4 
something wholly different. We may therefore expect to find some 
wresting of the imagery to adapt it to contemporary events. But on 
the other hand it must have exhibited coincidences sufficiently patent to 
strike the ordinary mind. Otherwise the writer would not have ventured 
to. leave the application of the prophecy to his readers. He must have 
discarded the prophecy as unfit for his purpose unless it had told 
its own tale, if he did not venture to expand it. And again; we may 
look for the key to the exposition in those modifications of the original 
words which the writer introduces. The most imporsant of these is the 
twice-repeated expression ὑφ᾽ é€v—‘in one’ or ‘at once.’ The origina 
prophecy contains no hint that the three kings shall suffer at once. 
are closely connected together. Lastly; the little horn in the origina 





THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 507 


prophecy is plainly the Antichrist; for he is described as making 
war against the Saints and prevailing against them, until the Ancient of 
Days came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the Most High; 
and the time came that the Saints possessed the kingdom (vii. 21, 22). 
This fact was too patent to be overlooked, and is recognised in all 
patristic interpretations of the prophecy. It is impossible therefore to 
suppose that our Barnabas could have interpreted the little horn in any 
other way. Bearing these conditions of the problem in mind, we may 
proceed to investigate three solutions of the enigma which have been 
offered. 

1. In the first place then Weizsacker reckons the ten Czesars from 
Julius to Vespasian continuously, Vespasian being the tenth. So far he 
adopts the simple and natural reckoning. But he supposes Vespasian 
to be the little horn, and the three kings humbled by him to be Galba, 
Otho, Vitellius. These identifications must be discarded for several 
reasons. In the first place Vespasian is made the little horn, while at 
' the same time he is one of the great horns. Next; Vespasian, though 
he humbled Vitellius, can in no sense be said to have humbled Galba 
and Otho. Indeed, so far was this from being the case, that Vespasian 
throughout identified himself with the cause of Galba, and the first 
measure of his reign was the vindication of the memory of this prince 
(Tac. Hist. ii. 6, iv. 40). Lastly; this interpretation altogether sets 
aside the distinctive character of the little horn as the Antichrist. 
Vespasian was never so regarded by the Christians. During his reign 
they had an entire immunity from persecution, and so rapidly did their 
influence grow that they even made converts in the imperial family 
itself. Toa strongly Antijudaic writer, like Barnabas, more especially 
Vespasian, the scourge of the Jews and the instrument of God’s 
vengeance on a rebellious people, must have been regarded in a directly 
opposite light. 

2. Hilgenfeld reckons Domitian as ‘the tenth king. He omits 
Julius as not having been an emperor strictly so called, and Vitellius as 
never having been recognised in Egypt. The little horn according to 
his solution is Nerva, a feeble and insignificant prince, who subverted 
the dynasty of the three great emperors of the Flavian family— 
Vespasian, Titus, Domitian. But this theory again is open to very 
serious and (as it seems to me) fatal objections. In the first place 

there is no parallel elsewhere to this mode of reckoning, which makes 
Domitian the tenth, and not the twelfth of the Czsars. Whatever 
might be said in favour of excluding Julius from the enumeration, the 
exclusion of Vitellius is indefensible. It is a mistake to maintain that 































508 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 


he was never recognised by the Alexandrians. ‘True, his name does not 
occur, or at least has not yet been discovered, on the hieroglyphic — 
monuments of Egypt; but, as his reign only lasted a few months, this — 
proves nothing. His name is equally conspicuous by its absence in the 
Latin Inscriptions of Asia, of Greece, of Thrace and Illyricum, of — 
Cisalpine Gaul, of Spain, of Britain, and throughout the whole collection — 
of Greek Inscriptions. On the other hand, as an evidence that he was — 
recognised i in Egypt, we have coins of this reign struck at Alexandria. 
And in the Sibylline Oracles, which in some cases at least emanated 4 
from this country, he has his proper place’. The lists of the Roman 
‘kings’ which they give begin with Julius and include Vitellius, ac- — 
cording to the ordinary practice. As Vitellius, like Otho, was duly ac- — 
knowledged by the Senate, and took possession of the Capital, no one at — 
a subsequent period would have disputed his claim to appear in the list. ~ 
This sanction gave to Otho and Vitellius a position in history which was — 
never accorded to pretenders like Civilis. , 

Moreover this theory fails, like the last, in not recognising the Π|||6΄ 
horn as the Antichrist. The persecution, which had harassed the — 
Christians under Domitian, ceased under Nerva, for whose memory in — 
consequence they always had a kindly regard, as their benefactor. © 
Hilgenfeld is therefore obliged altogether to ignore the Antichrist in ~ 
his interpretation. Nor again could Nerva be said without excessive — 
straining of language to destroy the three kings ‘in one’ or ‘fat 
once.’ Vespasian, the earliest, and Titus the next of the Flavii, died in ~ 
their beds seventeen and fifteen years respectively before the accession » 
of Nerva. ; 

4. The solution of Volkmar is exposed to still greater ob , 
jections than the two theories which have been considered hitherto. P 
Like Hilgenfeld, he omits Julius and Vitellius, so as to reckon” 
Domitian the 1oth king; but he takes the three kings to be the three 
successors of this last-named emperor, Nerva, Trajan, and Hadrian. 
They are said to be three in one, because Trajan was adopted by 
Nerva, and Hadrian by Trajan. The writer therefore, living in ne 
time of Hadrian, looks forward to the appearance of the Antichrist in 
the person of Nero or Domitian redivivus, who shall crush Hadriat 
and end the dynasty. This theory has the merit of seeing the Anti 
christ in the little horn ; but this is its only advantage. Its enumeratio1 
of the Czesars is expels to the same objection as the last; and it: 
explanation of the three kings in one seems altogether impossible 
Nerva had been already dead for twenty or thirty years on tt 


1 Orac. Sibyl. V. 35, VIII. §0, XII. 95. 





THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 509 


hypothesis, and yet the writer is looking forward to the advent of a 
conqueror who shall smite and humiliate him. Again; the connexion 
of these three emperors was very slight, the adoption of the successor 
in each case having been made shortly before the death of the pre- 
decessor. And though this seems to be a less serious objection than 
the preceding, the three kings are enumerated over and above the ten, 
whereas the language suggests that they were in some sense comprised 
in the ten. 

The solution, which I venture to offer, has not, so far as I am aware, 
been given before. We enumerate the ten Cesars in their natural 
sequence with Weizsicker, and we arrive at Vespasian as the tenth. We 
regard the three Flavii as the three kings destined to be humiliated, 
with Hilgenfeld. We do not however with him contemplate them as 
three separate emperors, but we explain the language as referring to 
the reigning sovereign, Vespasian, associating his two sons Titus and 
Domitian with himself in the exercise of the supreme power. At no 
other point in the history of the imperial household do we find so close 
a connexion of three in one, until a date too late to enter into 
consideration. And lastly; we interpret the little horn as symbolising 
the Antichrist with Volkmar, and we explain it by the expectation of 
Nero’s reappearance which we know to have been rife during the reign 
of Vespasian. No other epoch in the history of the Czesars presents 
this coincidence of the three elements in the image—the ten kings, the 
three kings, and the Antichrist—so appropriately. For these reasons 
we are led to place the so-called Barnabas during the reign of 
Vespasian (A.D. 70—79). 

The enumeration of the ten kings speaks for itself; but the 
significance of the three kings requires some illustration. When Ves- 
pasian assumed the supreme dignity, the power of the empire was 
sustained by Titus among the legions, while it was represented by 
Domitian in the capital (Tac: His¢. iii. 84, iv. 2, 3). The three were 
thus associated together in the public mind, as no three persons 
had been associated before in the history of the Empire. Immediately 
on the accession of their father the two young men were created 
Czesars by the Senate and invested with the title of ‘Principes Juven- 
tutis.’ The first act of Vespasian was to associate Titus with himself as 
colleague in the consulship, while Domitian was made pretor with 
consular power. Several types of coin, struck during this reign, 
exhibit the effigy of the reigning emperor on the obverse with figures 
of Titus and Domitian on the reverse in various attitudes and with 
various legends, An extant inscription, on a marble (Eckhel Doctr. 


510 EPISTLES OF S. CLEMENT. 



































Num. vi. p. 320 sq), which has apparently served as a base for three ~ 
busts, commemorates the emperor and his two sons in parallel — 
columns, Vespasian’s name and titles occupying the central column, ~ 
‘Along this path (to glory)’, says the elder Pliny (4. H. ii. 5) ‘now 
advances with godlike step, accompanied by his sons, Vespasianus — 
Augustus the greatest ruler of any age.’ The association of Titus with — 
his father’s honours was close and continuous. He was seven times 
colleague to the emperor in the consulate during the ten years of © 
Vespasian’s reign. He was associated in the Pontificate, the Censor- — 
ship, and the Tribunician Power, which represented respectively the — 
religious, the moral, and the political authority of the sovereign. From 
the moment of his return to Rome after his Eastern victories ‘he never ~ 
ceased,’ we are told, ‘to act the part of colleague and even guardian of q 
the empire’.’ The title Imperator itself was conferred upon him’, 806 
that the language of the elder Pliny is perfectly correct, when he speaks ~ 
of ‘imperatores Caesares Vespasiani, pater filiusque’ during the life- — 
time of the father*, On the other hand the relations of Vespasian © 
towards his younger son were never cordial. But the good nature and © 
generosity of Titus interposed to. prevent any open breach between the ~ 
two. He represented to his father that the safety of the empire was — 
dependent on the harmony of the imperial household; and the — 
baseness of Domitian was in consequence overlooked. Coins were — 
struck, which had on the obverse the two sons of Vespasian, with the — 
legend TvTELA . AvGvst1*. At the triumph after the close of the Judaic — 
war, ‘Vespasian,’ says one who witnessed it, ‘preceded in a chariot, and — 
Titus followed, while Domitian rode on horseback by the side, himself 
splendidly habited and mounted on a horse which was a sight to see’” 

Here then were the very three kings of whom the prophecy spoke. ἢ 
It is true that the obvious interpretation of the words pointed to three 
several kings belonging to the ten who are mentioned just before, whereas — 
the so-called Barnabas found the three combined in one of the ten 
together with his sons and colleagues in the kingship. But this ma ni 
pulation was forced upon him by the stubbornness of contemporary 
facts; and he calls attention to it by repeating the expression δ n 
one,’ which has no place in the original. Fal | 

But what will be the end of this threefold kingship? It woul be 


1 Suet. 772. 6 neque ex eo destitit pare MV. 27. ii. to. 
participem atque [etiam] tutorem imperii 3 So Titus himself is called Titus 1 
agere. Compare Plin. Pameg. 2. perator Caesar, δῆ 27. ii. 22. 

2 But not as a prenomen, Eckhel v1. 4 Eckhel vi. 329. 

361 54. See Pliny MW. ZH. vii. 50; com- 5 Joseph. B. J. VII. 5. 5. 





THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 511 


treason to give utterance to the thought which was passing through his 
mind. He therefore leaves the riddle to the intelligence of his readers. 
And this he might safely do. Ever since the reported death of Nero, 
expectation had been rife on the subject of his reappearance. He was 
thought to live retired beyond the Euphrates, where he was watching 
his opportunity to swoop down upon the Roman Empire and avenge 
himself on his enemies’. The wish was father to the thought. For 
Nero, monster though he was, possessed some popular qualities which 
made him a favourite with the masses. - One after another pretender 
took advantage of this expectation. One false Nero started up im- 
mediately under Galba. He was caught at Cythnus and put to death ; 
but it was thought necessary to take his body to Rome that the public 
mind might be disabused*. A second appeared about a.p. 80 under . 
Titus, gathered followers on the banks of the Euphrates, and ultimately 
fled for refuge to the Parthians*. A third, if he be not the same with 
the last mentioned, threatened the peace of the Roman Empire under 
Domitian about a.p. 88*. Even in the early years of the second cen- 
tury Dion Chrysostom could still write, ‘To the present time all men 
desire him to be alive, and the majority even trust that he is®.’ This 
belief chimed in with the Christian expectation of the speedy coming 
of Antichrist and the end of all things. This persecutor of the dis- 
ciples, this prodigy of wickedness and audacity who outraged humanity 
and defied nature, the son who murdered his mother, the engineer 
who would sever the Isthmus and join the two seas—who could he be 
but the very man of sin, the Antichrist, or the forerunner of the Anti- 
christ? Accordingly in an early apocryphal writing, the Ascension of 
Isaiah, it is said that in the last days Belial shall appear ‘in the form of 
a man, of the king of unrighteousness, of the matricide,’ and shall ‘ per- 
secute the Church®” In this respect Christian anticipation only kept 
pace with Jewish. Two Sibylline Oracles, which date about a.p. 8ο--- 
both apparently Jewish, and one of them written in Egypt—dwell on 
this expected return of the matricide, this final scourge of the human 
race, which shall precede the advent of Messiah’s reign; and from these 
earlier Sibylline Oracles it is transmitted to the later. The belief in- 
deed lingered on for several centuries. In the age of Jerome and 
Augustine some were still found to entertain this opinion. Even S. 
Martin of Tours himself is credited with it by a contemporary and 


1 Suet. Mer. 57. 5 Dion, Chrysost. Orat. xxi (p. 504 ed. 
2 Tac. Hist. ii. 8, 9. Reiske). 
3 Zonaras xi. 18 (p. 578). 8 iv. 2 sq (p. 17 ed. Dillmann, 1877). 


4 Suet. Wer. 57. 













512 EPISTLES OF 85, CLEMENT. 


friend. But it was during the continuance of the Flavian dynasty that 3 
the expectation was at a white heat. Ἢ 

Here then was the little horn of Daniel. What more appropriate? — 
The little horn is represented as springing up from the ten, and yet not — 
counting as one of the ten. It is in fact an offshoot, an excrescence. — 
Hence our Barnabas, with his own interpretation of the prophecy in — 
his mind, unconsciously quotes this word ‘excrescence’ (παραφυάδιον), 
as if it were part of the text. 





I. INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL PASSAGES. 


/ 


Il. INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 





ne ee 


INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL PASSAGES. 


The asterisks mark the passages in which the resemblance is close, and 
which therefore are printed in the text as quotations. 









Genesis 





Exodus 


Leviticus 


Numbers 


Joshua 


_ 1 Kings 


Deuteronomy *iv. 34 


1 Samuel 


(1) Zhe Epistle of S. Clement of Rome. 


Be Mh sis oer vegas Cpbsebanys dx0d%p 20 
ἮΝ MO, BT, SB: es iaidcosnre che 33 
i OE REE AN Ae 6 
ΤῊΝ, RWG Fodigberpidesie scams 4 
ἜΧΗΙ AOE Wardepeetshsoessscnes 10 

ΠῚ 36." ints eblialsncres ena Ιο 
ΧΗΣ FEO: ἐ νηδα. ἐν δον 10 
ee ee ee ΡΝ 10, 32 
i ie a ee 17 

PES, ρει ει εν κξνοζεν Io 

SEs BT asthe vaWerisexcasess 32 

MOTD AB: | dg GG isaac cave 32 
ye? ΠΟ es een 4 
PRL ER ΡΥ ἘΝ 17 
FOU RS sb tebigtecaph sistyes nes 17 
Cie Le sas sisoe saohisseapeaias 60 
*XIV. 935-265 9B: <éscsvssasis 51 
MERE: 10) BE BH ἐς, ὑο νος 53 

ἘΠ}. 5. ας οτος Ι 

BR. AS ΡΤ Ὁ ΚΤΥΡΕ ΤΣ Ι 
BAH, 7 ρερρολνόμον ἐνερ 17, 43 

BV BS. os cesabardeessved bev 59 

BVI, OF. oss cik aissigies ies 29 

MRPs δ, πο βόε cass 59 

νι Σου 2 
PEER Spr are i 
FRE 16-04 o; case epaiens 53 
SII, PC spy ssid wake 60 
TRIPS δον cs seid nite cdberesusons 64 
ERT Oh Oren Τ eniwevess 29 
ΠΣ Rady PS Gicsdicccapues 3 
NAIL, 30 ρον κρονβΑ νιον νυ ess 59 

BRIG: hss cpurnbhhnvondilives 12 
See eee Many hornets 13 
Be Pe yids oe etiinans 18 
wile he? oss jee eths eulbvautiaieys 60 
*xix. EG acgesepawsgp eds τὸς μδν 59 

Ay. ΑΚ ΤΡ ΤῸ 17 
i Se, Cee ere ee 30 
ὟΝ KE ξουροιε ΠΥ ΡΡΗΥ 30 


Job 


Psalms 





Vo UL, caccigekahiotrvevsshe 59 
"Ye ΤΊ ΒΩ, eo tasihvatias vues 57 
Ἔχ ν ἃ ρον ΕΣ 26 
WIN, δ Bikocaly bddghvor etre 17 
ἔχ χω ΘΗ 39 
Ἀχίχ, 26.: cozm>piaedtoapvarans 26 

ΧΑ, 25; sa. spribeckeeneas 20 
*XXXVULs TOs El ΠΣ τόνε 20 
προ tee Lagan 36 
ἘΠῚ 5 οὐ 26 
“xi (xii), 390. ΤΟΣ 15 
* xvii (xVili). 25, 26......00. 46 
“xviii (xix)2\ 3 86) 31 λον cos οῖν 27 
*xxd (xxii), 684 iiss. cisiats 16 
ἜΧΧῊ {παθῶν ays spaee. veces eke 26 
ἜΧΗΙ ἰΧῸΥΝ ὙΠ ΩΝ 54 
*xxvii  χχν» 7 δ εν τες 26 
“xxx (xxx): 16 | nits. <s dais 15 

XXL (SEKU)) ya eens 50 
*xxxi (XERH) AP Ota sess sstees 22 
*xxxii (xxxiil) 230i eae 59 
*xxxil ἰΧΧΧΗΤ ΚΦ fcactees 59 
*xxxili (Xxxiv). 20 ......... 22 
*xxxiii (xxxiv). 11 Sq ...... 22 
*xxxvi (xxxvil). 36 56 ...... 14 
*xxxix (xl); ia ΜΕ eaees 60 
*xlviii (xlix). 14 .......0.00. 51 
*xlix (1),, τώ ΟΝ 52 
Pylix (1). 1690 ciiehaccsveons 35 
ἘΠ {Ὸ, 5:90 hgetseo sacs pans 18 
"xi {π|1}.. 4. Εν ον νοι τα νι 15 
Ixvi (Ixvit),’ Ἐ τρτοΥ 60 
*lxvili (ΠΥ ΕΣ vase 2 
*Ixxvii (Ixxviil). 36, 37 ... 15 
*Ixxxviil (IXxxix). 21 ...... 8 
*xoix (C). Ὁ Ὁ ΟΣ casa aa 59 
*cii (ciii). 10, II....... Ae, 
ΤΟΙΣ (CiV).: den dvvseviababacnne 36 
Ἔχ (eX), Duss μον abt 36 
*cxvii (cxviii). 18 .......... 56 

FE ae 


516 


Psalms 


Proverbs 


Isaiah 


Jeremiah * 


Ezekiel 


Daniel 
Malachi 
Judith 
Wisdom 


Ecclus. 


S. Matthew *v. 7 


S. Mark 


INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL 


*exvii (cxvili). 19, 20...... 48 
*exvili ‘Geel ἐς ΚΡ 59 
*cxviii COKER) F434 Uv νον 60 
wexxx (cxxxi). sy pee eae 7 
*Cxxxviii (cxxxix). 754... 28 
yfee ech gilt ci: ) mantra eres 38 
Fem Leg). Bi iveracedeesasnes 57 
γί: τον αι νος εν τς ἂν tip sauitacease 60 
eo Re eA eR 57 
TH AL ERs va teveweabeos skess 14 
sa): Fay © ASO ah Hal EPA 56 
MEHL, 34. εν ξοβνο, ρινξις νὰ 30 
OPE: Δ ncnanevie sdetenwviyssens 2 
ΩΤ ΤΟ ον ΠΕ ΥΥΙ 49 
PII. OF pedal ἈΈΡΑ ΟΡ ΣΕ 21 
MERAY, EB τ. 5. ἥν sn sat scapietee 34 
μ᾿ ἐεξ  ϑχν πα τος ἐγ cence 8 
δ να Ἐπ ον ΜΩΝ 3 
*vie ΠΕΣ IP ater ene 34 
* xiii, WET cox τε δ, Τὴ είο ον 59 
ΘΝ eee ee 23 
REKVE AO dein deavtoossscsees 50 
PEKIK 1S) oH πὴ ΕΗ ν 15 
MED ἀνοικ εξ, ct easends 34 
ye | Bes ESS Pe CP 10, 17 
Τρ cTO cngevindetoetrd voesscnees 60 
PIVEN EB s+ ταν, ddevtes<tsavea. 59 
ΜΝ eel overen casters 3 
PAKS AY ld. ζετο sctusy 42 
PKA Ei 2 sug ioetecddassnestthe 34 
PURE. Hy ἐλ δ δ ον όξοως τό 
ἀχῖν ahs Po obi Wes Vin κου οιὺς 34 
PEA Da ORL Ges ssvcascs 13 
BAUR BO ETI E hs winns ese II 
“iii. 10) Yeo Oy eee 8 
"EX. 23», 24 ssevessserevernees 13 
KVL 1g ALN c0c0s00 20 
Ἐχχὶ 805! iil ideksoesnease 60 
PVT ROBT τ see sanens 8 
PUOCRREAS 8 Bh. ohh Fas coco enee 8 
NERV ATO FAIRE oases 59 
ες ἈΠῸ γεν. Ὁ vide ts cio see 50 
χῖν τ -12%-'..3,: Fitna bide sis 29 
«Ἀν Sea Py | Sach RE 34 
PHS TULA, GA Btaseestecss 23 
ὁ ED ΧΕ ΣΎΡΟΙΣ 59 
KIM STR ἀπ χινενιδως 55 
XVI. 5 sssseesevesseveesevers 55 
bi a Peery δ Beth sans ene 3 
παῖ ἀπ AAD RR Sp avsae deep 27 
Pevi, FB, BG 1M Aesccccase 59 
αν PAE Ltescveases 6 
sntildbbdasivd sececsse ee 
DTH ἀΠ εν cc 13 
eee eo aes oe 2 ee 48 
PEGE 6255. GEER ch φόνος 24 
FB. ΧΟ ΜΌΝΩΝ sys sacene I 
μὲ τ, τῶν Gy 7 AWA Nike cedesdes 4 
Fx bi9 Eh GOR sic sebace 46 
Ἔσο ἀρ Goss iwe shan 24 
PIME AEME GOA awe se vein 23 


S. Mark “*vii. 6 


S. Luke 
S. John x. 9... 


Acts 


Romans 


1 Cor. 


2 Cor. 


ν. 21 


iv. 15 
Colossians ii. 1 
1 Timothy i. 17 


Vv. 21 


iv. 6 
Titus 


PASSAGES. 


ΟΣ 


τε κεενεοεεεενενόσσόνον 


ΟΣ. 


ΟΠ ΎΎΎΣ 


ΟΣ" 


ΟΠ οου 


Fee meme w rere eee esenee 


σον 


ROR eee Σ 


ΟΣ 


Προ" 


Pee eee eee ee ereeeeeeae 


ΟΣ 


ΟΣ 


κε εεενεενεννοέεοοο 


Penman ον εκ εεσον 


Σ 


ΟΣ 


Pee οοοοοοο 


Beare ee ewer eeeene 


See eee eee eeeeeererees 


ον. 


See εν τ er erseneseeeeeeee 


ον 


Peewee eee ee eeeeeeeeeeee 


ρον. 


ΟΣ 


Fee e meee e ee eeeeneeeeeees 


Pee eee ee meee ees eeeeeerree 


ΣΝ 





INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL PASSAGES. 517 


ae 8 νὴ Σ ον υνοννόνον. ἜΡΡΡῚ TO Fees FONE ices sh araseeddacessones 49 
AD OG) AERA SG PURE a ec eaccousteagtsavcents pref. 
ἘΠ ΠΣ ΑΝ γα τ, ον ἀφοῦ: 43 1. IQ ssecceceecesesseescerees 7 
WED Veith datesie cad sees οἷν 21 SF nike rakevauieeose yeni 30 
ME BOC eis ΘΗ ΎΡ ΜΝ 27 Ἧς: Q evesservesennusnecorness 36, 59 
AG Te See ie ee 12 ἔν Ἐς 3K: ὐαβεντολ νύν 1 
Be RM adh weadtubeices doeces ne 27 BLY A soonverstacingeoneneces 2 
REL Mls Nc tathepen tesa τ 9 EVE OU Secs ns sencacedbesaesiones 49 
SES EO asics dian τ λδέεν έξενοι 20 TORO ect eaten ikea {τὸν 38 
MIS BP cc cansteservasde τον. δὲ se Ey IV ΤΉ ΓΞ ΕΘ ΘΚ 2 
προ ανν 13, 19, 63 Ws [Beare uta sureearyetaees 30 
SIEM) Beit sc cis ater seatiooine 56 Vs Ἢ γόνενεν νυν δ τον ἐνψμεύν ξ νὸν 38 
MERE δ᾽ πεν τρρνενρ το βο γυθ τῆν 64 ΣΉΝ ΣΕ ΔΝ ΡΥ ΕΟ 2 
αὶ, TF νον δι ἐν μα ee ahopbee Zi @ ὦ ΑΙ, ΡΥ ἐν pref. 
KEEL Δ Ὁ ο νυν εὐ ον εἰ ο ον κυοοῖος 10 Le BF Το ΔῊ Ὁ ἢ 9 
KHNL. 7 τοο εν νον τιον ἐνολονει I Us Riess ce sanetaae eae 7 
MELATP OSV, ihe. ΣΤ I Mis 9s TA eee 44 
δὺο τον as. 21 1 John ἐν. δ ΡΟΝ 49, 50 

James We OE: itd el eee 21 Revelation *xxii. 12........ ἘΠ ΤΙΣ 34 
PI MOA LN 30 


(2) An Ancient Homily. 





ον ΜῊ ΤΡ ΠΤ ΤΣ 1: Θ. Ελιους Wag ee 9 

Psalms WERIQE fy cdi) ταν cdc δρ ἐς 4 WXe: Bl ΗΤΎΎΤΝΝΣ γι 5 

Ixxi (Ixxii). 5, 17 οτος; 17 xii ὁ Dereon aah Ἢ 5 

PEE EN) LR xd vacnesnasancevens ed 16 Mxdil,. 299 τ leeds dene 4 

πο sis PKA GTN) God cvdsckia veadee os 3 “XVI. τοι οὐ 1: 8 

BERMIV:. Arve opty reat Picts’ 16 Ἐχυϊ, DF ΡΣ 6 

"ΠΝ ΤΣ ὙΠ cienid. owas 4 WEN IOY λ  ΟΧΗ 2 

PEEL BO πριν, 30d betas 18 Acts TS FO casa. bees ee ares 13 

δεῖν, Miche ck tik essa 2 ἦγ. ΣΟ νον ον ον cheese 4 

ΤΣ Θ᾽ ities. ξυμ 15 γι ασ: Fay ἢ, Deak δ ΜΝ 4 

AON LBM: ccs νυν σοῖς haga 17 Vie BE eccucniegeeseevaeeee 20 

Mavi 8h icades was υου ει χοΐ a7. Romans) Wey... eee I 

Jeremiah xviii. 45q ἀνοςτζρὶ οι; τοῖον Be τὴ υἱὲν By BL11.c 25. Sabet 16 

SCOR | Paiva Tg 540 ὍΔ δρ ολιοο 6 Aas: SROs Mb ees See 8 

Hosea Tid pire et ety ἐφ τος UE Qi εκ εξ, ἀφο ae II, 14 

τ Πα ΜΙ Ὁ dace ἀλενέσς 16 1X:i24;' Bis WAM 4 

SulMaitthew iii. 12 5 ccsecds cscs testis. sy. Galatians; viei16 (isd, Gui 9 

ΝΕ ig cascet d, ἀν ἕνας ἐδ τῶν ἐς 6 Ephesians ἱρὰ δ᾽ ΤΕ ἐπ Ἦν 14 

ϑηδιτ os υνμθόηνολ ἐκ 4 νοῦ TS ee ee 19 

Fils BF) weve seston 2 VIO CA Meee 13 

Mil OBy.cs Sivdhaeict Mises Ἐ΄ Colossians: iii. 205500505... 13 

RRM. peat scgeivactbbceodet ait SAE MOU ἀν is riduatsedea GA 20 

ἐς ἈΝ ΡΤ ΤΥ ΜΡ 9 ἐν 06 6560s TRIES εν δ αν 15 

τὴν ἈΚ ΥΉΡΙΝΙ noes fuses, uel 6: -- Hebrews) *xu 296 inn αν ree Deowarr 

REVISE) ἀφινύνο Nice 0 8 “ἄν Ὁ VA ats A ΣΎ 

Ae Oe Sip teri: 6 χη; £82.78 ke eee en 16 

Senay Rib BY cs. eas ἐφρρελε νὰν ina . James IVE. EE Sisk wht ΨΌΜΌΙ 4 

APIO visi x ΟΣ ΤΕΣ ieee 4: 6 ΣΟ opened νυ 6 

ΠΑ ΜΕ Ἐ  ΤΎΤΡΉΤΟῚ nowhere ad a7  piPeter: Five (Gch dies an 16 

τ δον eG ει, Lewiiieaeeews 27 «9 Peter. i TQ: ed Pera t At. It 
Reh) 335 95s War thvtaneere- 33 





INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


Abbreviations employed, 4 

Abdo and Sennes, martyrs, 363 

Abraham; in Clement’s Epistle, 43 54; 
his title ὁ φίλος, 43, 63 

Abulides, Egyptian name for Hippoly- 
tus, 401, 477 

Abundius, Abundus; in the Laurentian 
Acts, 353, 469 sq, 472 sq; his burial- 
place, 469; ‘Ado of Vienne on, 360; 
inscription relating to, 351 

Acontus, a martyr of Portus, depositio of, 
355» 475 

Aden; never called Portus Romanus, 
429; its usual name, 429; not the 
see of Hippolytus, 429 

Ado of Vienne; on the martyrdom of 
Laurence and Hippolytus, 357 sq, 
448, 450, 471 sq; source of his in- 
formation, 473 

Agapitus, in the Laurentian Acts, 353, 
354) 357 

Ager Veranus; its position, 442; the 
name, 442 sq; cemeteries at, 442 sq; 
burial-place of Hippolytus, 440, 442; 
probably on his property there, 441, 
443; his statue discovered in, 463 sq; 
other martyrs buried there, 4625 con- 
fused medieval use of the term, 443, 
493; De Rossi’s excavations, 443, 453, 
463; inscriptions found at, 464; history 
of Hippolytus’ basilica there, 444 Sq, 
4518q,459; the basilica disinterred, 452, 
464; Hippolytus’ bones translated from, 
3 51 Sq, 459,467 sq; other reliques trans- 
erred and the cemetery rifled, 351 sq, 
459 54, 463, 468 sq ; commemorative in- 
scription, 351, 459, 462, 469; medieval 
acts and guide books written for pil- 
grims to, 463, 473; the Laurentian 
Acts linked with, 468; the expression 
juxta Nympham, 359, 472 

Agnes (S.); her cemetery, 443, 445, 451) 
her day, 451; Prudentius’ poem on, 
445, 451; her connexion with other 
martyrs commemorated by Prudentius, 


445) 451 


If. 




















Alcibiades and the Book of Elchasai, 
323 Sq 

Alcinous, heretic, 347, 396 

Alexander III at S. Denis, 468 

Alexandrian Church, its origin and early 
character, 504 sq 

Alexandrian Ms, Clementine matter in 
the; title, 191, 198 sq; mutilations 
and lacunze, 240, 263 sq; corruptions, 
57, 110, 124, 138, 232 sq; first ex- 
plicit mention of 2 [Clement] as the 
work of Clement of Rome in, 193, 200 

Almsgiving, its importance in 2 [Clement® 
251 

Alogi, the name perhaps traceable to 
Hippolytus, 394 

Ambrose (S.), his literary obligations to 
Hippolytus, 413 

Ambrosius, Origen’s ‘task-master’, 330; 
confused by Photius with Hippolytus, 
348, 423 Ἢ 

Aohiloctiad metrical list of the scrip- 4 
tures by, 407, 408, 413 q 

Anacolutha in Clement’s Epistle, 11 ‘ing 

Anastasius Apocrisiarius, on a spurious — 
Hippolytean work, 344, 403 sq ΓῊΝ 

Anastasius of Sinai; quotes Hippo i 
345, 421; onthe Eternal Church, 245 sq — 

Ancient Homily; see Corinthians, Seco: 
Clementine Epistle to the FY 

Andreas of Czsarea, mentions Hippo- — 
lytus, 340 if 

Andreas the presbyter; restored Hippo 
lytus’ basilica, 454, 465; perhaps prior 
of the title of the third ecclesiastical 
region, 465 ἣ 

Antichrist, treatise of Hippolytus on ; 
notices, 330, 345, 348, 349; exta 
398, 405; character, 398; date, 3 
Nero as Antichrist in Barnabas; 
508, 509; in other documents, 511 sq 

Antipodes, early co on the, 73 

I 








¢ 


re 
4 

he 
δι 


- INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


against the identification of Gaius and 
Hippolytus, 386 sq; Hippolytus’ view, 
3943 Dionysius of Alexandria mistaken, 
386; how far Gwynn’s discovery modi- 
fies this argument, 388 

Apocryphal quotations in Clement, 39, 
52, 64, 80, 95, 139, 141; in 2 
[Clement], 218, 219, 227, 235, 236 sq 

Apocryphal writings ascribed to O. T. 
prophets, 39 sq; invented by Gnostics, 
106 


Apollinarian expressions anticipated in 
early orthodox writings, 14 sq 


Apollinaris, a notice of Hippolytus wrong- 
> ἀναγραφή, 89 


ly ascribed to, 328, 431 sq 

Apollonius on the character of Domitian, 7 

Apollos, not reckoned an apostle by 
Clement, 144 

Apostolical Constitutions; imitates Cle- 
ment’s Epistle, 5, 70, 71, 125, 134, 171, 
172, 173, 174, 176; Hippolytus’ name 
attached to a form of, 401 sq; illustrates 
2 [Clement], 222, 249; and cites it as 
genuine and canonical, 193 

Apt, the sarcophagus at, a testimony to 
Hippolytus’ fame, 467 

Arabic Catena on the Pentateuch ascribed 
to Hippolytus, 348, 423 

Archelaus the deacon, in the Portuensian 
Acts, 356, 364, 474, 476 

Arsis, Assis, the island at Portus, 341 

Artemon, the treatise against; assigned 
to Gaius, 348, 377; identical with the 
Little Labyrinth, 378, 380, 385, 4213 
and the work of Hippolytus, 380 sq; an 
objection of Salmon’s considered, 400; 
see Little Labyrinth 

Ascension of Isaiah; date, 106; probably 
extant, 107; not quoted by S. Paul, 
106; makes Nero Antichrist, 511 . 

Assumption of Moses; an alleged quota- 
tion in Clement from, 65, 81, 86; on 
the phcenix, 85; minor reference to, 


187 

Athletic metaphors in 2 [Clement], 223 sq 

Atlantis, 73 

Augustine (S.), on S. Matt. xvi. 18, 19, 
482, 483 

Aurea, in the Portuensian Acts, 362, 4743 
see Chryse 


ἀβαναύσως, 134 

ἀγαθοποιΐα, ἀγαθοποιεῖν, 17, 232 
ἀγαθότης, 243 

ἁγιόγραφα, titles applied to the, 92, 167 
ἅγιοι (ol), 163 


 ayompérns, 52 


ἀγνωσία, 171 

ἀγωγή, 144, 145 ; 

ἀγών and αἰών confused in Mss, 223 
ἀδελφότης, 18 

ἀθλεῖν with acc., 259 


519 


ἄθραυστος, 171 

αἵματα, plur., 68 

alvov αἰώνιον, 231 

aiperifew, 244 

ἀκουτίζειν, 66 

ἀκρογωνιαῖος, of Christ, 486 
ἀληθεία (ἡ), 195, 216, 257, 260 
ἀλλότριος, ἀλλόφυλος, 38 
ἀλύπητος, 259 

ἀμβλνυωπεῖν, ἀμβλυώττειν, 21 
ἀμεταμέλητος, ἀμεταμελήτως, 19, 169 
ἀμνησίκακος, 16, 182 

ἄμωμος, 102, 111, 126 
dvaryvos, 96 


ἀναζωπυρεῖν, intrans., go 
ἀνάλυσις, 135 

ἀνατέλλειν, trans., 71 
ἀνατυλίττειν, 97 

ἀνελεῖ, form, 78 

ἀνήκειν, constr., 108, 136, 181 
ἀνθρωπάρεσκος, 241 
ἀντικείμενος (ὁ), 153 
ἀντιμισθία, 212, 213, 231, 236 
ἀντιπαρέλκειν, 254 

ἀντίτυπον, 247 

ἀντοφθαλμεῖν, 104 

ἀξιοῦν, constr., 162 

ἀόργητος, 69 

ἀπέρατος, ἀπέραντος, 72 
ἀποκτέννειν, form, 220 
ἀπολαμβάνειν, 228 
ἀπολύτρωσις, 254 

ἀπόνοια, 9 

ἀπόστολοι (ol), of writings in N. T., 202, 


245 
ἀπροσδεής, 155 
ἀπροσκόπως, 74 
ἀπροσωπολήμπτως, LO 
ἀρκετός, 148 
ἀρσενόθηλυς, 239 
ἀρχεγόνος, accent, 172 
ἀρχὴ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 143 
ἀρχιερεύς, of Christ, 111, 123 
ἀσεβής, 174 
ἄσοφος, 258 


“ἄσπιλος, 228 


ἀστοχεῖν, 256 

ἀτημελεῖν, 116 

αὐθεντικόν, 247 

αὐτεπαινετός, 97 

ἀφήκειν, 93 

ἀφιλοξενία, 10g 

ἀφορμὴν διδόναι, λαμβάνειν, 250 


Babylon; in 5. Peter’s Epistle, 491 54; 
as a name for Rome, 492 
Balaam, the Blessings of, 343, 389, 400, 


402 

Baptism, called σφραγίς, 201, 226 

Baralas, Barulas, in the story of Roma- 
nus, 446 54, 449 54 


520 


Bardenhewer, 366, 391, 393 

Barnabas, the Epistle of; its character, 
503; author, 503 sq; canonicity, 504; 
country, 504 sq; date, 505 sq; test 
passages as to date, 506; theory of 
Weizsacker, 505, 507; Hilgenfeld, 506, 
507; Volkmar, 505, 508 sq; the theories 
criticised and date suggested, 509; the 
threefold kingship and the coming of 
Antichrist explained, 509 sq 

Baronius, 373, 477 

Basil (S.) quotes Clement, 140, 169 

Bensly and the Syriac Version of the 
Clementine Epistles, 36, 47, 69, 147, 
158, 176, 215, 255; 257 

Benson, Archbishop, on Hippolytus, 367, 
453, 466 , 

Bero, a spurious Hippolytean work a- 
gainst, 345, 346, 403 sq 

Bianchini, 367, 399 

Bilt (S.); French name for Hippolytus, 
477; the Abbey of, 467 

Bishops, itinerant and extra-diocesan, 432 
sq; illustrated by the episcopate of 
Hippolytus, 432 sq 

Bito, 185, 187, 305 

Book of Jubilees, 44, 94 

Bostra ; sy ap ho associated by Gela- 
sius with the see of, 340, 428; the error 
traced, 327, 331, 428 

bravium, 28 

Brescia, reliques of Hippolytus in S. Julia 
at, 468 

Bryennios ; his edition of Clement, 47, 
172, 178, 181, 234, 243, 244, 2573 
criticised, 14, 21, 30, 38, 77, 78, 90, 96, 
129, 148, 158, 172, 177, 182, 224, 233, 
245, 260; assigns 2 [Clement] to Cle- 
ment of Rome, 204 sq 

Bucher, 399 

Bucina; mentioned in the Liber Pontifi- 
calis, 340; its position, 340; the read- 
ing of the passage, 340 

Bunsen, 34, 132, 134, 367,378, 385) 305, 
397s 402, 403, 404, 427, 428, 430) 


βάναυσος, 149 

βασιλεία, opposed to ἱερωσύνη, 179 
βασίλειον, 222 

βασιλεὺς τῶν αἰώνων, 180 

βάτος, gender, 64 

βιβλία (τὰ) of O. T., 202, 245 
Blos, 213 

βλάπτειν, 260 

βλασφημεῖν, 9 


Cain, meanings given to the name, 22 

Callinicus the tribune, in the Acts of 
Laurence, 362 

Callistus, bishop of Rome; his life and 
relations to Hippolytus, 320 sq, 431 sq, 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 







































437. 439; his cemetery, 328, 442, 451; 
his portrait extant, 441 
Canon; in the time of Clement, 205 sq; 
of 2 [Clement], 202, 204, 205 sq, 242, 
245 Sq 
Canons ascribed to Hippolytus, 401 sq 
Carpophorus, Callistus’ master, 320 sq 
Caspari, 367, 401 sq, 403, 407 
Cassianus, picture seen by Prudentius 
representing the martyrdom of, 450, 
453 / 
Cassianus, Julius; quotes the Gospel of 
the Egyptians, 207, 236 sq, 238, 239; 
his controversy with Clement of Alex- 
andria thereon, 207, 236, 239 
Cemeteries; (1) of S. Agnes, 443, 445). 
451; (2) of Callistus, position, burials 
and commemorations, 328, 442, 4513 
(3) of Cyriace, name, 469, 472; posi- 
tion, 442 sq, 469; called the Cemetery 
of 5. Laurence, 442 sq; basilica of S. 
Laurence at, 442 sq; the church of S. 
Stephen at, 341, 459; saints and popes 
buried in, 442, 469, 471; reliques trans- 
ferred from the cemetery of Hippolytus 
to, 351 54, 459, 468; commemorative 
inscription, 351, 459, 469; (4) of Hip- 
polytus; see Ager Veranus 
Censurianus, in the Portuensian Acts, 361, 
364, 474 Sq 
Cerinthus as author of the Apocalypse οὗ 
S. John, 381, 386 sq 
Chair of Hippolytus, 324 sq, 395, 400, 
412, 419S8q, 440, 463sq; see further 
fTippolytus of Portus 
Chiliasm in Hippolytus and other early — 
writers, 387 sq p 
Christology; of Clement, 13 sq, 57, 91» 
102, 205; of 2 [Clement], 200, 205, — 
211, 230, 248; of other early writers, — 
13 Sq ‘i 
Chronica of Hippolytus; notices of, 325, — 
395, 421; identification of, 399, 4190; 
date of, 437 x 
Chronicon Paschale; quotes Hippolytus, — 
344, 403, 4213 ἃ passage wrongly — 
ascribed in, 344 fi 
Chronology of our Lord’s life in Hippoly-- 
tus’ system, 391 sq (ἐς 
Chryse, in the Portuensian Acts, 361, 
364 Sq, 474 Sq Ἢ 
Chrysostom on Romanus, 446, 448 
Claudius Ephebus, 185, 187, 305 : 
Claudius Gothicus, in the spurious Ac 
of Hippolytus, 471, 474. =. 
Claudius, in the Laurentian Acts, 3. 


472 Ὧν) 
Clemens, Flavius, his relations to ΟἹ 

of Rome, 8 ae 
Clement of Alexandria; quotes Cl 

of Rome, 4, 9, 39, 42) 52» ‘ 

62, 65, 721 75, 771 931 104, 








INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


121, 127, 140, 141, 145, 146 sq, 149, 
164, 168, 1723 his use of the Gospel of 
the Egyptians, 207; does not know 
2[Clement], 192; is not its author, 204, 
206 sq; on S. Peter at Rome, 495 

Clement of Rome; see Clement, Epistle 
ο 

nk ape in Hermas; according 
to Harnack distinct from Clement of 
Rome, and author of 2 [Clement], 207 sq 

Clement, Epistle of; Mss and Versions, 


3, 13; other sources of evidence for, . 


4; titles, 5; date, 8, 25, 125, 134, 144, 
185; the writer a Hellenist Jew, 23, 
205; his personal relation to the 
Apostles, 25; his mention of S. Peter, 
493; his comprehensiveness, 121; com- 
bines the teaching of S. Peter, S. Paul 
and 5. James, 47, 97, 100, 149; his 
tolerance, 149, 170; his christology, 
13 Sq; 57, or, 102, 205; the Epistle 
known to the author of 2 [Clement], 
235; the styles compared, 205; the 
opening words imitated, 5; translation, 
271 54 

Clement, Spurious Epistle of, see Cor- 
inthians, Second Clementine Epistle to 
the 

Clementine Homilies; imitates Clement, 
52; and 2 [Clement], 217, 219; relative 
positions of S. Peter and S. Paul in, 30 

Cleomenes, the Noetian, at Rome, 319 sq 

Cologne, reliques of Hippolytus at, 468 

Compendium against all Heresies; an 
early work of Hippolytus, 414; its 
date, 426 sq; not the Philosophumena, 
414; probably survives in a Latin 
summary in the Praescriptio of ps- 
Tertullian, 386, 414 sq; references to, 
400, 413 Sq 

Concordia, the ‘nurse’ of Hippolytus; 
in the Laurentian Acts, 353, 354; in 
Ado of Vienne, 359 sq; in Florus- 
Bede, 357; her burial-place, 351, 469sq; 
her day, 356, 470; originally ‘mulier,’ 
470; when added to the story of Hip- 
polytus, 463; her connexion with him 
merely local, 470 

Constantinopolitan Ms, corrigenda in the 
collation bor this edition, 268 

Cooper, B. H., 33 

Corinth, as a halting-place between the 
East and Rome, 9 

Corinth, Church at; feuds in the, 20 sq, 
43, 120 Sq, 133, 143 Sq, 158 

Corinthians, Pauline Epistles to the; 
allusions in Clement’s Epistle to, 142 
sq; both Epistles known to Clement, 
142 sq; source of a quotation in 
1 Cor. ii. 9, 106 sq 

Corinthians, Epistle of Clement to the; 
see Clement, Epistle of 


521 


Corinthians, Second Clementine Epistle 
to the; the title in Mss, and deduc- 
tions, 191, 198, 211; not the work of 
Clement, 191 sq, 204 sq; external evi- 
dence, 192 sq; accepted by the Mono- 
physites, 193; the appellation ‘ Epistle 
to the Corinthians,’ 193 sq; from in- 
ternal evidence a homily, 194 sq, 253; 
probably delivered in Corinth, 197, 
224; extempore or from manuscript? 
197; then read publicly and attached 
to Clement’s Epistle, 197 sq; not So- 
ter’s letter, nor Dionysius’ reply, 196 
sq; not by a layman, 195, 253; Har- 
nack’s theory of its Roman origin, 199 
sq; the resemblances to the Shepherd 
of Hermas, 200 sq; date, 201 sq; its 
evidence to the canon, 202 sq; ortho- 
doxy of the writer, 202; the form of 
Gnosticism attacked in, 203; acquaint- 
ance of the author with the writings 
of S. Paul and S. John, 204, 222; with 
Clement’s Epistle, 235; the author, not 
Clement of Rome (Bryennios’ view), 
204 sq; not Clement of Alexandria 
(Hilgenfeld’s view), 206; not the Cle- 
ment of Hermas (Harnack’s view), 207 
sq; a Gentile Christian, 205, 213, 214; 
its literary merit, 208; lacunz in the 
archetype of our Ms real and supposed, 
233 Sq, 245; analysis, 208 sq; transla- 
tion, 306 sq 

Cotelier, 143, 215, 216 

Cotterill, 115 

Crescentio, Crescentius, Crescentianus, 
in the Laurentian Acts, 353, 358, 471 
54 

Cureton, 193 

Cyprian on S. Matt. xvi. 18, 19, 484 
sq; interpolations in the passage, 484 
5. 

Ft iret in the Laurentian Acts, 353, 
358, 469 sq, 471 54; inscription re- 
lating to, 351; gave her name to the - 
cemetery of S. Laurence, 342, 459; 
probably owned the ground, 469; see 
Cemeteries 

Cyriacus, the bishop, in the Portuensian 
Acts, 364, 475, 476; in Roman 
martyrologies, 356; in Florus-Bede, 


357 

Cyril of Alexandria, on S. Matt. xvi. 18, 
19, 482 sq 

Cyrilla; in the Laurentian Acts, 353, 
354, 360, 473; inscriptions relating to, 
351, 352; references to, 353; her 
identity, 470; her burial-place, 469 sq; 
date of her martyrdom, 471; her day, 
471; her connexion with Hippolytus 
local, 471 

Cyrillus of Scythopolis on Hippolytus, 
343) 421 


522 


καθ᾽ ὥραν, 236 

καιρός and wpa, 122 
κακοδιδασκαλεῖν, 234 
καλαβρισμός, κάλαβρος, 120 
κανών, II, 3 

καταντᾶν, 34 

καταπλεῖν, 223 

κατοικεῖν, παροικεῖν, 5 
κεκράγειν, 105 
κῆρυξ, accent and use, 29 
κισσᾶν, 66 

κολαβρίζειν, 120 

κοπιᾶν, 224 

κοσμικός, 254 

κρίματα, reading, 71 
κύθρας, KvOpivos, form, 65 
κύτος, 71 


χαρίσματα, Hippolytus’ treatise respecting, 
400 Sq, 421 

χρᾶσθαι, form, 221 

χώρα, 128, 150 


Damasus, bishop of Rome; his episco- 
pate, 444; inscription on Hippolytus 
by, 328 sq, 424 Sq, 444 54; read by 
Prudentius, 424; makes Hippolytus a 
Novatian, 425, 445; the result of a 
confusion, 425 sq; calls him ‘pres- 
byter,’ 424, 428, 435; other inscrip- 
tions of, 375, 464, 500; beautifies the 
basilica of Hippolytus, 329, 444 sq 

Daniel, commentary by Hippolytus on, 
391 54; patristic notices of, 343, 345, 
346, 348, 349, 350; Bardenhewer on, 
391; Georgiades’ discovery of, 391; 

ennedy’s edition of, 366, 391 

Davies, 69, 70, 232 

De Magistris, 365, 368, 394, 395; 476 

De Rossi; his writings on Hippolytus, 
366, 368; discovers inscriptions illus- 
trating Hippolytus, 329, 351 sq, 374 
sq, 443 sq; on the Paschal Tables of 
Hippolytus, 399; on his cemetery in the 
Ager Veranus, 443, 453, 463; on his 
memoria in the Vicus Patricius, 465 ; 
on the picture of his martyrdom seen 
by Prudentius, 453; on the Acts of 
Hippolytus, captain of brigands, 373 
sq; on the Cemetery of Callistus, 374 
sq; on the day of Concordia, 470 sq 

Decius; death of the emperor, 362, 364; 
in the Laurentian Acts confused with 
Gothicus, 471; his alleged wife and 
daughter martyred, 470 

Denis (S.), monastery of ; bones of Hip- 
polytus brought to the, 467; Alexander 
III at the, 468 

Deuteronomy xxxii. 8, 9, reading of, 93 


Dislabue with Proclus; see Proclus, 
Dialogue with 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 





































Dialogues, early Christian, real and 
fictitious characters in, 381 sq 

Dionysius of Alexandria, on the Apoca- 
lypse, 386 

Dionysius of Corinth; on the martyrdom 
of S. Peter and S. Paul, 26, 27, 494; 
the Second Clementine Epistle un- 
known to, 192; and not his work, 197 

Dionysius Barsalibi, Hippolytean frag- 
ments discovered in, 388, 394 

Dodwell, 206 

Déllinger ; on Hippolytus of Portus, 368, 
403, 427, 430 54, 440; on Hippolytus 

. of Antioch, 371; on Severina, 397; on 
the Treatise against Bero, 404 

Domitian ; his close association with Ves- 
pasian and Titus in the empire, 509 sq; 
character of the persecution under, 7, 
175; allusions in Clement’s Epistle to 
this persecution, 7, 175 

Donaldson, 133, 195 

Dorner, 403 

Dorotheus the Archimandrite, quotes 2 
[Clement], 193, 225 

Draseke, 404 

Duobus Geminis Cons. as the date of the 
Crucifixion; probably due to Hippoly- 
tus, 391 sq; light thrown on this by 
the treatise on Daniel, 391 sq 


Aavatées καὶ Δίρκαι, 32 54 
Δανείδ, form, 24 

δεσπότης, of God the Father, 37 
δῆλος, fem., 239 

δημιουργός, 75, 89, 171 

διανύειν, 88 

διευθύνειν, 73, t80, 181 
διοίκησις, 6 

δισταγμός, 142 

διψυχεῖν, διψυχία, δίψυχος, 46, 236, 258 
δωδεκάσκηπτρον, 98 
δωδεκάφυλον, 162 

δώσω, form, 213 


Ebedjesu, the catalogue of; Hippolytus’ 
works in, 350, 393, 398, 419 Sq, 4233 
the Heads against Gaius mentioned in, — 
350, 388; the Little Daniel, 393 “Ν 

Ebionites; attacked in 2 [Clement], 211, 

229; their name, 211 sq; their christo-_ 
logy, 2114 sq; their Gospel, 231 

Elchasai, the book of, 324 

Eldad and Modad; history of the work, — 
80; its relation to 2 Peter, 235; quoted 
in Clement’s Epistle, 65, 80; and in 2 
[Clement], 235 δεν 

Elkanah and Anna, treatise of Hippolytu: 
to, 338, 20 : 

Encratites oa the Gospel of the Egypt 
ians, 2378q, 240 my 

Endor, the witch of, Hippolytus’ wo 
ON, 325; 330, 400, 412, 420 








ΤᾺ 


te 





᾿ 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


Enoch called ὁ δίκαιος, 42 

Ephebus, 185, 187, 305 

Epigonus, the pupil of Noetus, 319 

Epiphanius ; an alleged allusion to Clem- 
ent’s Epistle explained, 62, 117; quotes 
another passage second-hand probably 
through Hegesippus, 158; date of his 
work against heresies, 415 ; his indebted- 
ness to Hippolytus, 413, 415 sq; quotes 
from the Ebionite Gospel, 231 

Episcopacy in Corinth in Clement’s time, 
120 Sq, 123, 129, 133 

Erbes, 372, 429 

Eugenius, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Euripides quoted in Clement’s Epistle, 
115, 116 

Eusebius; on 2 [Clement], 192, 199 sq; 
probably knew the work, 199 sq; on 
Romanus, 446; on the works of Hip- 
polytus, 327, 389 sq, 419 sq; on Hip- 
polytus himself, 326 sq; ignorant of 
the facts of Hippolytus’ life, 428; on 
Gaius, 326 sq, 377 Sq, 380 sq, 384; on 
Hippolytus the brigand, 373 

Eusebius the presbyter, in the Portuen- 
sian Acts, 364 

Eustratius, on Hippolytus, 343, 420 

Ezekiel ; apocryphal works ascribed to, 39, 
40; perhaps quoted by Clement, 39; 
bipartite division of the canonical book 
of, 40 


ἔγγραφος, 139 

ἐγκάρδιος, 231 

ἔγκαρπος καὶ τέλειος, 135, 163 
ἐγκύπτειν, 121, 156, 182 
εἰκτικῶς, 113 

εἰλικρινῶς, 98 

εἰς γενεὰν γενεῶν, 180 
εἰσήκειν, 236 

ἐκλεκτὴ κυρία, 400 54 
ἐκλεκτός, τόρ 

ἐκτενής, 169, 182 

ἑκτικῶς, 113 

ἐλεῶν, form, 52 

ἐλλόγιμος, 170, 182 
ἐμφυλακίζειν, 137 

ἐν χειρί, τότ; ἐν χερσίν, 223 
ἐναλλάξ, 48 

ἐνάρετος, 181 

ἐνδελεχισμός, 125 
ἐνκατάλειμμα, 55 
ἐνοπτρίζεσθαι, 111 
ἐνστερνίζεσθαι, τό 

ἔντευξις, 257 

ἐξαίρετος, 120, 186 

ἑξάκις, ἐν δὲ τῷ ἑβδόμῳ, 165 
ἐξακοντίζειν, 53 

ἐξειπεῖν, 248 

ἐξελίσσειν, 71 

ἐξελοῦμαι, form, 156 
ἐξερίζειν, 138 


523 


ἐξερίζωσεν, spelling, 34 

ἐξετασμός, 168 

ἐξολεθρεύειν, 54 

ἐπάλληλος, 8. 

ἔπαρχος, 114 

ἐπεξεργάζεσθαι, 145 

ἐπιδημία, 220 

ἐπιείκεια, 10, 162, 169, 182 

ἐπικαταλλάσσειν, 145 

ἐπιμονή, 132 

ἐπινομή, 132 

ἐπιπόθητος, form, 188 

ἐπίσκοπος and πρεσβύτερος in Clement’s 
Epistle, 129 

ἐπιστολή (7), where more than one Epistle 
exists, 142 

ἐπιφάνεια, 236 

ἐπόπτης, 173 

ἐργοπαρέκτης, 104 

ἔρις and kindred words, 20, 140 

ἑτερογνώμων, 46 

ETEPOKAW IS, 45, 145 

εὐδόκησις, 18, 123 

εὐεικτικῶς, 113 

εὐημερεῖν, εὐημερία, 232 

εὐθής, form, 66 

εὐκταῖος, 188 

εὐπραγεῖν, 255 

εὐστάθεια, 180, 188 

εὐχαριστία, εὐχαριστεῖν, 124 

εὐχή, προσευχή, 126 

ἐφόδιον, 12, 15 


ἡγεμονικόν, 66 sq 

ἡγούμενοι, προηγούμενοι, of Church of- 
ficials, 10, 77, 113 

ἡδυπάθεια, 250, 256 

ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτός, order, 17 


Fabian, bishop of Rome, divides the city 
among the seven deacons, 372 

familia of Hippolytus, 351, 354, 359, 357» 
359; 47° ν 

Faustinus, in the Portuensian Acts, 474 

Felicissimus the deacon, in the Lauren- 
tian Acts, 357 

Filocalus the calligrapher, 444, 464 

Fock, 403, 404 : 

Fortunatus, 187, 305 5 

Fossombrone, cult of Hippolytus and 
Laurence at, 466 sq 

Fulrad; brings bones of Hippolytus to 
France, 467; his abbey St Bilt, 467 

Funk, 440 

Fuscianus, city prefect, 320, 321 


Gaia, Gaius, in legal formulz, 382 

Gaius, the Roman presbyter; Eusebius 
on, 326 sq; Jerome on, 329, 378; Pho- 
tius on, 347, 377 54; treatises ascribed 
to, especially the ON against Pro- 
clus, 377 sq, 4073 all belong to Hip- 


524 


polytus, 13, 377 sq; Gaius perhaps 
Hippolytus’ preenomen, 381; all par- 
ticulars about Gaius and Hippolytus 
identical, 382, 383; probably the same 
as Hippolytus, 318, 496; the reference 
in the Mss of the martyrdom of Poly- 
carp, 383; on the Apocalypse, 386; on 
the millennium, 387 sq; style and mat- 
ter of the Dialogue, 386; his date, 496; 
on the graves of S. Peter and S. Paul, 
26, 496, 497, 499; the Heads against, 
in Ebedjesu’s catalogues, 350, 3953 
fragments discovered by Gwynn, 366, 
380, 388 

Games, Greek words adopted by the 
Romans relating to, 35 

Gass, 200 

Gebhardt; on Clement’s Epistle, 172, 
174, 176,177, 178, 184; on 2[Clement], 
195, 224, 240, 257 

Gelasius; quotes Hippolytus, 340, 421; 
confuses his see, 428 

Geminus of Antioch, 331, 371 

Genesis iv. 3—8 explained, 22 sq 

Genesius, martyr, in the Laurentian Acts, 
353; buried in the cemetery of Hip- 
polytus, 454 sq; his church restored 
by Gregory III, 340, 455; two martyrs 
of the name mentioned, 455; but per- 
haps only one person, 455 

Geography, speculations of the ancients 
in, 72 sq 

Georgiades discovers Hippolytus’ com- 
mentary on Daniel, 391 sq 

Georgius Hamartolus on Hippolytus, 347 

Georgius Syncellus; list of Hippolytus’ 
works in, 346, 419 sq; does not accept 
2 [Clement], 193 

Germanus of Constantinople on Hip- 
polytus, 345 

Gnomic aorist, 2 

Gnosticism; its apocryphal works, 106; 
its expressions anticipated by Clement, 
1213; the form attacked in 2 [Clement], 
203, 228 sq 

Gospel of the Egyptians; its character, 
237; held in esteem by the Gnostics, 
2373; quoted in 2 [Clement], 202, 207, 
218, 219, 236 sq; and by Clement of 
Alexandria, 207, 236; who had never 
seen it, 237 

Grabe on 2 [Clement], 194, 196 

Greeks, Treatise against the, by Hip- 

lytus, 325, 

Gispors δ λον, metrical list of the 
scriptures by, 407, 408, 413 

Gregory of Tours, on Hippolytus, 343 


Gregory III restores the church of 


Genesius, 340, 455 
Senate: ek Re ts of the Hi 
wynn ; vers fragments of the Hip- 
polytean Heads against Gaius, 366, 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


























380, 388; of the Hippolytean com- 
mentary on S. Matthew, 366, 394 


γηγενής, 118 
γήρους, γήρει, form, 185 
γνῶσις, 121, 147 


γοργός, 147 
γραφεῖον, γραφεῖα, of the Hagiographa, 
92, 167 


γραφή, γραφαί, of N. T. writings, 202, 
215, 242, 245 
γραφαὶ ἱέραι, of O. T. writings, 156 


Hadrian I; restores the cemetery of 
Hippolytus, 341, 459 sq; the church of 
S. Stephen, 341, 459; and the church 
of S. Laurence, 342 

Hadrias, in the story of Hippolytus the 
brigand, 373, 374; 376 

Hagemann, 133, 208 

Haneberg, 401 

Harnack; on Clement’s Epistle, 33, 49, 
69, 90, 99, 117, 133, 136, 172, 175, 
176, 185, 186; on the country of 
2 [Clement], 199 $4 theories on its 
authorship, 195, 196, 207 sq; on the 
mode of its delivery, 198; on its date, 
201, 204; on passages in it, 213, 230, 
241, 244, 246, 249, 250, 254, 260 

Hebrews, Epistle to the; imitated in 
Clement’s Epistle, 10, 18, 37, 42, 48» 
50, 57, 62, 68, 75, 78, 91, 99; imitated 
in 2 [Clement], 214, 236, 246, 252; 
Gaius and Hippolytus on its authorship, 
348, 378 

Hegesippus; shows no knowledge of 
2 [Clement], 192; Epiphanius’ in- 
debtedness to, 158 

Herculanus; in the Portuensian Acts, 474 
sq; a genuine martyr of Portus, 475; 
his day, 355, 475; depositio of, 355: 
sarcophagus commemorating, 47 

Herenius, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Hermas, the Shepherd of; its date, 411, 
413; illustrates Clement’s Epistle, 46, 
76, 81, 118, 140, 141, 142, 144, 146, © 
165, 178, 185, 186; its resemblances — 
to 2 [Clement] considered, 200 sq; — 
the doctrine of the heavenly Church in, — 
200, 2443; of the pre-incarnate Son, 200, 
230; calls baptism a ‘seal,’ 201, 226; — 
its teaching on marriage, 201; on 
Judaism, 201; the Clement mentioned — 
in, 107 sq; illustrates 2 [Clement], 214, — 


λ 


73 


Hesse on the Muratorian Canon, 369, 407 
Hexaemeron interpreted of Christ and 
the Church, 245 sq ἡ 
ἀπ Lapeer of Christ in Clement’s 
pistle, 99, 111, 123 «ἢ 
Hilarus, inscription relating to, 351 
Hilgenfeld; on Clement’s Epistle, 15, 17, 








INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


41, 71, 81, 95, 99, 106, 108, 117, 131, 
132, 136, 146, 147, 157, 160, 161, 172, 
176, 177, 178, 187, 195; identifies 2 
[Clement] with the Letter of Soter, 196; 
on passages in 2 [Clement], 227, 228, 
231, 232, 233, 234, 244, 250, 257, 260; 
on the date of the Epistle of Barnabas, 
506, 507 Sq, 509 : Pio 
Hippolytus of Portus; interest in his 
personality, 317 ; discovery of the Philo- 
sophumena, 317, 378, 414; the earliest 
papal catalogue probably drawn up by, 
317; contemporary notice of him in 
the Liberian Catalogue, 318; ancient 
references to, 318 sq; extracts from his 
writings bearing on his history, 318 sq; 
his relations with Zephyrinus and Callis- 
tus, 320 Sq, 370, 431 Sq, 4373 chair of, 
324, 412, 440; its date, 324, 440; the 
inscription on, 324 Sq, 419 sq; the Pas- 
chal Cycle on, 326; significance of the 
discovery, 443 ; his early and middle life, 
422 sq; a pupil of Irenzeus ‘at Rome, 
383; his indebtedness to Irenzeus, 422; 
date of their intercourse, 422 sq; his 
connexion with Origen, 330, 423; not a 
Novatian, 424 sq; the story traceable 
to Damasus’ extant inscription, 424 sq, 
4453 ignorance and conflicting state- 
ments as to his see, 427 sq; his 
association with Bostra based on an 
error, 428 sq; evidence for Portus as 
his see late and scanty, 430; yet his 
connexion with Portus undeniable, 432 
sq, 465 sq; character of his bishopric 
there, 432 sq; Le Moyne’s theory, 
429; Bunsen’s theory, 430; Déllinger’s 
theory of an antipope, 431 sq; evi- 
dence of the Philosophumena here, 
434; by whom appointed bishop, 433; 
later years and literary activity, 436 
sq; his banishment, 328, 427, 438; 
its date, 438; died in banishment, 427, 
439 54; date of his death, 440 ; his name- 
sakes, (i) Hippolytus, the martyr of 
Antioch, 370 sq; (ii) Hippolytus the 
Alexandrian, 372; (iii) Hippolytus, 
Greek captain of brigands, 373 sq; 
(iv) Hippolytus the warder of S. Lau- 
rence, no such person, 376; (v) Hip- 
polytus of Thebes, 377; his identity 
with Gaius considered, 377 sq; his 
literary works, (a) biblical and exe- 
getical, 389 sq; (4) theological and 
apologetic, 395 sq; (c) historical and 
chronological, 399 sq; (d@) heresio- 
logical, 384 sq, 400 sq; spurious Hip- 
+ ytean works, 403 sq; table of his 
iterary works, 419 sq; editions of 
them, 365 sq; his title ‘the presbyter’ 
_ represents dignity, not office, 424, 428, 
435 sq; on the theology of Clement, 


525 


13 sq; 2 [Clement] known to, 258; on 
the authorship of the Apocalypse, 386, 
394; his chronology of our Lord’s life, 
391 sq; perhaps invented the term 
Alogi, 394; his depositio, 439, 442; 
444; his day, in calendars, 355 sq; 
in the Liberian Catalogue, 355; in 
itineraries, 353 sq; his burial-place in 
the Ager Veranus, 442 sq; probably 
his own property, 441, 443; its proxim- 
ity to the cemetery of 5, Laurence, 442, 
444; his cult in Damasus’ time, 465 ; 
as described by Prudentius, 332 sq, 445 
sq, 451 sq; his basilica in the Ager 
Veranus, 444$q; enlarged by Damasus, 
445 sq; described by Prudentius, 451 sq; 
verified by excavations, 452, 464; re- 
stored by Andreas the presbyter, 454, 
465; his reliques transferred to the 
basilica of S. Laurence, 459; and else- 
where, 459, 467 sq; inscriptions on 
these translations, 351, 461 sq, 469; 
his story attached to 5. Laurence, and 
he himself transferred from cleric to 
soldier, 402, 458 sq, 468 sq; becomes 
Hippolytus the warder, 376, 468 sq; 
a confusion with the soldier Romanus, 
462; evidence of this transference in 
the Latin Acts, 462 sq; his sanctuary 
in the Vicus Patricius, 464 sq; in 
Portus, 465 sq; his well shown there, 
466; in Fossombrone, 466 sq; outside 
Italy, 467; especially in France, Arles, 
S. Denis, 467; Spurious Acts of; 
(i) the Laurentian Cycle, 468 sq; here 
the warder, 471 sq; (ii) the Portuensian 
Cycle, 474 sq; here the presbyter and 
his personality grafted on to Nonnus, 
476; confused by Peter Damian with 
the bishop of Edessa, 476; his names 
in different countries, 477 

Hippolytus, bearer of a letter 
Dionysius of Alexandria, 372 

Hippolytus, Greek captain of brigands; 
his story and companions, 373 sq; acts 
and inscriptions relating to, 373 sq 

Hippolytus, martyr of Antioch; Dollin- 
ger’s theory of a confusion untenable, 
371; a real person, but invested with 
attributes of Hippolytus of Portus, 372 

Hippolytus of Thebes, 377 

Hippolytus, son of Theseus, his story 
adapted to his Christian namesake of 
Portus, 370, 453 

Hippolytus, warder of 5. Laurence; no 
such person, the story a growth out of 
that of Hippolytus of Portus, 376, 402, 
458sq, 468 sq; see Hippolytus of Portus 

Hoeschel, 396 

Honorius ΠῚ transfers Hippolytus’ 
reliques to the cemetery of S. Laurence, 
459 


from 


526 


Hort, 117, 133, 179, 369 


Iflites, the name of Hippolytus among 
the Syrians and Chaldeans, 477 

Ignatius; shows coincidences with 
Clement’s Epistle, gh 99, 117, 186; 
his allusion to S. Peter an argument 
for S. Peter’s Roman visit, 26, 493 

llicius the presbyter; erects a sanctuary 
to Hippolytus in the Vicus Patricius, 
464; reason for the choice of this 
locality, 465 

Trenzeus; at Rome, 422, 495; Hippolytus 
his pupil there, 383, 422; Hippolytus’ 
literary obligations to, 422; imitates 
Clement, 149, 150; does not accept 
2 [Clement], 192; the title ‘presbyter’ 
as used by, and as applied to, 435; on 
the Roman visit of S. Peter, 495; 
fragments of poetry embedded in the 
works of, 405 sq 

Irenzeus the cloacarius, in the Laurentian 
Acts, 359, 360, 472 sq 

Trenzeus a martyr, inscription to, 351 

Isaac, a willing sacrifice, 98 

Isaiah liii, notes on, 58 s 

Isthmian games ; alluded toin 2[Clement], 
197, 223 sq; their importance at that 
time, 224 

Itineraries illustrating Hippolytus and 
Laurence, 352 sq, 469 sq 


ἱερωσύνη, opposed to βασιλεία, 179 
ἱλέως, adverb, 17 
ἰνδάλλεσθαι, ἴνδαλμα, 79 Sq 


Jacobson, 27, 28, 41, 46, 71, 146, 156, 236 

James v. 20 explained, 251 

Jerome; on 2 [Clement], 192; on Hip- 
polytus, 329 sq, 389 sq, 419 sq; his 
ignorance of the facts, 425, 428, 429 sq 

Jews, treatise against the, by Hippolytus, 
3259 395 421 

Joannes Philoponus, a mistake of, 394 

Job iv. 16—v. 5, notes on, 118 sq 

John (S.), the Gospel according to, 
known to 2 [Clement], 204, 222 

John the Deacon quotes Clement’s Epi- 
stle, 133 

John of Ephesus, source of his information 
about Clement’s Epistle, 158 

Josephus; 38, 39 sq, 98, 125, 130, 161, 
184; a work of Hippolytus assigned to, 


Judith ; reference in Clement’s Epistle to, 
161; date of the book of, 161; Volk- 
mar on this, 161 

Julianus, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Justin Martyr; passages illustrating Cle- 
ment’s Epistle, 49, 55, 57, 5857, 178; 
illustrating 2 [Clement], 214, 215, 217, 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 

























218, 221; his description of Christian 
services supported by 2 [Clement], 195 
Justina, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 
Justinus; in the Laurentian Acts, 353, 
354, 462, 472; in Ado of Vienne, 358 
56, 4733 his burial-place, 351, 469; in- 
scription naming, 351 


Kennedy’s edition of the Hippolytean 
fragments on Daniel, 366, 391 


Labyrinth; mentioned by Photius, 347 sq, 
377, 378 sq, 382; not the Little Laby- 
rinth, but by the same author, 377, 378 
sq; identical with the summary in Phi- 
losophumena Book x, 379 8q, 396, 4213 
see Little Labyrinth ‘ 

Lagarde; on Clement's Epistle, 34; on 
Hippolytus, 363, 364, 366, 401, 421, 
473, 470; onthe Muratorian Canon, 408 

laicus, 124 

Lateran Council quotes Hippolytus, 334, 


421 
Laurence (S.); his story in Florus-Bede, 
357 sq; in the Menza, 361 sq; in the 
Latin Acts, 363 sq; his companions, 
353 Sq, 471 sq; inscription relating to _ 
his reliques, 351 sq; their position in 
itineraries, 352 sq; his cemetery (see 
Ceméteries); honours paid him in Rome, 
455 Sq; his day, 355 sq, 456; basilicas 
to, 452, 456; notices of them in the 
Liber Pontificalis, 341 sq, 457; , that 
seen by Prudentius, 456 sq; their archi- 
tectural history, 456 sq 
Laurent on Clement’s Epistle, 28, 33, 69, 
116, 139, 187 
Laurentian Cycle of the Acts of Hippoly- 
tus, 468 sq; documents and inscriptions 
illustrating, 351, 352 54, 357 54, 361 55, 
363 sq; mutual relation of the docu- _ 
ments, 473 a 
Laymen; part played by, in early Chris- 
tian services, 195 sq; the case of Origen, 
195 sq; 2 [Clement] not by a layman, — 
195, 253 a" 
Moyne; on Severina, 397; on the see — 
of ich ee 429; his edition οὗ 
Hippolytus, 366 Ἔ 
Leo III decorates the basilica of Hippo- — 
lytus in Portus, 341, 466 
Leo IV transfers reliques of Hippolytus 
to the Quatuor Coronati, 341, 459 i 
Leontius and John quote Clement’s Epi- — 
stle, 101, 117 a 
Leontius of Byzantium on Hippolytus, | 
343» 389, 420 aegis a 
ae our Lord’s connexion with the tribe 
ol, ν᾿ 
ἍΝ vege a translation of Hip: 
: ἱ mica, 399, 41 
Li Pontificalis, λυ of H ppolyti 











INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 527 


in, 340 sq; in error as to his banish- 
ment, 438; notices of S. Laurence in, 
341 54, 457 

Liberian Catalogue; on Hippolytus, 318, 
328; its silence on his Novatianism, 
426; the word ‘presbyter’ in, 436 

Liberian chronographer on the depositio 
of S. Peter and S. Paul, 499 sq 

Lipsius; on the lists of heresies in Epi- 
phanius etc., 369, 415 sq; on Clement’s 
Epistle, 71, 99, 108, 109, 132, 133, 160, 
161, 176, 178, 196, 233 

Little Labyrinth; Theodoret on the, 339, 
3773; is the Treatise against Artemon, 
378, 380, 385, 400, 421; not the Laby- 
rinth mentioned by Photius, 377, 378 sq; 
by the same author, 379; the author 
Hippolytus, 380sq; see Labyrinth 

Liturgical expressions in Clement’s Epi- 
stle, 93, 95, 105, 107, 170 54 

Logos-doctrine ; see Christology 

Lot’s wife, 46 

Lucillius, in the Laurentian Acts, 472 

Ludolf, 401 


λάγνης, λάγνος, οὔ 

λαϊκός, λαϊκοῦν, 124 

λαμπρότης, 107 

λαός, 94, 124, 161; περιούσιος, 186 
λειτουργός, of O. T. prophets, 38 
λιψοκαλάμη, 48 

λιποτάκτειν, form, 76 


Macarius Magnes illustrates Clement’s 
Epistle, 26, 28, 57, 72, 178 

Mammeza; Hippolytus’ correspondence 
Ἦν 338, 339, 307, 437; her death, 


43 

Marcellus the deacon, in the story of Hip- 
polytus the brigand, 373, 374 

Marcia befriends the Christians, 321 sq 

Marcion; later than 2 [Clement], 203; 
treatise of Hippolytus against, 327, 330, 

46, 421 

Marcus the Valentinian, verses written 
against, 405, 410 

Maria, in the story of Hippolytus the 
brigand, 373 sq, 376 ; 

Mark (S.); his Gospel traditionally con- 
nected with S. Peter’s preaching at 
Rome, 402, 494, 495; meaning of ἑρμη- 
νευτής as applied to, 494 

Martana, in the story of Hippolytus the 
brigand, 373, 374 

Martin of Tours on the reappearance of 
Nero, 511 

Matthew xvi. 18, 19, patristic interpreta- 
tions of, 482 sq 

Maximin, the emperor; his character, 
438; his persecution, 438; his death, 

ο 


44 
Maximus, in the Portuensian Acts, 364 


Melito on the sacrifice of Isaac, 98 

Menza on the martyrdom of Hippolytus, 
361, 372, 476 : 

Metrical; passages embedded in Irenzus, 
405 sq; doctrinal treatises, 407; lists 
of Scripture, 407 sq 

Miller publishes the Philosophumena, 
317, 367, 414 

Molon, 44 

Monophysite expressions anticipated in 
the Apostolic Fathers, 14 sq 

Moses, a title of, 154 

Muratorian Canon; a translation, 407; 
from Greek verse, 408 sq; reasons for 
assigning the original to Hippolytus, 
389, 411 Sq, 495; on S. Peter and 
S. Paul, 495; reference to the spiritus 
principalis in, 67 sq; date, 495 


μακάριος, 143 

μᾶλλον μείζων, 148 

μαρτυρεῖν, μάρτυς, in Christian writings, 
26 sq 

μαστιγοῦν, μαστιγοφόροι, μαστιγονόμοι, in 
athletic contests, 225 

ματαιοπονία, 42 

μεγαλοπρεπής, 42 

μελανώτερος, form, 41 

μετὰ δέους, reading, 18 

μεταλαμβάνειν, with acc., 248 

μεταξύ, 132, 134 

μεταπαραδιδόναι, 74 

μηλωτή, 62 

μόλιβος, μόλιβδος, 251 

μονογενής, of the phoenix, 87 

μυσερός, form, 52, 96 

μῶμος, μωμοσκοπεῖν, 126, 185 


Narcissus, in the Laurentian Acts, 360,471 

Nemeseus, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Neon, in the story of Hippolytus the 
brigand, 373, 374, 376 

Nero; character and date of the perse- 
cution under, 7, 32, 497; his popu- 
larity, 511; expectation of his reap- 
pearance, 509 sq; personifications of, 
511; as Antichrist, 511 54 

Nicephorus of Constantinople; quotes 
Hippolytus, 346, 403; 2 [Clement] in 
the Stichometria of, 193, 233 

Nicephorus Callistus on Hippolytus, 


Si 

Nigslas ‘I beautifies the basilica of S. 
Laurence, 458 

Nicon the Monk; quotes Clement’s 
Epistle, 53, 140; and 2 [Clement], 
193, 216 

Noah preaches repentance, 37 sq 

Noedechen, 418 

Noetus, Hippolytus and, 319, 348, 400 

Nonnus; the name, 475; in the Portu- 
ensian Acts originally distinct from 


528 


Hippolytus, 476; a genuine martyr of 
Portus, 475; mentioned in the Libe- 
rian depositio, 355, 475; in Jerome, 
356; identified with Hippolytus, 466, 
475 sq; further confused by Peter 
Damian, 362, 476 

Nonnus, bishop of Edessa; his date, 
476; his see, 476; converts Pelagia, 
476; confused by Peter Damian with 
Hippolytus, 362, 476 

notarli, 197 

Notation employed in this edition, 4 

Novatianism of Hippolytus, alleged, 


357. 424 Sq, 445 


νουθεσία, νουθέτησις, 163 
νωθρός, 104 


(CEcumenius on Hippolytus, 349, 420 

Ophites, teaching oF the; as to marriage, 
237, 239; as to jealousy, 22 

Origen; at’ Rome, 423; meets Hippo- 
lytus there, 330, 423 ; his ‘ taskmaster’ 
Ambrosius, 330, 348, 423; preached as 
a layman, 195 sq; employed shorthand- 
writers, 197; on the Eternal Church, 
244; on I Pet. iv. 8, 252; on S. Matt. 
xvi. 18, 19, 48358q; on S. Peter’s visit 
to Rome, 496; mentions Clement’s 
Epistle, 15 

Ostia; its τὸ fh to Portus, 429, 433, 
466; in Prudentius associated with 
Hippolytus, 333, 338» 432 

Ostian Way, the traditional place of 
S. Paul’s burial, 496, 497, 499 sq 

Overbeck, 390, 398, 403 


οἱ ἔξω, 241 

οἴομαι, οἰώμεθα, 221, 244, 249 

ὁμολογητής, ὁμόλογος, in Christian writ- 
ings, 27 

ὁμόνοια, 70 

ὄνομα, 9, I12, 130, 131, 241 

ὄργανον, 256 

ὀργή and θυμός, 151 

ὅσια, ὅσιος, 17, 212; Kal δίκαια, 146, 213, 
220, 223, 249 

οὖν, 217, 241 


ὦ ὦ, accent, 157 
wpa and καιρός, 122 
ὡς, ὡς οὖν, 226, 244, 249 


Palladius on Hippolytus, 338, 402, 404 
Pammachius, xenodochium at Portus of, 


2 
lca on the Eternal Church, 245; on 
the Roman visit of S. Peter, 492, 494; 
the word ‘presbyter’ as applied to, 435 
Paschal I, translations of reliques by, 


458 
Paschal Tables of Hippolytus, 324 sq, 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


399, 403; their date, 437; when aban- 
doned, 399, 4413 significance of their 
prominence on the Chair, 441 

Passio illa; references to, 352, 469, 4733 a 
guide-book for pilgrims to the Ager 
Veranus, 473; quoted and abridged by 
Ado, 473 

Paul (S.); in Rome, 29, 497; his release, 
497; his visit to Spain, 30; his subse- 
quent arrest and death, 407; not 
martyred with 5, Peter, 497 sq, 4993 
origin of the conjunction of their names, 
499 sq; buried in the Ostian Way, 
496, 497 sq; his reliques temporarily 
deposited with S. Peter’s in the cata- 
combs of S. Sebastian, 500; festival of 
his translation, 501; his relation to 
S. Peter in the Church generally, 
489 sq; in Rome particularly, 491, 


497 54 i 

Paul I; transfers reliques to S. Silvester 
in Capite, 351, 352, 459; commemo- 
rative inscriptions, 352, 459 

Paulina, in the story of Hippolytus the 
brigand, 373, 3745 376 ; 

Pelagia converted by Nonnus, bishop of 
Edessa, 362, 476 

Pelagius II; his basilica in honour of ° 
S. Laurence, 342, 456 sq; his dedi- 
cation of it, 457, 469; commemorative 
inscription, 341 sq 

Peter (S.); character of his primacy, 
481 sq; our Lord’s promise, 481 sq; 
twofold patristic interpretation of the 
word ‘rock,’ 482 sq; exegetical con- 
siderations, 485 sq; result, 486; his 
rimacy evidenced in action, 487 sq; 
his relations to 5. Paul, 489 sq; his 
visit to Rome, 26, 490 sq; external 
evidence for it conclusive, 409 sq, 
491 sq; its date, 491, 497 sq; his rela- 
tions to S. Paul there, 491, 497 sq;_his 
First Epistle written during persecution, 
498 sq; date of his martyrdom, 26 sq, 
497 54; not martyred with 5, Paul, 
497 54, 499; origin of the conjunction 
of their names, 499 sq; buried in the 
Vatican Way, 498, 499; his reliques _ 
temporarily deposited with S. Paul’s _ 
in the catacombs of 5. Sebastian, 500; 
his traditional twenty-five years’ epis- 
copate, 501 sq; was he ever reckoned — 
a bishop of Rome? 500 Py, 

Peter (S.), First Epistle of; written ina 
time of persecution, 498 sq; its date, — 
499; its coincidence with S. Paul’s — 
Epistles, 4993 explanation of ch. iv. 
149, 2513; the allusion to 4 συνεκλεκτή 


in, 491 
Peter {8.), Second Epistle of; its auth 


ticity, 493, 498; an apparent coit 


dence in Clement’s Epistle with, ; 



















INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


perhaps not independent of the book 
of Eldad and Modad, 235 

Peter Damian confuses Nonnus, bishop 
of Edessa, with Hippolytus, 362, 476 

Peter of Alexandria; a passage in the 
Chronicon Paschale wrongly ascribed 
to, 344; imitates Clement’s Epistle, 26 

Philaster; date of his work on Heresies, 
415; his indebtedness to Hippolytus, 
413, 415 Sq 

Philo; illustrates Clement’s Epistle, 44, 
45, 98, 130, 164, 183; illustrates 
2 [Clement], 214 

Philosophical terms adopted by Clement 
and others, 66 sq, 69, 75, 89, 155, 247 

Philosophumena; its discovery, 317, 4143 
editions, 365 sq; the work of Hippo- 
lytus, 377, 378 54, 403, 421; extracts 
and patristic notices, 318sq, 327, 330, 
346; passages from Irenzeus incorpo- 
rated in, 422; the Summary in the 
Tenth Book published separately and 
called the Labyrinth, 379 sq, 396; its 
evidence as to Hippolytus’ see, 4343 
see Labyrinth, Miller 

Phoenix ; in the classics, 84; growth of 
the story, 88; its general acceptance, 
84 sq; its adoption by Jewish and 
Christian writers, 85 sq; its explana- 
tion, 86; chronology of its appearances, 
85, 87, 89; in Christian art, 87; in 
Egyptian hieroglyphics, 87 

Photius; notices of Clement in, 13, 14, 
72, 86, 139; rejects 2 [Clement], 193, 
194, 211, 212, 219; on works of Hip- 
polytus, 347 sq, 396, 419 sq; on Gaius, 
34784, 3773 a blunder of, 423 

Pitra, 133 

Plato, Hippolytus’ treatise against, 325, 
347» 395 54 
olto, Hippolytus’ name among the 
Italians, 477 

Polycarp, Martyrdom of; see Smyrneans, 
Letter of the 

Polycarp, Epistle of, imitates Clement’s 
Epistle, 5, 11, 27, 42, 52, 156, 162 

Pontianus, bishop of Rome; his episcopate, 
437; banishment, death and depositio, 
328, 438 sq, 443; burial-place, 442; 
the notice in the Liber Pontificalis, 340; 
date of the close of his episcopate, 439 

Porphyrius in the Laurentian Acts, 472 

Portuensian Cycle of Acts of Hippolytus, 
474 8q; documents illustrating it, 355, 
361, 364 54; their mutual relation, 476 

Portus, the harbour of Rome, 429; its 
relation to Ostia, 429, 433; its growth 
in importance, 429, 431, 433; intimately 
connected with Hippolytus’ history, 
466; in what sense his see, 430 sq, 432 
sq; the ruined church bearing his 
name, 466; the well of his traditional 


CLEM., II. 


529 


martyrdom, 466; the Isola Sacra, 466; 
gifts of Leo III to, 341, 466; date of 
the foundation of a permanent see at, 
466; its position among suburbicarian 
sees, 466; xenodochium at, 429 

Portus Romanus, as a name for Aden, 
429 

Potter, 157 

Praxedis (S.), connexion of this Church 
with Hippolytus explained, 465 

Preaching in the early Church, 195 sq 

Presbyter; as a designation of Hippolytus, 
424, 428, 435 sq; a title of dignity, 
435; not of office, 435; to whom ap- 
plied, 435 

Primitivus, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Proclus, Dialogue with; patristic notices 
of, 326, 327, 329, 348, 379, 381; the 
author Hippolytus, 377 sq; Gaius the 
name of the orthodox disputant, 381 
sq; argument from matter, 384 sq; 
from style, 386 sq 

Proverbs, titles of the book of, 166 sq 

Prudentius; on Hippolytus, 332 sq; his 
visit to the basilica of Hippolytus, 424, 
445; date and circumstances of this 
visit, 424, 450; the basilica described, 
332 Sq, 451; also the picture of Hip- 
polytus’ martyrdom, 451, 453 sq; de- 
scription of the commemoration, 451; 
of the basilica of S. Peter and S. Paul, 
450; present at the feast of their 
passion, 450; subjects commemorated 
in his Hymns, 445, 449; the Roman 
saints associated with the Tiburtine 
Way, and the month of August, 445, 
451; onthe Novatianism of Hippolytus, 
424; on Romanus, 445, 449 

ps-Chrysostom on Hippolytus, 346 

ps-John Damascene on Hippolytus, 345, 
396, 419 sq 

ps-Justin; date and country, 200; perhaps 
refers to 2 [Clement], 193, 200, 233, 
234, 250, 256 

ps-Tertullian, obligations of the Prae- 
scriptio to Hippolytus, 386, 414 sq 

Pudentiana (S.), the church and mon- 
astery of; its position, 464; date, 464; 
Hippolytus’ sanctuary at, 464 sq; its 
connexion with him explained, 465 


παλιγγενεσία, 42. 

παμβότανον, 165 

πανάγιος, 108, 169 

mavdpeTos, το, 19, 138, 166, 178 
πανθαμαρτωλός, πανθαμαρτητός, 256 
παντάδικος, 256 

παντεπόπτης, 162, 185 
παντοδύναμος, 7 

παντοκρατορικός, παντοκράτωρ, 7, 41 
παραγγελία, 128 

παράγειν, 234 


34 


530 


παράκλητος, 222 

παραλογίζεσθαι, 255 

παραποιεῖν, 137 

παραπολλύσθαι, 253 

παράπτωσις, 170 

παραφυάδιον, 506 sq, 512 

παροικεῖν, παροικία, 5, 218 

πατέρες, of O. T. worthies, 23, 182 

πεποίθησις, 89, 108 

περιούσιος, 186 

πέτρος, πέτρα, 482 Sq 

πηρός, πηροῦν, πήρωσις, 213 

πλάτος, TAGE, 19 

πλατυσμός, 20 

πλεῖν, compounds of, used metaphorically, 
224 

πληροφορεῖν, 158 

προαιρεῖν, 130 

προγνώστης, 230 

πρόδηλος, 50 

προοδοίπορος, 232 

πρόσδεκτος, 36 

προσέχειν, with acc., 16 

προσέρχεσθαι, 183 

προσκλίνεσθαι, πρόσκλισις, 77, 143, 184 

προστάτης, 111 

πρόστιμον, 127 

προσφεύγειν, 75 

πρόσωπον, ‘ringleader,’ 8, 144 


φησίν, not introducing a quotation, 240 

φθείρειν, in athletic contests, 225 

φθορά, 221 

φιλοξενία, stress laid by Clement on, 45, 
109 

φιλοπονεῖν, reading, 206, 258 

φίλος Θεοῦ, the title, 43 

φοῖνιξ, 84 sq 

φυγαδεύειν, 29 

φυλλοροεῖν, spelling, 81 


ψηλαφᾶν, 182 

ψωμίζειν, 160 

Quatuor Coronati, reliques of Hippolytus 
transferred to the, 341, 459, 408 

Quotations in Clement’s Epistle; canon- 
ical (see Zudex of Scriptural Passages) ; 
classical, 115, 116; apocryphal (see 
Apocryphal); combined and loose, 51, 
52, 65, 89, 92, 95, 99) 104, 106, 129, 
141, 151, 156; leading words comment- 
ed on in, 141 sq 

Quotations in 2 [Clement]; canonical (see 
Index of Scriptural Passages); apo- 
cryphal (see Afocryphal) 


Rahab, 46 sq 

Refutation of All Heresies; see Philoso- 
phumena 

Resurrection of the body denied by the 
Gnostics, 229 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER 


Richardson, E. C., 365 

‘Rock’ in S. Matthew xvi. 18, interpre- 
tations of the word, 482 sq 

Romanus, martyr; his story in the Lau- 
rentian Acts, 353, 354, 446, 448 sq, 
472; in Ado of Vienne, 358, 448; 
associated with the Tiburtine Way and 
the month of August, 445, 447; com- 
memorated by Prudentius, 445; origin- 
ally a deacon, 446, 448; transformed 
into a soldier, 446, 448 sq; ampli- 
fications of his story, 446, 448 sq; day 


of his martyrdom at Antioch, 449; of 


his festival, 356, 447, 448, 449 Sq, 4725 
the commemoration in August a trans- 
lation, 449; his burial-place, 400: 
inscription relating to, 351, 447, 469; 
his connexion with Hippolytus, 462 

Rome, Church of; its history in the 
second century obscure, 317; light 
thrown on it by Hippolytus, 317 sq; 
and by the Novatian schism, 425 54; 
Sabellianism in the, 319 sq 

Rothe, 132, 133 

Routh, 379 

Rufinus ; on 2 [Clement], 192; on Hip- 
polytus, 331 

Ruggieri, 370, 429 


ῥιψοκινδύνως, 53 


Sabellianism; at Rome, 319 sq; favours 
the Gospel of the Egyptians, 237 
Sabinianus, in the Portuensian Acts, 365, 


475 

Salmon; on the chronology of Hippoly- 
tus, 370, 389, 390, 392, 399, 440 54; 
on the treatise against Artemon, 400; 
on the treatise de Psalmis, 390; on 
the Muratorian Canon, 411 sq 

Salome in the Gospel of the Egyptians, 


236 sq 

Sardinia; Callistus banished to, 321 sq; 
Hippolytus and Pontianus banished to, 
328, 427, 438 sq 

Scaliger, 399 . 

Scarlet thread, patristic interpretations 
of the, 49 sq 

Schneckenburger, 237 

Schwegler, 229 

Scriptures, designations in 2 [Clement] of 
the, γραφαί, 202, 215; Ta λόγια τοῦ 
Θεοῦ, 203, 2423 τὰ βιβλία Kal οἱ ἀπό- 
στολοι, 202, 245; ὃ Θεὸς τῆς ἀληθείας, 
195, 257 - 

Severina, Hippolytus’ treatise to, 325, 
397: 421 

Severus, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Severus, Alexander; his reign, 437; kill- 
ed by Maximin, 437: ends the 
Christians, 437 





i 








INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 531 


Severus of Antioch quotes and accepts 
2 [Clement], 193, 211, 212 

Shorthand writers employed by the 
fathers, 197 sq 

Sibylline ΑΒΕ illustrate Clement’s 
Epistle, 37 sq, 109, 162; designate 
Rome Babylon, 492; and Nero Anti- 
christ, 511 

Simferosa, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Simplicius, bishop of Rome, arrange- 
ment of regiones by, 465 

Siricius, bishop of Rome; honours to 
Hippolytus in the time of, 464 sq 

Sixtus III, basilica built to 5. Laurence 
by, 341, 456 sq 

pee their liberation a Christian duty, 
160 

Smyrnzans, Letter of the; imitates 
Clement’s Epistle, 5, 188; the Gaius 
mentioned in the, 383; on Irenzeus at 
Rome, 422 

So ΜΩ͂Ν perhaps quoted in Clement’s 

pistle, 115 

Soter, bishop of Rome; his letter to 
Corinth re publicly, 192; not 2 
[Clement], 196 

Stephanus Gobarus, identification of Hip- 
Pn tos treatises mentioned by, 343, 


385, 
Stephee Ἢ ), the two churches at Rome 
to, 341, 459 
Stoic division of human nature, 66 
Suidas on Hippolytus, 349; 420 
Syriac version of Clement’s Epistle, 3 sq 
Syriac Writer, anonymous, quotes Cle- 
ment’s Epistle, 158 


σάκκος; 41 

σαλεύεσθαι, 70 

σημειοῦν, » 

σκάμμα, 3 

Σοφία Gh ἡ παν ἀετοὶ Σοφία, as a title 
of Proverbs, 166, 169; of apocryphal 
books of Wisdom, 167 

σοφός, συνετός, 100 

σταθμός, στάσις, 74 

στήρισον, στήριξον, form, 68, 101 

στύλος, accent, 25 

συναγωγή, 72 

συνείδησις, 18, 57, 124 

συνεκλεκτή, ἡ ἐν Βαβυλῶνι, 491 sq 

συνέλευσις, 75 

σφραγίς, of baptism, 201, 226 

σωζόμενοι (ol), 170 


Tacteus, in the Laurentian Acts, 353 

Taurinus ; in the Portuensian Acts, 474; 
a genuine martyr of Portus, 475; his 
day in the Liberian chronographer, 


355, 475; his depositio, 355; sar- 
cophagus commemorating, ee 


Temple sacrifices; classification of, 125 ; 
Clement’s Epistle on, 125 

Tertullian; quotes from and illustrates 
Clement’s Epistle, 82, 128, 131; on 
the phcenix, 85, 86; quotes from an 
apocryphal Ezekiel, 40; his christology, 
15; on S. Peter and S. Paul in Rome, 
26, 495 sq 

Theodoret ; on Hippolytus and his works, 


338 Sq, 377, 389 54, 419 Sq; on Gaius, 


378 

Theophilus of Antioch; borrows from 
Clement’s Epistle, 54, 82; from 2 
[Clement], 227; from Sibylline Oracles, 
8 


3 

Theophilus, addressed in Hippolytus’ 
treatise on Antichrist, 398 

Theucinda restores Hippolytus’ church at 
Arles, 467 

Thompson, E. M., 152, 153 

Tiburtine Way; see Ager Veranus 

Timotheus of Alexandria quotes and 
accepts 2 [Clement], 193, 211, 212, 218 

Tischendorf on Clement’s Epistle, 255 
27, 28, 45, 46, 48, 55, 109, 113, 114» 
119, 122, 137, 146, 148, 150, 151) 
153, 156 

Titus, the emperor, closely associated 
with Vespasian and Domitian in the 
empire, 509 sq 

Trinity, the doctrine in Clement’s Epistle, 
140, 169 

Triphonia, Tryphonia, in the Lauren- 
tian Acts, 473; references to, 353, 
354; inscriptions mentioning, 351, 
352, 469; her burial-place, 469; date of 
her martyrdom, 471; her day, 471; 
explanation of ‘wife of Decius,’ 470; 
her connexion with Hippolytus merely 
local, 471 


ταγή, 73 

ταμεῖον, ταμιεῖον, 76, 151 
ταπεινοφρονεῖν, 63, 69 
ταχυγράφοι, 197 

τέγος, 49 

τελειοκαρπεῖν, 135 

τέρμα τῆς δύσεως, 30 
τιμᾶσθαι, constr., 136 
τόπος, 27, 37, 123, 182, 183 
τύπος and ἀντίτυπον, 247 
τύφος, form, 50 


θᾶττον, form, 188 

θεεῖν, with acc., 224 

θεμέλιος, of Christ and His apostles, 486 
θεμιτός, 183 

Θεὸς τῆς ἀληθείας (ὁ), 195, 257, 260 
θεοσέβεια, 2 

θημών, θημωνιά, 165 


532 


Ulpius Romulus, in the Portuensian Acts, 
361, 362, 3648q, 47484 : 

Urbanus, bishop of Rome; his episco- 
pate, 437; his relations with Hippo- 
lytus, 437 ‘ 

Ursicinus, antipope, and the basilica of 
Hippolytus, 444, 465 


ὑγεία, form, 74 
ὑπερασπισμός, 165 
ὑπερδέες (τὸ), 69 
ὑπέρμαχος, 138 
ὑπογραμμός, 31, 61, 103 
ὑποδεικνύναι, 28 
ὑποτιθέναι τράχηλον, 183 


Valentinian language found in the Ig- 
natian Epistles, 203; in 2 [Clement], 
203, 243, 247: argument of date there- 
from, 203 

Valeria, in the story of Hippolytus the 
brigand, 373, 374) 376 

Valerian the prefect, in the Laurentian 
Acts, 357 54, 471 54; his death, 362, 


304 
Valerianus, bishop of Zaragoza, 452, 


407 

Valerius Bito, 185, 187, 305 

Vansittart, 185 

Vatican Way, the traditional burial-place 
of 5. Peter, 496, 497, 499 54 

Vero; see Bero 

Vespasian; his position in the list of 
Czesars, 507 54; associates Titus and 
Domitian with himself in the empire, 
509 Sq pals, 

Victor, bishop of Rome; his episcopate, 
436; probably appointed Hippolytus 
to Portus, 433; Hippolytus’ account of 
him, 321 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


Vicus Patricius, sanctuary of Hippolytus 
in the, 464 sq 


Vigilius, bishop of Rome; sieges of 


Rome during his episcopate, 454; de- 
struction and restoration of Hippoly- 
tus’ basilica in his time, 454, 465 
Volkmar; on the date of Clement’s 
Epistle, 8; of the book of Judith, 161; 
of the Epistle of Barnabas, 505, 508 sq 


Wansleb, 401 

Weizsiicker on the date of the Epistle of 
Barnabas, 505, 507, 509 

Westcott, 161, 218, 219, 223, 231 

William of Malmesbury, Guide to Rome 
by, 353» 373 

Wocher, 197 

Wordsworth, 331, 3441 367, 370, 396, 
4275 429 

Wotton on Clement’s Epistle, 27, 117, 
127, 1345 149, 150, 152, 232 


Xystus I, bishop of Rome, inscription 
relating to, 351 


Young, Patrick; on Clement’s Epistle, 


26, 28, 70, 81, 99, 103, 108, 143, 152» 
1573 on 2 [Clement], 212 


Zahn on Clement’s Epistle, 18, 176, ‘195s 


198 

Zephyrinus, bishop of Rome; his episco- 
pate, 436; his relations to Hippolytus, 
319 Sq, 348, 431 54, 4373 Eusebius on, 
327; Jerome on, 3293 attacked by 
Tertullian, 418 

Zonaras on Hippolytus, 349 

Zosimus, inscription relating to, 351 





CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. — 





¥ 
» 
. 
- 
. ! 
᾿ - 
’ 
Ἵ 
᾿ 
΄ 
“ 
i 
ων ᾿ 
ιν. ἡ od. 
t 
Ἧ ΄ 




















i 
Ἰ 











δὴ 
ὶ ret 


" i 
ἔπι 






































"35:53 = 
“τῷ ᾿ 
EEE 
Fig Ao Los x= 
Sree 
ees 
eee > Z 
ΞΞΞΞΞΞΞΞ 
aay 


pare 












oo 











ONY 


3:2::Ξ 
aes 
4 





ΝΑῚ 

ἀφ ἣν ΔΝ 
Oe ‘ We ὮΝ Mod ΝῊΝ 
Nh Νὰ i oH Ν PRON 
δὴν vid i \ Νὴ τῶν sates way ΔΝ Ne 
CGS SN 
dats 


BRIN 
vec aX 


EF 
ype 


ae 
"τ, 
Ee 

















Sr 











Spee 
ΕΣ ΞΞΣΞΞΞΞΟΞ 











‘ \ 
ΗΝ 
te wi " RAG 


ah 
ΩΝ 








τ, 





— 
Sane e* 
55:5 Be 
foo oon 























Sree 
TS 
ἘΞ ΞΞΞΞΞΞΙ 



















Cee <3 ΟΣ 
ES. a 22; 
SALE hal ae! 
as AS Oe 
᾿ς ae La 
Pearce 
ἘΞ ΣΌΣ; 


δεν 


τ 
xt 


δ ¥ 
PNR CY 





Shae 
x, 



















τ 
oe 
"Ἂν 













ω » 


oS 
Gen. 
eos 
eee 


RAY 
ee 


a 











































τ 


Wal Ὧν δ ih Trt 
PRR ‘ ahh 
i . δ Ba 


πα: 
eet 
t= 
<>, 
se 





SSS 
ee 
See 
ΞΞΞΞΕΞ: 
Ae 
See 


“as Pes 
“-. “55 
ae capo 
aX 
Gate 
ee 
anne 
ms 


a 


























rae 
com 
“τς 


“5,5: 
ores 


= 
ἐς 
mA 


aa 





Se a ee 


ane 
Se 
“- 


aA 









ὯΝ 
PSMA Cag a 
‘ wi 
TEARS 








ae 
ies 
aay 


FPR 

ee 
are 
ee 

















S 


ave ἢ ᾿ 
ne 





os 
eases 
eee 
SF 
me 
aon 


Se 





Ss 
re er κ 
lames 
“τ 


as 
oe 
ἘΞ 
x oe 
ea 
rae 
— 





eae 








a 
τὰς 
5: 





ΟΣ ΣΝ 


ΩΝ, 
= 
sees 
Rarer 


ante MCh ot 
eer 
i “πΞ 
ya 








ἃ, 
te. Ὁ 

















εν 
es 















Nua (aa 
Ν ΑΝΝΑ ye 





Νὴ 
ΔΎ 









στον 











































SHOP SAAR 








Ay Hy) δι 
ὴ ὶ Yat sd 
ἣ i pont AW Ni / Nts ean 
RASS) Δ Υ is AMyY χ ay ὴ LONE at AN IND er 
fi ὴ A ya ARYAN NIE) APTN CA AQ AAS, 
ES Ne ANNES aa 


yh \ 
t 











now: 
an, 
oF 
CAS 
sen 
SES 


ear 

= 
= 
re 


= 
ee 
fess 
ΟΣ ΕΣ 
Ss 


eee 


anna 
aS 
5 













CGR SG) Ba 
th NK ; 














Ca 
eS 
tas 





+ RES a “55.5.5. tmp a 
































































ἡ 








NA RGN me AARON aN 
BUCO ΝΑ ΑΝ ERROR ROT μαλλὶ 
mae Me He SES a 
OO Ne SE NASR 
fi CRN ONAN NESE RO 
FR CN ιν ἐν SEES ARS 
Oy PNA oe RN ἢ Rs aay 
ΟΣ δ Wat aa Set ii % Ἂ We ; A 
DANSON FAVA RNAS 
A CAN AEN AS ἡ Ν ἵ A 
ἡ ΛΝ Ai Ra 
XO if Ὧν is 













= 
<A 
ΣΤ: 
oe 
oes 


os 
ante 
ances 
eres 
ale ἶψν, 
peste, 
PAS 
rete 


4 i: 
vase Vets ARAMAR SY 
ΣΟῚ AOE 








Sa 
ecard 
<5 


Cue 








— 
Soo 
ats ζω 
χὰ 
a 


aoe 
= ae 
SS 
oe ΟΣ τας 
So etree ony oe 
SE 

























































NS 
i 
ay a A 
Δ i) ἣν Ν i 
7 vu ἢ 4 ΐ 
Ἷ i 
{ \ ate 
7, ann ‘ 
SAB wea ; 
(yeu! ay : 
δῦ ᾿ { 
ANY, ay ᾿ 
' ἐκ: 
δ \ 2 " 
1M ἦν Ay ‘ ‘| 
iy (Han if RUA ΝῊ ‘x ᾿ 
aN Gf 09 Ὁ ΩΝ 0) ε 
ἐδ δὰ δ ἐνῇ yi Seat ἐς 
RS λέων Lares 5 
Bie swe oN ty me ὅς 
RULER CCH 
Peete δ ΩΝ, 
NYS τῷ πῶ 
δὴ τὴ ΩΝ ν ' 
ἌΝ 






ee 
on 
no 
axle 






Site 


oe 







ME V4 μ᾿ Δ ῷ 


pathy 






core 
τ 





τ 





