^'6t 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PURCHASED  FROM 


Edward  M.    Kirk 
Fund 


LIBRARY     OF     FATHERS 


OF  THE 


HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH, 


ANTERIOR   TO    THE   DIVISION    OF   THE    EAST    AND  WEST: 


TRANSLATED  BY  MEMBERS  OF  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH. 


Yet  shall  not  thy  teachers  be  removed  into  a  corner  any  more,  but 

THINE    EYES  SHALL  SEE  THY  TEACHERS.      Isaia/i  ■ss.x   20. 


OXFORD, 

JOHN  HENRY  PARKER; 
F.  AND  J.  RIVINGTON,  LONDON. 
MDCCCXLVII. 


TO  THK 
MOST  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD 

WILLIAM 

LOED    ARCHBISHOP    OF    CANTERBURY, 

PRIMATE  01'  ALL  ENGLAND, 
FORMERLY  REGIUS   PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD, 

THIS    LIBRARY 

OF 

ANCIENT  BISHOPS,  FATHERS,  DOCTORS,  MARTYRS,  CONFESSORS, 
OF  CHRIST'S  HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH, 

IS 
WITH    HIS    grace's    PERMISSION 

RESPECTFULLY    INSCRIBED, 

IN  TOKEN  OF 

REVERENCE    FOR    HIS    PERSON    AND    SACRED    OFFICE, 

AND  OF 
GRATITUDE    FOR    HIS    EPISCOPAL    KINDNESS. 


SEVENTEEN    SHORT   TREATISES 


OF 


S.     A  U  G  U  S  T  I  N  E, 


BISHOP  OF  HIPPO, 


TRANSLATED, 


WITH     NOTES     AND     INDICES. 


OXFORD, 

JOHN  HENRY  PAllKER; 

F.  AND  J.  RIVINGTON,  LONDON. 

MDCCCXLVII 


5' 


PREFACE. 


The  present  volume  consists  of  seventeen  short  works  of 
St.  Augustine,  all  taken  from  the  VI th  volume  of  the  Bene- 
dictine Edition,  except  the  last,  which  was  inserted  from  the 
Vlllth  volume  as  connected  in  some  degree  with  several  of  the 
others,  and  important  in  itself.  The  first  and  last  may  be 
classed  together  as  relating  to  the  general  principles  of 
evidence  in  Religion,  and  the  last  but  one  with  some  of  the 
earlier  ones,  as  going  over  the  Creed  with  a  particular  expo- 
sition. There  is  of  course  some  repetition  of  matter  in  the 
several  expositions  of  the  Creed,  but  it  was  thought  worth 
while  to  put  them  together,  both  in  order  to  give  a  more 
complete  view  of  his  teaching,  and  in  order  to  shew  how 
much  of  it  was  based  on  the  Creed,  and  how  it  was  used  by 
the  Christians  of  that  time.  The  Treatise  on  Catechizing 
the  Unlearned  is  remarkable  as  a  specimen  of  the  times, 
besides  its  great  value  in  shewing  what  was  thought  the  most 
needful  instruction,  and  giving  hints  for  conveying  it,  for 
which  purpose  it  should  be  compared  with  the  Sermon  to  the 
Catechumens.  That  on  Faith  and  Works  is  very  clear  on  its 
own  main  subject,  maintaining  that  the  faith  which  saves  is 
the  Faith  of  grace,  which  implies  Love.  It  also  contains  a 
remarkable  discussion  on  the  state  of  souls  awaiting  the 
Judgment,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  doctrine  of  a 
Purgatory  was  then  held  by  some,  but  doubted  by  St.  Augus- 
tine. A  similar  doubt  appears  in  his  view  of  the  interference 
of  departed  Saints  in  human  affairs,  which  however  he  con- 
siders established  as  a  fact  in  some  cases,  though  the  manner 


iv  PREFACE. 

of  it  is  very  doubtful,  and  not  easily  to  be  gathered  from 
appearances,  which  he  shews  to  be  deceptive  with  respect  to 
living  persons. 

The  Treatises  on  Continence,  Marriage,  Virginity,  and 
Widowhood,  together  give  a  tolerably  complete  view  of  his 
teaching  on  an  important  subject,  and  one  which  has  given 
occasion  to  many  attacks  upon  the  Fathers  of  the  Church. 
Much  of  what  has  been  said  against  them  will  appear  at  once 
on  reading  these  to  be  mere  misrepresentation,  while  on 
some  points  there  may  be  fair  room  for  difference  of  opinion. 
It  is  impossible  to  go  over  such  ground  without  offending 
modern  delicacy,  but  it  is  probably  really  safer  to  venture  on 
it  by  the  side  of  St.  Augustine,  than  with  many  of  those  who 
would  blame  him. 

The  Treatise  on  Lying  is,  as  he  says,  difficult,  from  its 
having  the  arguments  on  both  sides  drawn  out,  and  his 
own  judgment  reserved  for  the  end.  It  is  necessary  to 
remark  this,  as  single  extracts  on  one  side  might  give  a  false 
impression  of  his  doctnne,  which  is  as  strict  as  possible 
against  lying  in  Christians,  especially  in  any  matter  of  Faith 
and  Religion.  He  makes  allowance  for  heathens,  and  persons 
in  any  less  perfect  state,  when  their  intention  is  good.  The 
argument  is  clearer  in  the  work  *  against  Lying,'  where  the 
objections  are  not  put  as  if  in  his  own  mouth,  and  where  a 
dangerous  position  taken  up  by  others  had  roused  him  to 
speak  somewhat  vehemently. 

The  treatise  '  on  the  Work  of  Monks'  refers  lo  the  question, 
whether  manual  labour  is  to  be  expected  of  them.  The 
argument  turns  chiefly  on  certain  passages  of  Scripture, 
which,  without  mentioning  the  exact  case,  contain  principles 
applicable  to  it.  He  decides  in  the  affirmative.  It  is  in- 
teresting as  shewing  something  of  the  state  of  Monachism  at 
that  early  period  in  Africa.  Cassian  and  Palladius  must 
however  be  consulted  by  any  one  who  wishes  to  know  the 
state  of  it  in  Egypt,  where  it  had  long  flourished. 


PREFACE.  V 

The  principles  stated  in  llie  Treatise  '  oi  the  Profit  of 
Believing,'  with  respect  to  the  authority  of  the  Church,  com- 
pared with  the  constant  appeal  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  the 
rest  of  the  works,  and  the  manner  in  which  those  appeals 
are  made,  shew  how  perfectly  consistent  he  considereth  the 
free  use  of  Holy  Scripture  to  be  with  the  deference  due  to 
Ecclesiastical  Tradition,  and  how  many  interesting  points 
even  his  enquiring  mind  was  content  to  leave  uncertain. 

The  publication  has  been  delayed  some  little  time  by  the 
Index,  which  would  have  kept  it  back  longer  but  for  the  kind 
assistance  of  two  friends.  The  first  ten  treatises,  and  the  last, 
are  translated  by  the  Rev.  C.  L.  Cornish,  M.A.  of  Exeter 
College,  Oxford;  and  the  remaining  six  by  the  Rev.  H. 
Browne,  M.A.  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  late 
Principal  of  the  Diocesan  College,  Chichester. 

Several  new  volumes  are  in  the  press,  to  be  brought  out  in 
the  coming  year ;  the  third  and  last  of  St.  Gregory's  Morals 
on  Job,  the  first  of  St.  Augustine  on  the  Psalms,  St.  Chrysos- 
tom  on  the  second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  The  third  and 
last  volume  of  St.  Chrysostom  on  St.  Matthew,  and  the  Acta 
Martyrum  from  the  Collection  of  Ruinart,  are  in  immediate 
preparation  for  the  press. 

C.  M. 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Concerning  Faith  of  things  not  seen                  .                  .  1 

Of  Faith,  and  of  the  Creed                .                  .                  .  15 

Of  Faith  and  Works         ....  37 

Enchiridion  to  Laurentius  on  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity  85 
On  the  Christian  Conflict                  .                  .                  .159 

Of  the  Catechizing  of  the  Unlearned                  .                  .  187 

Of  Continence                   ....  243 

On  the  Good  of  MaiTiage                  .                 .                 .  274 

Of  Holy  Virginity             ....  308 

On  the  Good  of  Widowhood              .                  .                  .  353 

On  Lying         .....  382 

To  C  onsen  tins :  Against  Lying        .                 .                  .  426 

Of  the  Work  of  Monks                      .                  .                  .  470 

On  Care  to  be  had  for  the  Dead       .                 .                 .  517 

On  Patience     .....  543 

On  the  Creed:  A  Sennon  to  the  Catechumens                  .  563 

On  the  Profit  of  Believing                  .                  .                 .  577 


S.    AUGUSTINE 

CONCERNING 

FAITH  OF  THINGS  NOT  SEEN. 


Tliis  tract  was  thought  spurious  by  some,  but  is  known  to  be  St.  Augustine's 
by  bis  mention  of  it  in  Ep.  ccxxxi.  ad  Darium  Comitem.  It  seems  to 
have  been  written  after  399,  from  what  is  said  about  Idols,  §.  10  ;  for  in 
that  year  Honorius  enacted  laws  against  tbem.  From  Ben.  The  reader 
of  Butler's  Analogy  will  recognise  many  similar  turns  of  thought. 


].  There  are  who  think  that  the  Christian  rehgion  is  de fide 
what  we   should    smile    at,  rather  than  hold  fast,  for  this    ^^^ 
reason,  that,  in  it,  not  what  may  be  seen,  is  shewn,  but  men  nonvi- 

D  ENTUR 

are  commanded  faith  of  things  which  are  not   seen.     We — -. 

therefore,  that  we  may  refute  these,  who  seem  to  themselves 
through  prudence  to  be  unwilling  to  believe  what  they 
cannot  see,  although  we  are  not  able  to  shew  unto  human 
sight  those  divine  things  which  we  believe,  yet  do  shew 
unto  human  minds  that  even  those  things  which  are  not 
seen  are  to  be  believed.  And  first  they  are  to  be  admonished, 
(whom  folly  hath  so  made  subject  to  their  carnal  eyes,  as 
that,  whatsoever  they  see  not  through  them,  they  think  not 
that  they  are  to  believe,)  how  many  things  they  not  only 
beUeve  but  also  know,  which  cannot  be  seen  by  such  eyes.  . 
Which  things  being  without  number  in  our  mind  itself,  (the 
nature  of  which  mind  is  incapable  of  being  seen,)  not  to 
mention  others,  the  very  faith  whereby  we  believe,  or  the 
thought  whereby  we  know  that  we  either  believe  any  thing, 
or  believe  not,  being  as  it  is  altogether  alien  from  the  sight 
of  those  eyes  ;  what  so  naked,  so  clear,  what  so  certain  is 
there  to  the  inner  eyes  of  our  minds  ?  How  then  are  we  not 
to  believe  what  we  see  not  with  the  eyes  of  the  body,  whereas, 
either  that  we  believe,  or  that  we  believe  not,  in  a  case 
where  we  cannot  apply  the  eyes  of  the  body,  we  without  any 
doubt  see  ? 

B 


2  Minds  and  uills  of  men  known  wiihoui  sight. 

DEFiDE  2.  But,  say  lliey,  those  things  which  are  in  the  mind,  in 
^"^"^  that  we  can  by  the  mind  itself  discern  them,  we  have  no  need 
to  know  through  the  eyes  of  the  body  ;  but  those  things, 
which  you  say  unto  us  that  we  should  believe,  you  neither 
point  to  without,  that  through  the  eyes  of  the  body  we  may 
know  them  ;  nor  are  they  within,  in  our  own  mind,  that  by 
exercising  thought  we  may  see  them.  And  these  things 
they  so  say,  as  though  any  one  would  be  bidden  to  believe, 
if  that,  which  is  believed,  he  could  already  see  set  before 
him.       Therefore    certainly    ought    we    to    believe    certain 

1  mere-  temporal  things  also,  which  we  see  not,  that  we  may  merit' 
^^^^      to  see  eternal  things  also,  which  we  believe.     But,  whosoever 

thou  art  who  wilt  not  believe  save  what  thou  seest,  lo,  bodies 
that  are  present  thou  seest  with  the  eyes  of  the  body,  wills 
and  thoughts  of  thine  own  that  are  present,  because  they  are 
in  thine  own  mind,  thou  seest  by  the  mind  itself;  tell  me, 
I  pray  thee,  thy  friend's  will  towards  thee  by  what  eyes  seest 
thou  ?  For  no  will  can  be  seen  by  the  eyes  of  the  body. 
What  ?  see  you  in  your  own  mind  this  also  which  is  going  on 
in  the  mind  of  another  ?  But  if  you  see  it  not,  how  do  you 
repay  in  turn  the  good  will  of  your  friend,  if  what  you 
cannot  see,  you  believe  not  ?  Will  you  haply  say  that  you  see 
the  will  of  another  through  his  works  ?  Therefore  you  will 
see  acts,  and  hear  words,  but,  concerning  your  friend's  will, 
that  which  cannot  be  seen  and  heard  you  will  believe.  For 
that  will  is  not  colour  or  figure,  so  as  to  be  thrown  upon  the 
eyes ;    or  sound  or  strain,  so  as  to  glide  into  the  ears ;  nor 

2  affec-  indeed  is  it  your  own,  so  as  to  be  perceived  by  the  motion^ 
tione      ^£  ^,^^^^  ^^^^  heart.     It  remains  therefore  that,  being  neither 

seen,  nor  heard,  nor  beheld  within  thyself,  it  be  believed, 
that  thy  life  be  not  left  deserted  without  any  friendship,  or 
affection  bestowed  upon  thee  be  not  repaid  by  thee  in 
return.  Where  then  is  that  which  thou  saidest,  that  thou 
oughtest  not  to  believe,  save  what  thou  sawest  either  out- 
wardly in  the  body,  or  inwardly  in  the  heart  ^  Lo,  out  of 
thine  own  heart,  thou  believest  an  heart  not  thine  own  ;  and 
lendest  thy  faith,  where  thou  dost  not  direct  the  glance  of  thy 
body  or  of  thy  mind.  Thy  friend's  face  thou  discernest  by 
thy  own  body,  thy  own  faith  thou  discernest  by  thine  own 
mind  ;  but  thy  friend's  faith  is  not  loved  by  thee,  unless  there 


Ventures  made  for  trial  sheiv  some  belief.  3 

be  in  thee  in  return  that  faith,  whereby  thou  niayest  believe    qu^ 
that  which  in   him  thou  seest  not.     Although  a  man  niay  p^'^^^uB 
also    deceive    by    feigning    good   will,   and    hiding   malice : 
or,  if  he  have  no  thought  to  do  harm,  yet  by  expecting  some 
benefit  from  thee,  feigns,  because  he  has  not,  love. 

3.  But  you  say,  that  you  therefore  believe  your  friend, 
whose  heart  you  cannot  see,  because  you  have  proved  him 
in  your  trials,  and  have  come  to  know  of  what  manner  of 
spirit  he  was  towards  you  in  your  dangers,  wherein  he 
deserted  you  not,  Seemeth  it  therefore  to  you  that  we  must 
wish  for  our  own  affliction,  that  our  friends'  love  towards  us 
may  be  proved  .?  And  shall  no  man  be  happy  in  most  sure 
friends,  unless  he  shall  be  unhappy  through  adversity  ?  so 
that,  forsooth,  he  enjoy  not  the  tried  love  of  the  other,  unless 
he  be  racked  by  pain  and  fear  of  his  own  ?  And  how  in  the 
having  of  true  friends  can  that  happiness  be  wished  for,  and 
not  rather  feared,  which  nothing  save  unhappiness  can  put 
to  the  proof?  And  yet  it  is  true  that  a  friend  may  be  had 
also  in  prosperity,  but  proved  more  surely  in  adversity. 
But  assuredly  in  order  to  prove  him,  neither  would  you  ii. 
commit  yourself  to  dangers  of  your  own,  unless  you  believed  ; 
and  thus,  when  you  commit  yourself  in  order  to  prove, 
you  believe  before  you  prove.     For  siu'ely,  if  we  ought  not 

to  believe  things  not  seen%  since  indeed  we  believe  the 
hearts  of  our  friends,  and  that,  not  yet  surely  proved  ;  and, 
after  we  shall  have  proved  them  good  by  our  own  ills, 
even  then  we  believe  rather  than  see  their  good  will  towards 
us:  except  that  so  great  is  faith,  that,  not  unsuitably,  we 
judge  that  we  see,  with  certain  eyes  of  it,  that  which  we 
believe,  whereas  we  ought  therefore  to  believe,  because  we 
cannot  see. 

4.  If  this  faith  be  taken  away  from  human  affairs,  who  but 
must  observe  how  gi-eat  disorder  in  them,  and  how  fearful 
confusion    must  follow?      For  who    will  be  loved  by  any 

with  mutual  affection,  (being  that  the   loving^  itself  is  in-'dilectio 
visible,)  if  what  I  see  not,  1  ought  not  to  believe?     There- 

*  The  text  seems  corrupt.     A  Ms.  will  be,     *  For  certainly  if  you  will  not 

in  Bra-senose  Library  reads,   'si  non  have  us  believe  things  unseen,  we  ought 

vis  rebus  credere.'    If  we  read  '  Si  non  not  (to  believe  this,)  since  &c.' 
vis  rebus  non  visis  credere,'  the  sense 

B  2 


4    Mutual  love,  even  in  families,  is  by  faith  in  the  unseen. 
DE  FIDE  fore  will  the  whole  of  friendship  perish,  in  that  it  consists 

RERUM  ,  ^  ,11  T-i  ,  /.   .  .1,     .       ,  , , 

not  save  ot  mutual  love.     l*or  what  of  it  will  it  be  able  to 

receive  from  any,  if  nothing  of  it  shall  be  believed  to  be 
shewn  ?    Further,  friendshij)  perishing,  there  will  be  preserved 
in  the  mind  the  bonds  neither  of  marriages,  nor  of  kindreds 
and  relations;   because  in  these  also   there   is  assuredly  a 
friendly  union  of  sentiment.     Spouse   therefore  will  not  be 
able  to  love  spouse  in  turn,  inasmuch  as  each  believes  not 
the  other's  love,  because  the  love  itself  cannot  be  seen.     Nor 
will  they  long  to  have  sons,  who  they  believe  not  will  make 
them  a  return.     And  if  these  be  born  and  grow  up,  much 
less  will   the   parents  themselves   love  their  own   children, 
whose  love  towards  themselves  in  those  children's  hearts  they 
will  not  see,  it  being  invisible;  if  it  be  not  praiseworthy 
faith,  but  blameable  rashness,  to  believe  those  things  which 
are  not  seen.     Why  should  I  now  speak  of  the  other  con- 
nections,  of  bi'others,   sisters,    sons-in-law,   and  fathers-in- 
law,  and  of  them  who  are  joined  together  by  any  kindred 
or  affinity,  if  love  is  uncertain,  and  the  will  suspected,  that 
of  parents  by  sons,  and  that  of  sons  by  parents,  whilst  due 
benevolence  is  not  rendered;  because  neither  is  it  thought 
to  be  due,  that   which  is  not  seen   in    another  not  being 
thought  to  exist.     Further,  if  this  caution  be  not  a  mark  of 
lingeni- ability^,  but  be  hateful,  wherein  we  believe  not  that  we  are 
loved,  because  we  see  not  the  love  of  them  who  love,  and 
repay  not  them,  unto  whom  we  think  not  that  we   owe  a 
return ;  to  that  degree  are  human  affairs  thrown  into  dis- 
order, if  what  we  see  not  we  believe  not,  as  to  be  altogether 
and  utterly  overthrown,  if  we  believe  no  wills  of  men,  which 
assuredly  we  cannot  see.     I  omit  to  mention  in  how  many 
things  they,  who  find  fault  with  us  because  we  believe  what 
we  see  not,  believe  report  or  history;  or  concerning  places 
where    they  have   not    themselves  been;    and    say  not,  we 
believe  not,  because  we  have  not  seen.     Since  if  they  say 
this,  they  are  obliged  to  confess  that  their  own  parents  are 
not  surely  known  to  them ;  because  on  this  point  also  they 
have  believed  the  accounts  of  others  telling  of  it,  who  yet 
are  unable  to  shew  it,  because  it  is  a  thing  already  past; 
retaining  themselves  no  sense  of  that  time,  and  yet  yielding 
assent  without  any  doubting  to  others  s})eaking  of  that  time: 


Prophecy  of  herself  the  Church'' s  proof  of  things  unseen.  5 
and  unless  this  be  done,  there  must  of  necessity  be  incuiTed    cu^ 

/.    .    1  •  1-1  •  NON  VI- 

a  faithless  impiety  towards  parents,  whilst  we  are,  as  it  were,DENTu[i 
shewing   a   rashness    of  belief  in    those    things    which    we 
cannot  see.     Since  therefore,  if  we  believe  not  those  things    iii. 
which  we  cannot  see,  human  society  itself,  through  concord 
perishing,  will  not  stand;    how  much  more  is    faith   to   be 
applied  to  divine  things,  although  they  be  not  seen;  failing 
the  application   of  which,  it  is  not  the  friendship  of  some 
men  or  other,  but  the  very  chiefest  bond  of  piety' that  isi'reli- 
violated,  so  as  for  the  chiefest  misery  to  follow.  ftoward 

5.  But  you  will  say,  the  good  will  of  a  friend  towards  me,  parents) 
although  I  cannot  see  it,  yet  can  I  trace  it  out  by  many 
proofs ;  but  you,  what  things  you  will  us  to  believe  not 
being  seen,  you  have  no  proofs  whereby  to  shew  them.  In 
the  mean  time  it  is  no  slight  thing,  that  you  confess  that  by 
reason  of  the  clearness  of  certain  proofs,  some  things,  even 
such  as  are  not  seen,  ought  to  be  believed:  for  even 
thus  it  is  agreed,  that  not  all  things  which  are  not  seen,  are 
not  to  be  believed;  and  that  saying,  '  that  we  ought  not  to 
believe  things  which  we  see  not,'  falls  to  the  ground,  cast 
away,  and  refuted.  But  they  are  much  deceived,  who  think 
that  we  believe  in  Christ  without  any  proofs  concerning 
Christ.  For  what  are  there  clearer  proofs  than  those  things, 
which  we  now  see  to  have  been  foretold  and  fulfilled  ? 
Wherefore  do  ye,  who  think  that  there  are  no  proofs  why 
ye  ought  to  believe  concerning  Christ  those  things  which  ye 
have  not  seen,  give  heed  to  what  things  ye  see.  The 
Church  herself  addresses  you  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  mother's 
love :  '  T,  whom  ye  view  with  wonder  throughout  the  whole 
world,  bearing  fruit  and  increasing,  was  not  once  such  as  ye 
now  behold  me.  But,  In  thy  Seed  shall  all  nations  deGen.22, 
blessed.  When  God  blessed  Abraham,  He  gave  the  promise  ^^' 
of  me ;  for  throughout  all  nations  in  the  blessing  of  Christ 
am  I  shed  abroad.  That  Christ  is  the  Seed  of  Abraham,  the 
order  of  successive  generations  bears  witness.  Shortly  to 
sum  up  which,  Abraham  begat  Isaac,  Isaac  begat  Jacob, 
Jacob  begat  twelve  sons,  of  whom  sprung  the  people  Israel. 
For  Jacob  himself  was  called  Israel.  Among  these  twelve 
sons  he  begat  Judah,  whence  the  Jews  have  their  name,  of 
whom  was  born  the  Virgin  Mary,  who  bore  Christ.     And,  lo, 


6  Holy  Church  recounts  prophecies  of  Christ  and  of  herself . 

DEFiDE  in  Cluist,  that  is,  in  the  seed  of  Abraham,  that  all  the  nations 
^•^^^^  are  blessed,  ye  see  and  are  amazed :  and  do  ye  still  fear  to 
believe  in  Him,  in  Whom  ye  ought  rather  to  have  feared  not 
to  believe  ?     What  ?  doubt  ye,  or  refuse  ye  to  believe,  the 
travail  of  a  Virgin,  whereas  ye  ought  rather  to  believe  that  it 
was  fitting  that  so  God  should  be  born  Man.     For  this  also 
Is.7, 14. receive  ye  to  have  been  foretold  by  the  Prophet;  Behold, 
23!      '«  Virgin  shall  conceive  in  the  womb,  and  shall  bring  forth 
a  Son,  and  they  shall  call  His  Name  Emmanuel,  which  is, 
being  interpreted,    God  with   us.      Ye  will   not    therefore 
doubt  of  a  Virgin  bringing  forth,  if  ye  be  willing  to  believe 
of  a  God  being  born ;  leaving  not   the   governance  of  the 
world,  and  coming  unto  men  in  the  flesh ;   unto  His  Mother 
bringing    fruitfulness,  not    taking   away    maidenhood.      For 
1  Mss.    thus  behoved  it  that  He  should  be  born  as  Man,  albeit'  He 
l!'"'^'  was  ever  ^  God,  by  which  birth  He  might  become  a  God  unto 
per.'       us.     Hence  again  the   Prophet  says  concerning  Him,  Tliy 
Ps.45,    Xhrone,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever ;  a  sceptre  of  right,  the 
sceptre  of  Thy  Kingdom.      Thou  hast   loved  righteousness^ 
and  hated  ini(p(ity;  therefore  God,  Thy  God,  hath  anointed 
Thee  with    the    oil    of  gladness    above   Thy  fellows.     This 
anointing   is    spiritual,  wherewith   God    anointed   God,  the 
Father,  that  is,  the  Son :    whence  called  from  the   Chrism, 
that  is,  from  the  anointing,  we  know  Him  as  Christ.     1  am 
the  Church,  concerning  whom  it  is  said  unto  Him  in  the 
same  Psalm,  and  what  was  future  foretold  as  already  done; 
There  stood  at  Thy  right  liand  the  Queen,  in  a  vesture  of 
gold,  in  raiment  of  divers  colours;  that  is,  in  the  mystery  of 
wisdom,  '  adorned  with  divers  tongues.'     There  it  said  unto 
me.  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  see,  and  incline  thine  ear, 
and  forget  thy  oivn  people  and  thy  father's  house :  for  the 
King  hath  desired  thy  beauty:  seeing  that  He  is  the  Lord 
thy  God:    and  the  daughters  of  Tyre  shall  worship  Him 
with  gifts,  tlvy  face  shall  all  the  ricJt  of  the  people  entreat. 
All  the  glory  of  that  King's  daughter  is  within,  in  fringes 
of  gold,    with   raiment   of  divers   colours.     There  shall  be 
bronght  unto   the  King  the  maidens  after  her;   her  com- 
panions shall  be  brought  unto  Thee.      They  shall  be  brought 
with    joy    and   gladness,    tlicy   shall    be    brought    into    the 
Temple  of  the    King.     Instead   of  thy  fathers,  there  are 


Fulfilment  in  conversions  of  Nations  and  calling  of  Saints.  7 

horn  unto  thee  sons,  thou  shalt  set   them  as  jJrinces  over    qvm 
the    whole    earth.       They    shall   be    mindful  of  thy   name,^^^^^.^^ 
even  from  generation    to  generation.     Therefore  shall  the 
people  confess  u7ito  thee  for  ever,  and  for  ever  and  ever. 

6.  If  this    Queen   ye  see  not,  now  rich    also  with  roj'al 
progeny.     If  she  see  not  that  fulfilled  which  she  heard  to 
have  been  promised,   she,   unto   whom  it  was  said,    Hear, 
O  daughter,  and  see.     If  she  hath  not  left  the  ancient  rites 
of  the  world,  she,  unto  whom  it  was  said.  Forget  thy  own 
people  and  thy  Father's  house.     If  she  confesses  not  every 
where  Christ   the  Lord,  she,  unto  whom  it  was   said,    The 
King  hath  desired  thy  beauty,  for  He  is  the  Lord  thy  God. 
If  she  sees  not  the  cities  of  the  nations  pour  forth  prayers 
and  offer  gifts  unto  Christ,  concerning  Whom  it  was  said 
unto  her,   There  shall  worship  Him  the  daughters  of  Tyre 
icith  gifts.     If  the  pride  also  of  the  rich  is  not  laid  aside, 
and  they  do  not  entreat  help  of  the  Church,  unto  whom  it  was 
said.  Thy  face  shall  all  the  rich  of  the  peojjle  entreat.     If 
He  acknowledges  not  the  King's  daughter,  unto  Whom  she 
was  bidden  to  say,  Our  Father,  Who  art  in   Heaven ;   and  Matt.  6, 
in  her  saints   in   the   inner  man   she  is  not  renewed   ^xom'^CQ^.i 
day   to    day,    concei*ning  whom  it  was  said.  All  the  glory  ^^• 
of  that   King's   daughter    is   within:    although    she    strike 
upon    the    eyes    of   them    also    that    are    without   with    the 
blaze"  of  the  fame  of  her  preachers,  in  diversity  of  tongues, 
as  in  fringes  of  gold,  and  raiment  of  divers  colours.     If 
there  be  not,  now  that  His  fame  is  spread  abroad  in  every 
place  by  His  good  odour,  virgins  also  brought  unto  Christ  Song  of 
to   be  consecrated,  of  Whom   it  is   said,  and  to  Whom  it      *  '  ' 
is   said.    There  shall  be  brought  unto  the  King  the  virgins 
after  her,  her  companions  shall  be  brought  unto  Thee.    And 
that  they  might  not  seem  to  be  brought  like  captives,  into 
some,  as  it  were,  prison,  he  says.  They  shall  be  brought  in  Joy 
and  gladness,  they  shall  be  brought  into  the  King's  temple. 
If  she  brings  not  forth  sons,  that  of  them  she  may  have,  as 
it  were,  fathers,  whom  she  may  appoint  unto  herself  every 
where  as  rulers,  she,  unto  whom  it  is  said.  Instead  of  thy 
fathers  there  are  born  unto  thee  sons,  thou  shalt  set  them  as 
j)rinces   over    the   whole   earth :    unto    whose   prayers   their 

*  Ben.  conj.  '  fulgente,'  for  '  fulgtntes.' 


8  The  Church  ptoves  past  facts,  not  seen,  hy  present,  seen. 

DE FIDE  mother  both  preferred  and  made  subject,  commends  herself, 

"'^^^'^  They  shall  be  tnindful  of  thy  name,  even  from  generation  to 
generation.  If,  by  reason  of  the  preachuig  of  those  same 
fathers,  wherein  they  have  without  ceasing  made  mention  of 
her  name,  there  are  not  so  great  multitudes  in  her  gathered 
together,  and  without  end  in  their  own  tongues  unto  her 
confess  the  praise  of  grace,  unto  whom  it  is  said.  Therefore 
shall  the  people  confess  unto  thee  for  ever,  and  for  ever  and 
iv,  ever.  If  these  things  are  not  so  shewn  to  be  clear,  as  that 
the  eyes  of  enemies  find  not  in  what  direction  to  turn  aside, 
where  the  same  clearness  strikes  them  not,  so  as  by  it  to  be 
obliged  to  confess  what  is  evident:  you  perhaps  assert  wiih 
reason,  that  no  proofs  are  shewn  to  you,  by  seeing  which 
you  may  believe  those  things  also  which  you  see  not.  But 
if  those  things,  which  you  see,  both  have  been  foretold  long 
before,  and  are  so  clearly  fulfilled ;  if  the  truth  itself  makes 
itself  clear  to  you,  by  efiects'^  going  before  and  following 
after,  O  i-emnant  of  unbelief,  that  ye  may  believe  the  things 
which  you  see  not,  blush  at  those  things  which  ye  see. 

7.  'Give  heed  unto  me,  the  Church  says  unto  you;  .give 
heed  unto  me,  whom  ye  see,  although  to  see  ye  be  unwilling. 
For  the  faithful,  who  were  in  those  times  in  the  land  of 
Judaea,  were  present  at,  and  learnt  as  present,  Christ's  won- 
derful birth  of  a  virgin,  and  His  passion,  resurrection, 
ascension;  all  His  divine  words  and  deeds.  These  things 
ye  have  not  seen,  and  therefore  ye  refuse  to  believe.  There- 
fore behold  these  things,  fix  your  eyes  on  these  things,  these 
things  which  ye  see  reflect  on,  which  are  not  told  you  as 
things  past,  nor  foretold  you  as  things  future,  but  are  shewn 
you  as  things  present.  What  ?  seemeth  it  to  you  a  vain  or  a 
light  thing,  and  think  you  it  to  be  none,  or  a  little,  divine 
miracle,  that  in  the  name  of  One  Crucified  the  whole  human 
race  runs?     Ye    saw   not   what   was   foretold  and  fulfilled 

Ts.7, 14.  concerning  the  human  birth  of  Christ,  Behold,  a  Virgin  shall 
conceive  in  the  womb,  and  shall  bear  a  Son  ;  but  you  see 
the  Word  of  God   which  was    foretold    and    fulfilled    unto 

Gen. 22,  Abraham,  I/i  thy  seed  shall    all   nations    be  blessed.      Ye 

18. 

<•  The  Prophecy  might  be  called  an  words  going  before  and  effects  following 
'effect'  as  well  as  its  fulfilment;  or  after.'  For  further  illustration  see  St. 
read  '  verbis'    for    '  vobis/  *  clear  by     Aug.  on  Ps.  46. 


FulfilmentinPassion  andResurrection  unseen;  in  Church  seen  9 
saw  not  «hat  was  foretold  concerning  the  wonderful  works    Qu^ 

NON  VI* 

of  Christ,  Come  ye,  and  see  the  works  of  the  Lord,  what  dentub 
wonders  He  hath  set  upoti  the  earth:  but  ye  see  that  which  Ps.46,8. 
was  foretold,  The  Lord  said  unto  Me,  My  Son  art  Thou,  IPs.  2,  7. 
have  this  day  begotten  Thee;  demand  of  Me  and  I  will  give  ^^^^  ^ 
Thee  nations  as  Thy  inheritance,  and  as  Thy  possession  the  5;  5,5. 
bounds  of  the  earth.     Ye  saw  not  that  which  was  foretold 33/    ' 
and  fulfilled  concerning  the  Passion  of  Christ,  They  pierced  Ps.  22, 
My  hands  and  My  feet,  they  numbered  all  My  bones;  but  they  \^  ^'' 
themselves  regarded  and  beheld  Me;  they  divided  among  them  John  19, 
My  garments,  and  upon  My  vesture  they  cast  the  lot;  but  ye"  " 
see  that  which  was  in  the  same  Psalm  foretold,  and  now  is 
clearly  fulfilled ;  All  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  remember  Ps.  22, 
and  be  turned  unto  the  Lord,  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the   '"'"' 
nations  shall  worship  in  His  sight;  for  the  kingdom  is  the 
Lord''s,  and  He  shall  rule  over  the  nations.     Ye  saw  not 
what  was  foretold  and  fulfilled  concerning  the  Eesurrection 
of  Christ,  the  Psalm  speaking,  in  His  Person,  first  concerning 
His  betrayer  and  persecutors  :   They  went  forth  out  of  doors,  pg.  41^ 
and  spake  together :  against  Me  whispered  all  My  eneniies,^^—^' 
against  Me  thought  they  evil  for  Me;  they  set  in  order  an 
unrighteous  word  against   3Ie.     Where,  to  shew  that  they 
availed  nothing  by  slaying  Him  Who  was  about  to  rise  again, 
He  adds  and  says;    What?    will  not  He,  tJiat  sleeps,  add 
this,  that  He  rise  again  ?    And  a  little  after,  when  He  had 
foretold,  by  means  of  the   same  prophecy,  concerning  His 
betrayer  himself,  that  which  is  written  iu  the  Gospel  also. 
He  that  did  eat  of  My  bread,  enlarged  his  heel  upon  Me,Ps.4i, 
that  is,  trampled  Me  under  foot:    He   straightway   added,^-^^*. 
But  do  Thou,  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  Me,  and  raise  Thou 
Me  up  again,  and  I  shall  repay  them.     This  was  fulfilled, 
Christ  slept  and  awoke,  that  is,  rose  again:  Who  through 
the  same  prophecy  in  another  Psalm  says,  /  slept  and  took  Ps.  4, 8. 
my  rest;  and  I  rose  again, for  the  Lord  will  uphold  Me. 
But  this  ye  saw  not,  but  ye  see   His   Church,  concerning 
whom  it  is  written  in  like  manner,  and  fulfilled,  O  Lord  My  jer.  \g, 
God,  the  nations  shall  come  unto  Thee  from  the  extremity  ^^• 
of  the  earth  and  shall  say,  Truly  our  fathers  ivorshipped 
lying  images,  and  there  is  not  in  them  any  pro/it.     This 
certainly,  whether  ye  will  or  no,  ye  behold;  even  although 


1 0  Fall  of  idols,  worship  every  where.  Past,  Presen  t,  and  FiUure 

DEFiDpye  yet  believe,  that  there  either  is,  or  was,  in  those  idols 
^^'^"'^^  some  profit;  yet  certainly  unnumbered  peoples  of  the  nations, 
after  having  left,  or  cast  away,  or  broken  in  pieces  such  like 
Jer.  16,  vanities,  ye  have  heard  say,   Truly  our  fathers  worshipped 
'     '''  lying  imayes,  and  titere  is  not  in  them  any  profit ;  shall  a 
man  make  gods,  and,  lo,  they  are  no  gods  ?     Nor  think  that 
it  was  foretold  that  the  nations  should  come  unto  some  one 
place  of  God,  in  that  it  was  said,  Unto  Tliee  shall  the  nations 
come  from  the  extremity  of  the  earth.     Understand,  if  you 
can,  that  unto  the  God  of  the  Christians,  Who  is  the  Supreme 
and   True   God,  the   peoples   of  the  nations   come,  not  by 
walking,  but   by  believing.     For   the    same    thing    was   by 
Zeph.  2,  another  Prophet  thus  foretold,  Ttte  Lord,  saith  he,  shall  pre- 
vail  against  them,  and  shall  utterly  destroy  all  the  gods  of 
the   nations  of  tlie  eartJi  :   and,  all  the  isles  of  the  nations 
shall  tvorship  Him,  each  man  from  his  place.     Whereas  the 
one  says,  Unto  Thee  all  nations  shall  come ;  this  the  other 
says,  '  They  shall  worship  Him,  each  man  from  his  place.' 
Therefore  they  shall  come  unto   Him,   not  departing  from 
their  own  place,  because  believing  in  Him  they  shall  find 
Him  in  their  hearts.     Ye   saw  not  what  was   foretold   and 
Ps.  108,  fulfilled  concerning  the  ascension  of  Christ;  Be  Tliou  exalted 
above  the  Heavens,  O  God;   but  ye  see  what  follows  imme- 
diately  after.  And  above  all  tlie  earth.    Thy    Glory.     Those 
things  concerning  Christ  already  done  and  past,  all  of  them 
ye  have  not  seen  ;  but  these  things  present  in  His  Church  ye 
deny  not  that  ye  see.     Both  things  we  point  out  to  you  as 
foretold ;  but  the  fulfilment  of  both  we  are  therefore  unable 
to  point  out  for  you  to  see,  because  we  cannot  bring  back 
into  sight  things  past. 
y  8.  But  as   the  wills  of  friends,  which   are   not  seen,  are 

believed  through  tokens  which  are  seen;  thus  the  Church, 
which  is  now  seen,  is,  of  all  things  which  are  not  seen, 
but  which  are  shewn  forth  in  those  writings  wherein  itself 
also  is  foretold,  an  index  of  the  past,  and  a  herald  of  the 
future.  Because  both  things  past,  which  cannot  now  be 
seen,  and  things  j^resent  which  cannot  be  seen  all  of  them, 
at  the  time  at  which  they  were  foretold,  no  one  of  these 
could  then  be  seen.  Therefore,  since  they  have  begun  to 
come  to  pass  as  they  were  foretold,  from  those  things  which 


in  the  Church.    Witness,  and  foretold  state  of  the  Jews.  II 


have  come  to  pass  unto  those  which  are  coining  to  pass,  qu^ 
those  things  which  were  foretold  concerning  Christ  and  the  dentur 
Church  have  run  on  in  an  ordered  series:  unto  which  series 
these  pertain  concerning  the  day  of  Judgment,  concerning 
tlie  resurrection  of  the  dead,  concerning  the  eternal  damna- 
tion of  the  ungodly  with  the  devil,  and  concerning  the 
eternal  recompense  of  the  godly  with  Christ,  things  which, 
foretold  in  like  manner,  are  yet  to  come.  Why  therefore 
should  we  not  believe  the  first  and  the  last  things  which  we 
see  not,  when  we  have,  as  witnesses  of  both,  the  things 
between,  which  we  see,  and  in  the  books  of  the  Prophets 
either  hear  or  read  both  the  first  things,  and  the  things 
between,  and  the  last  things,  foretold  before  they  came  to 
pass?  Unless  haply  unbelieving  men  judge  those  things  to 
have  been  written  by  Christians,  in  order  that  those  things 
which  they  already  believed  might  have  greater  weight  of 
authority,  if  they  should  be  thought  to  have  been  promised 
before  they  came. 

9.  If  they  suspect   this,  let  them  examine  carefully  the     vL 
copies'  of  our  enemies  the  Jews.     There  let  them  read  those '  codices 
things  of  which  we  have  made  mention,  foretold  concerning 
Christ   in    Whom    we   believe,  and  the   Church  whom  we 
discern  from  the  toilsome   beginning  of  faith  even  unto  the 
eternal  blessedness  of  the  kingdom.     But,  whilst  they  read, 
let  them  not  wonder  that  they,  whose  are  the  books,  under- 
stand not  by  reason  of  the  darkness  of  enmity.     For  that  they 
would  not  understand  was  foretold  beforehand  by  the  same 
Prophets;    which    it    behoved    should    be    fulfilled  in    like 
manner  as  the  rest,  and  that  by  the  secret  and  just  judgment 
of  God  a  due  punishment  should  be  rendered  to  their  deserts. 
He  indeed.  Whom  they  crucified,  and  unto  Whom  they  gave 
gall  and  vinegar,  although  when  hanging  upon  the  Tree,  by 
reason  of  those  whom  He  had  been  about  to  lead  forth  from 
darkness  into  light.  He  said  unto  the  Father,  Forgive  ihem,'Lule23, 
for  they  knoic  not  wliat    thetj  do;  yet  by  reason  of  those     * 
whom  through  more  hidden  causes  He  had  been  about  to 
desert,  by  the  Prophet  so  long  before  foretold,  Theij  gave  Me^s.  69, 
gall  for  My  meat,  and  in  My  thirst  they  gave  Me  vinegar  to     ~ 
drink;  let  their  table  become  a  snare   before  them,  and  a 
recompense,    and    a     slumhling-hlock :    let    their    eyes    be 


12  The  Jews  preserved  to  attest  their  Scriptures. 

jiEFivTs  darketied  that  theij  see  not,  and  ever  how  Thou  down  their 

.^^"^^^  hack.  Thus,  having  with  them  the  clearest  testimonies  of 
our  cause,  they  walk  round  about  with  eyes  darkened,  that 
by  their  means  those  testimonies  may  be  proved,  wherein 
they  themselves  are  disapproved.  Therefore  was  it  brought 
to  pass,  that  they  should  not  be  so  blotted  out,  as  that  this  same 
sect  should  altogether  exist  not:  but  it  was  scattered  abroad 
upon  the  earth,  in  order  that,  carrying  with  it  the  prophecies 
of  the  grace  conferred  upon  us,  more  surely  to  convince  un- 
believers, it  might  every  where  profit  us.  And  this  very 
thing  which  I  assert,  receive  ye  after  w^hat  manner  it  was 

Ps.  59,  prophesied  of:  Slay  them  not,  saith  He,  lest  at  any  time 
titey  forget  Thy  law,  but  scatter  them  abroad  in  Thy  miyht. 
Therefore  they  were  not  slain,  in  that  they  forgot  not  those 
things  which  were  read  and  heard  among  them.  For  if  they 
were  altogether  to  forget,  albeit  they  understand  not,  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  they  would  be  slain  in  the  Jewish  ritual 
itself;  because,  when  the  Jews  should  know  nothing  of  the 
Law  and  of  the  Prophets,  they  would  be  unable  to  profit 
us.  Therefore  they  were  not  slain,  but  scattered  abroad  ;  in 
order  that,  although  they  should  not  have  in  faith,  whence 
they  might  be  saved;  yet  they  should  retain  in  their  memory, 
whence  we  might  be  helped;  in  their  books  our  supporters, 
in  their  hearts  our  enemies,  in  their  copies  our  witnesses. 
vii.  10.  Although,  even  if  there  went  before  no   testimonies 

concerning  Christ  and  the  Church,  whom  ought  it  not  to 
move  unto  belief,  that  the  Divine  brightness  hath  on  a  sudden 
shone  on  the  human  race,  when  we  see,  (the  false  gods  now 
abandoned,  and  their  images  every  where  broken  in  pieces, 
their  temples  overthrown  or  changed  into  other  uses,  and  so 
many  vain  rites  plucked  out  by  the  roots  from  the  most 
inveterate  usage  of  men,)  the  One  True  God  invoked  by  all? 
And  that  this  hath  been  brought  to  pass  by  One  Man,  by 
men  mocked,  seized,  bound,  scourged,  smitten  with  the  palms 
of  the  hand,  reviled,  crucified,  slain  :   His  disciples,  (whom 

MdiotasHe  chose  common  men  ^,  and  unlearned,  and  fishermen,  and 
publicans,  that  by  their  means  His  teaching  might  be  set 
forth,)  proclaiming  His  Resurrection,  His  Ascension,  which 
they  asserted  that  they  had  seen,  and  being  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  sounded  forth  this  Gospel,  in  all  tongues  which 


Success  of  the  Gospel,  as  foretold,  proves  God's  Name.   13 
they  had  not  learned.     And  of  tiiera  who  heard  them,  part    qvje 

NON  VI 
DENTUR 


believed,   part,  believing  not,  fiercely  withstood  them  who 


preached.     Thus  while  they  were  faithful  even  unto  death 

for  the  truth,  strove  not  by  returning  evil,  but  by  enduring, 

overcame  not  by  killing,  but  by  dying ;  thus  was  the  world 

changed  unto  this  religion,  thus  unto  this  Gospel  were  the 

heai'ts  of  mortals  turned,  of  men  and   women,  of  small  and 

great,  of  learned    and    unlearned,    of  wise  and  foolish,  of 

mighty  and  weak,  of  noble  and  ignoble,  of  high  and  low,  and 

throughout  all  nations  the  Church  shed  abroad  so  increased, 

that  even  against  the  Catholic  faith  itself  there  arises  not 

any  perverse  sect,  any  kind  of  error,  which  is  found  so  to 

oppose  itself  to  Christian  truth,  as  that  it  affect  not  and  go 

not  about  to  glory  in  the  name  of  Christ:  which  very  error 

would  not  be  suffered  to  spring  up  throughout  the   earth, 

were  it  not  that  the  very  gainsaying  exercised  an  wholesome 

discipline.      How'   would  The  Crucified    have   availed    so  '  lit. 

'  wliGn 
greatly,  had  He  not  been  God  that  took  upon  Him  Man, 

even  if  He  had  through  the  Prophet  foretold  no  such  things 

to  come  ?     But  when  now  this  so  great  mystery  of  godliness 

hath  had  its  prophets  and  heralds  going  before,  by  whose 

divine  voices  it  was  afore  proclaimed ;    and  when  it  hath 

come  in  such  manner  as  it  was  afore   proclaimed,  who  is 

there  so  mad  as  to  assert  that  the  Apostles  lied  concerning 

Christ,  of  Whom  they  preached  that  He  was  come  in  such 

manner  as  the  Prophets  foretold  afore  that  He  should  come, 

which  Prophets  were  not  silent  as  to  true  things  to  come 

concerning  the  Apostles  themselves  .''     For  concerning  these 

they  had  said.  There  is  neither  speech  nor  language,  whereof  Vs.  19, 

O     A 

their  voices  are  not  heard;  their  sound  went  out  into  all  the  '  ' 
earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world.  And  this 
at  any  rate  we  see  fulfilled  in  the  world,  although  we  have 
not  yet  seen  Christ  in  the  flesh.  Who  therefore,  unless  blinded 
by  amazing  madness,  or  hard  and  steeled  by  amazing 
obstinacy,  would  be  unwilling  to  put  faith  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  which  have  foretold  the  faith  of  the  whole 
world  ? 

11.  But  you,  beloved,  who  possess  this  faith,  or  who  have    viii. 
begun  now  newly  to  have  it,  let  it  be  nourished  and  increase 
in  you.     For  as  things  temporal  have  come,  so  long  before 


14  Prophecy  speaks  of  evils  avou-ed  the  Church. 

°^*^°^  foretold  ,  so  will  Ihino-s  eternal  also  come,  which  are  promised. 

RERUM  P  '     ,  ^ 

Qu^    Nor  let  them   deceive  you,  either  the  vain  heathen,  or  the 

DENTUR^^^^®    Jews,    or    the    deceitful    heretics,    or  also  within   the 

Catholic  (Church)  itself  evil  Christians,  enemies  by  so  much 

the  more  hurtful,  as  they  are  the  more  within  us.     For,  lest 

on  this  subject  also    the  weak  should  be  troubled,   divine 

prophecy  hath  not  been  silent,  where  in  the  Song  of  Songs 

the  Bridegroom  speaking  unto  the  Bride,  that  is,  Christ  the 

Song  of  Lqi.(]   m^tQ    tijj.   Church,  saith,   As  a  lily  in  the  midst  of 

^  prox'i-  thorns,  so  is  my  best  Beloved^  in  the  midst  of  the  daughters. 

Mat.13  ^^^  ^^^^  "*^*''  ^"  *^^®  midst  of  them  that  ai'e  without ;  but,  in 
9'  the  midst  of  daughters.      Whoso  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 

hear:  and  whilst  the  net  which  is  cast  into  the  sea,  and 
ib.47-50.  gathers  together  all  kinds  of  fishes,  as  saith  the  holy  Gospel, 
is  being  drawn  unto  the  shore,  that  is,  unto  the  end  of  the 
world,  let  him  separate  himself  from  the  evil  fishes,  in  heart, 
not  in  body  ;  by  changing  evil  habits,  not  by  breaking  sacred 
nets ;  lest  they  who  now  seem  being  approved  to  be 
mingled  with  the  reprobate,  find,  not  life,  but  punishment 
everlasting  %  when  they  shall  begin  on  the  shore  to  be 
separated. 

e  Some  Mss.  '  that  they  &c.  may  find  not  punishment,  but  life.' 


S.    AUGUSTINE 


OF 


FAITH,  AND  OF  THE  CREED. 


.  Aug.  Retract,  i.  17.    About  the  same  time  in  the  presence  and  by  order  a.d.393. 
of  the  Bishops,  -who  were  holding  a  full  Council  of  Africa  at  Hippo- 
Regius,  1  discoursed,  as  a  Presbyter,  of  Faith  and  the  Creed.     Which 
discourse,  at  the  very  earnest  request  of  some  particular  friends,  I  have 
formed  into  a  book ;  in  which  the  truths  themselves  are  treated  of,  with- 
out adopting  the  form  of  words  which  is  given  to  the  Competentes  to 
learn  by  heart.     In  this  book,  in  treating  of  the  Resurrection  of  the 
flesh,  I  say,  "  The  body  will  rise  again  according  to  Christian  Faith,  Cap.  10. 
"  which  cannot  deceive.     He  who  thinks  this  incredible  attends  to  what  See  S. 
"  the  flesh  is  now,  but  does  not  consider  what  it  will  then  be;  because  in  that  Tyrj,- 
"  time  of  our  angelical  change  it  will  be  no  more  flesh  and  blood,  but  only  xiv,  72. 
"  body;"  and  the  restofwhati  there  say  of  the  change  of  terrestrial  bodies 
into  celestial  bodies,  because  the  Apostle  said  in  speaking  thereof,  Flesh  ^     °^' 
and  blood  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.    But  whoso  takes  this  so      ' 
as  to  think  that  the  earthly  body,  such  as  we  have  now,  is  in  resurrection 
so  changed  into  a  heavenly  body,  as  that  there  will  be  no  limbs  nor 
substance  of  flesh,  must  doubtless  be  set  right  by  reminding  him  of  the 
Lord's  Body,  who  appeared  after  Resurrection  in  the  same  members, 
not  only  to  be  seen  by  the  eyes,  but  also  to  be  handled  with  the  hands, 
and  even  proved  Himself  to  have  flesh  by  discourse,  saying.  Handle  Me,  Luke 
and  see,  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  hones,  as  ye  see  Me  have.  Whence      ' 
it  is  plain  that  the  Apostle  did  not  deny  that  there  will  be  the  substance 
of  flesh  in  the  Kingdom  of  God ;  but  either  called  men  who  were  after 
the  flesh  '  flesh  and  blood,'  or  the  corruption  of  the  flesh  itself,  which 
then  surely  will  be  no  more.     For  when  he  had  said,  Flesh  and  blood 
shall  not  inJieiHt  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  is  right  to  understand  him  as 
having  added  for  explanation  what  follows  directly.  Neither  shall  cor- 
ruption inherit  incorruption.     Of  which  point,  on  which  it  is  so  difficult 
to  convince  unbelievers,  any  one  who  will  read  my  last  book  '  On  the  Cap.  5. 
City  of  God'  will  see  that  I  have  treated  with  all  the  pains  I  could  ^^"^  ^^' 
bestow. 


16       The  Faith  of  the  Greed  guarded  by  e.vplanalions. 

DEFiDE  Seeing  that  it  hath  been  written  and  confirmed  by  most 
goLo."  strong  authority  of  ApostoHc  teaching,  That  the  just  liveth 
i]  of  faith ;  and  that  this  faith  requires  of  us  the  duly  both  of 
Hab.  2,  heart  and  tongue :  for  the  Apostle  says,  WitJi  the  heart  man 
Eom.  1  helieveth  unto  rigldeoumess,  and  with  the  mouth  confession 
IT*,        is  made  unto  salvation :  it  behoveth  that  we  be  mindful  both 

Gal,  3,  ... 

11.        of  righteousness  and  of  salvation.     Since  of  a  truth  bemg 
1^^^*  ^^' about   to   reign   hereafter   in    everlasting   righteousness,  we 
Eom.     cannot  be  saved  from  this  present  evil  world,  unless  also 
'     "  we   ourselves,  striving  for  the  salvation  of  our  neighbours, 
make  profession  likewise,  with  the  mouth,  of  the  faith  which 
we  bear  in  the  heart :  and  that  this  faith  be  not  in  any  part 
violated  in  ourselves  by  the  deceitful  craftiness  of  heretics, 
we  must  with  pious  and  cautious  vigilance  provide.    However 
the  Catholic  Faith  in  the  Creed  is  known  to  the  faithful,  and 
committed  to  memory,  with  as  much  brevity  of  speech  as  the 
matter  allowed,  in  order  that,  to  those  who  have  been  born 
again    in  Christ,  commencing    and    still    suckling,   not   yet 
strengthened  by  most  diligent    and  spiritual  handling  and 
knowledge    of  the    divine   Scriptures,   there    might   be    put 
together  in  few  words  for  their  belief,  what  was  afterwards  in 
many    words   to   be   expounded    to    them    as   they   should 
advance,    and    rise    unto    divine    doctrine    by    the    assured 
firmness  of  humility  and  charity.     Wherefore  beneath  these 
very  few  words  put  together  in  the  Creed,  the  most  part  of 
heretics  have  endeavoured  to  hide  their  poisons ;  whom  the 
Divine   merc}'^  hath  resisted  and   yet   resists    by  means   of 
spiritual  men.     Wlio  in  respect  of  the  Catholic  Faith  have 
obtained,  not  only  to  receive  and  believe  it  in  these  words, 
but  further,  by  the  enlightening  of  the  Lord,  to  understand 
Is.  7,  9.  and  know  it.     For  it  is  written,  Unless  ye  shall  believe,  ye 
shall  not  understand.     But  the  handling  of  the  Faith  avails 
to  the  fortifying  of  the  Creed:  not  that  itself  should  be  given 
in  place  of  the  Creed,  to  those  who  are  now  obtaining  the 
grace  of  God,  to  be  committed  to  memory  and  repeated,  but 
that  those  things  which   are  contained  in  the  Creed  it  may 
guard    against  the  lyings  in    wait  of  heretics   by  Catholic 
authority,  and  by  a  more  fortified  defence. 
ii,         2.  For  certain  have  endeavoured  to  persuade  that  God  the 


Omnipotence  implies  creation  of  matter  fro)n  notliintj.   17 
Father  is  not  Almighty;  not  that  tliey  have  dared  to  assert  deftdh 

,    .  ,  ...  T    .  •     4       1  /•       .1  ETSYM- 

this,  but  in  then-  own  traditions  are  convicted  ot  thus  bolo. 
holding  and  believing.  For  wherein  they  assert  that  there 
is  a  nature'  which  God  Almighty  created  not,  out  of  which 
nature  however  He  framed  this  world,  which  they  grant 
halh  been  beautifully  set  in  order;  they  so  deny  God  to  be 
Almighty,  as  not  to  beheve  that  He  could  have  created  the 
world,  unless  for  the  framing  of  it  He  should  nialie  use  of 
another  nature,  which  was  already  in  existence,  and  which 
Himself  had  not  created  ;  forsooth  from  their  carnal  use  of 
seeing  smiths,  and  house-builders,  and  workmen  of  all  kinds, 
who,  unless  they  be  aided  by  materials  already  prepared, 
are  unable  to  arrive  at  the  effect  of  their  own  art.  For  in 
this  way  they  understand  the  Framer  of  the  world  not  to  be 
Almighty,  if  He  were  unable  to  frame  the  world,  unless  these 
should  aid  Him,  after  the  manner  of  materials,  some  nature 
not  framed  by  Him.  Or  if  they  allow  that  God  the  Framev 
of  the  world  is  Almighty,  they  must  of  necessity  confess  that 
He  made  of  nothing:  those  thinos  which  He  made.  For 
there  cannot  exist  any  thing,  whereof  He  were  not  Creator, 
being  Almighty.  Because  although  something  He  made  out 
of  something,  as  man  out  of  clay,  yet  assuredly  He  made 
not  out  of  that  which  Himself  had  not  made ;  for  the  earth, 
whence  the  clay  was.  He  had  made  out  of  nothing.  And  if 
the  very  heaven  and  earth,  that  is,,  the  world  and  all  things 
which  are  in  it,  He  had  made  out  of  some  material,  as  it  is 

written,  TJioii  Who  hast  made  the  world  of  matter  unseen. '^is^. 

•  ■  .  •  .1117 

or  also,  without  form,  as  certain  copies  have  ;  in  no  way  is     ' 

it  to  be  believed  that  that  very  matter  out  of  which  the  world 
was  made,  although  without  form.,  although  unseen,  in  what- 
soever manner  it  existed,  could  have  existed  of  itself,  as  if 
coeternal  and  coeval  with  God  :  but  its  manner,  w  hatever  it 
was,  which  it  had,  so  as,  in  whatsoever  manner,  to  exist,  and 
to  be  capable  of  receiving  the  forms  of  things  distinct,  it  had 
not,  save  from  the  Almighty  God,  by  Whose  goodness  exists 
not  only  whatsoever  thing  is  foinned,  but  also  whatsoever  is 
formable.  For  between  the  formed  and  the  formable  there 
is  this  difference,  that  the  formed  hath  already  received  form, 

*  Of  the  Manichean  doctrine,  see  note  at  the  end  of  the  Translation  of  St. 
Augustine's  Confessions. 


18     Christ  the  Only  Son,  the  Word,  the  Wisdom  of  God. 

nE  FIDE  but  the  formable  is  capable  of  receiving  it.     But  He  Who 

BOLo.  on  things  bestows  form,  Himself  also  bestows  the  power  of 

receiving  form  ;    seeing  that  of  Him  and  in  Him  is  of  all 

\®P!°'°" things  the  most  kindly  kind',  unchangeable:   and  therefore 

sissima      ^.  .  .  . 

species.  Himself  is  One,  Who  to  each  thing  assigns,  not  only  that  it 
be  beautiful,  but  also  that  it  be  capable  of  beauty.  Where- 
fore most  rightly  do  we  believe  that  God  hath  made  all 
things  out  of  nothing:  because,  even  although  the  world 
have  been  made  of  some  material,  that  very  same  material 
hath  been  made  out  of  nothing ;  so  that  by  the  most  ordered 
gift  of  God,  there  should  take  place  first  a  capacity  of 
receiving  forms,  and  afterward  all  things,  whatsoever  have 
been  formed,  should  be  formed.  But  this  we  have  said,  that 
no  one  may  imagine  that  the  sentences  of  the  divine  Scrip- 
tures are  opposed  one  to  another,  seeing  that  it  is  written, 
both  that  God  created  all  things  out  of  nothing,  and  that  the 
world  was  made  out  of  matter  without  form. 

3.  Believing  therefore  in  God   the  Father  Almighty,  we 

ought  to   think   that  there  is   no    creature   which   was   not 

created   by   the  Almighty.      And,  because   He   created    all 

.J(>hni4,j}jj^^g.g  by  the  Word,  which  Word  is  called  also  the  Truth, 

]  Cor.  1,  and  the  Power,  and  the  AVisdom  of  God,  and   under  many 

^^'         other  names  is  He  suggested.  Who  is  commended  to  our 

faith,  Jesus   Christ,  the   Lord  our  Redeemer,  that  is,  and 

Ruler,  the  Son  of  God:  for  that  Word,  by  Whom  all  things 

were  made,  could  none  other  beget,  save  He,  Who  by  Him 

iii.     made  all  things:  we  believe  also  in  Jesus  Christ  the  Son 

OF  God,  thp:  Only-begotten,  that  is,  the  only  Son  of  the 

Father,  our  Lord.     Of  which  Word,  notwithstanding,  we 

ought  to  conceive  not  as  of  our  own  words,  which  being  put 

forth  by  the  voice  and  mouth,  strike  upon  the  air,  and  pass 

away,  nor  exist  any  longer  than  they  sound.    For  that  Word 

abideth  unchangeably :   for  of  This  very  Word  it  was  said, 

\yisd.  7,  when  it  was  said  of  Wisdom,  In  Herself  ahidiny  She  maketh 

all  tilings  new.    But  therefore  v>"as  He  called  the  Word  of  the 

Father,  because  by  Him   the  Father  is  made  known.      As 

therefore  by  our  words  this  is  our  purpose,  when  we  speak 

the  truth,  that  our  own  mind  may  become  known  to  him 

who  hears  us,  and  that  whatsoever  we   bear  secret  in  our 

heart,  may  by  means  of  signs  of  this  sort  be  brought  forth 


The  Word  is  from  tlte  Father,  not  as  our  uords  from  us.   19 

for  another  to  understand;  so  That  Wisdom  Which  God  theoEFiDE 
Father  begat,  seeing  that  by  It  there  is  made  known  unto    bold. 
worthy  minds    the    most   hidden   Father,  is    most   suitably 
called  His  Word. 

4.  But  there  is  a  very  great  interval  between  our  mind 
and  our  words,  by  which  we  endeavour  to  make  known  this 

our  mind.  That  is,  we  do  not  beget  audible'  words,  but'sonan- 
make  them,  and  body  is  the  subject-matter  for  making 
them.  But  there  is  a  very  great  difference  between  mind 
and  body.  But  God  when  He  begat  the  Word,  begat 
That  which  Himself  is :  nor  yet  out  of  nothing,  nor  out  of 
any  matter  already  made  and  created;  but  out  of  Himself  That 
which  Himself  Is.  For  this  we  also  endeavour,  in  speaking, 
if  we  diligently  consider  the  aim  of  our  will ;  not  when  we 
lie,  but  when  we  speak  the  truth.  For  what  other  thing  do 
we  attempt,  than  to  carry  our  very  mind,  if  practicable,  into 
the  mind  of  the  hearer,  that  he  may  know  and  see  it 
thoroughly;  that  we  may  indeed  ourselves  remain  within 
ourselves,  and  not  depart  from  ourselves,  and  yet  may  put 
forth  such  a  sign  as  that  there  be  produced  in  the  other 
a  knowledge  of  us ;  that  so,  as  far  as  the  power  is  granted, 
there  be  put  forth  by  the  mind  as  it  were  another  mind 
wherebv  to  declare  itself?  This  we  do  endeavouring  both  bv 
words  ""j  and  by  the  very  sound  of  the  voice,  by  the  counte- 
nance, and  by  the  gesture  of  the  body,  that  is  to  say,  by  so 
many  contrivances  desiring  to  shew  that  which  is  within  : 
because  .we  are  unable  to  put  forth  some  such  thing,  and 
therefore  the  mind  of  him  who  speaks  cannot  become 
entirely  known;  whence  also  there  is  a  place  open  for  lies. 
But  God  the  Father,  Who  both  willed  and  was  able  to  declare 
Himself  most  truly  to  minds  about  to  know  Him,  This  begat 
in  order  to  declare  Himself,  Which  Himself  Is  Who  begat ; 
Who  also  is  called  His  Power  and  Wisdom,  because  by 
Him  He  wrought  and  set  in  order  all  things ;  of  Whom 
therefore  it  is  said.  It  reacheth  from  one  end  even  unto  the  W\sd. 8, 
other  end  in  Its  strength,  and  setteth  all  things  in  order  in 
Its  sweetness. 

5.  Wherefore  the  Only-begotten  Son  of  God  was  neither     i^^- 
made  by  the  Father;  because, as  the  Evangelist  says,  All  things  ^°^°  ^» 

''  al.  making  effort  with  the  offspring  of  a  word. 
C  2 


20  The  Son  uncreated,  and  equal  in  Godhead,  i/et  made  Man. 

vEFioE  taere  made  by  Hint;  nor  begotten  in  liine^,  seeing  that  God 

BOLo.'^'^^^S  ever-etenially  wise,  liath  with  Himself  His  evev-eternal 

^extern-  Wisdom  ;  nor  unequal  to  the  Father,  that  is,  in  any  thing 

PhT  2  ^^^^'■>  because  also  the  Aposlle  says,  JV'io,  being  set  in  the 

6.  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robber g  to  be  equal  with  God. 

Wherefore  by  this  Catholic   Faith    both   they  are  excluded 

who  say,  that  the   Same  Who   is   tlie   Father  is   the   Son : 

because  botli  this  Word  could  not  be  with  God,  save  only  with 

God   the  Father,  and  He  Who  is  alone  is  equal  to  none. 

'St.Ath.They  also  are  excluded  who  say  that  the  Son  is  a  creature, 

^'^^■.  4^*  although   not  such   as  are  the  rest  of  creatures.     For  how 

great    soever  they  may   say   that  a   creature   is,  if  it   is  a 

creature,  it  hath  been  created  and  made.     For  condere  (to 

build)  is  the  same  as  creare  (to  create),  although  in  the  usage 

of  the  Latin   tongue   creare  is   sometimes   said,   where   the 

proper  word    is  gignere  (to  beget);    but   the   Greeks  make 

a  distinction.     For  we  call  creatura  what  they  call  xri(rixa 

or  Krl(Tis;  and  when  we  wish  to  speak  without  any  ambiguity, 

we  say  not,  creare,  but  condere  (to  build).   If  therefore  the  Son 

be  a  creature,  how  great  soever  it  be,  it  hath  been  made.    But 

we  believe  in  Him,  by  Whom  all  things  were  made,  not  in 

Him  by  Whom  all  other  things  were  made :  for  neither  in 

this  place  can  we  understand,  all,  in  any  other  sense,  than, 

whatsoever  things  have  been  made. 

John  1,       But  since  tJie  Word  teas  ?Jiade  Flesh  and  dwelt  among  us, 

the  same  Wisdom  which  was  begotten  of  God,  deigned  also 

3  al. '  a- to  be  created  among  men  ^.     And  to  this  applies  the  saying, 

all  Tlie  Lord  created  *  me  in  the  beginning  of  His  ways.     For 

rtiings.'  ^i^y  beginning  of  His  ways  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  which 

22.       'is  Christ  clothed   in  human   nature,  by  Whom    should   be 

sessed'   gi^'©'^   unto  US  an  example  of  life,   that  is,   a   certain   way 

^e^'       whereby  we  might  attain  unto  God.     For,  save  by  humility, 

*we  were  unable  to  return,  who  fell  by  pride,  as  was  said 

Gen.  3,  unto  our  first  creation,  Taste,  and  ye  shall  be  as  Gods.     An 

example    therefore    of   this    humility,    that    is,    of  the   way 

whereby  it  was  necessary  that  we  should  return,  our  Restorer 

e.  \[    '  Himself  hath  deigned  to  shew  us  in  Himself,  Who  thought 

it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  yet  emptied  Himself, 

receiving  the  form  of  a  servant;  that  He  might  be  created 

a  Man  in  the  beginning  of  His  ways,  the  Word  by  Whom 


The  Son  tauyht  Moses  His  own  Naine,  I  AM.         21 

all  things  were  created.     AVherefore  according  to  this,  thatDEFirE 
He  is  the  Only-begotten,  He  hath  not  brethren;  according    bolo." 
to   this,  however,   that  He   is    the  First-begotten,   He  hath 
deigned  to   call   brethren,  all   who   after  and    through   His 
First-born-ship*  are   born    again    unto    the    grace    of  God'P'"ima- 
through   the   adoption   of  sons,   as    the   Apostolic   teacliingLukeS 
instructs  us.     The   Son   by   Nature   therefore,   of  the   very^'-^^^- 
Substance  of  the  Father,  was  He  the  Only  One  born;  being  Gal.  4, 
That  Which  the  Father  Is;  God  of  God,  Light  of  Light ;  jj  f_P^- 
but  we  are  not  by  nature  the  Light,  but  are  enlightened  by 
That  Light,  that  we  may  be  able  to  shine  with  wisdom,  for 
TJiat  was,  it  is  said,  Uie  true  Light,  JVhich  enlighteneth  everij  John  i, 
man  coming  into  this  uorld.     We  add  therefore  to  our  faith ^" 
of  things  eternal  the  temporal  dispensation  also  of  our  Lord, 
which  He  deigned   to  bear  and  minister  for  our  salvation. 
For  according  to  this,  that  He  is  the  Only-begotten  Son  of 
God,  it  cannot  be  said,  He  was,  and.  He  shall  be,  but  only, 
He  Is:  because  that,  which  hath  been,  now  is  not,  and  that, 
which  shall  be,  is  not  as  yet.    He  therefore  Is  unchangeable, 
without  respect  of  times  and  variation.     Nor  do  1  think  that 
it  is  to  be  ascribed  to  any  other  source  that  He  suggested 
unto  His  servant  Moses  such  as  His  Name.     For  when  he 
inquired  of  Him,  in  case  the  people,  to  whom  he  was  being 
sent,  should  despise  him,  by  Whom  he  should  say  that  he 
was  sent,  he  received  an  answer  of  Him,  saying,  /  am  That Exod.3, 
I  AM.    Afterwards  He  added,  These  things  shalt  thou  say  unto  ^*' 
the  children  of  Israel,  He  That  is  hath  sent  me  unto  you. 

7.  From  which  I  trust  that  it  is  by  this  time  clear  to 
spiritual  minds,  that  no  nature  can  exist  contrary  to  God. 
For  if  He  is,  and  this  word  can  properly  be  spoken  of  God 
only,  (for  that  which  truly  is,  abideth  unchangeably ;  seeing 
that  that  which  is  changed,  hath  been  something  which  now 
it  is  not,  and  will  be  something  which  as  yet  it  is  not,) 
therefore  hath  God  nothing  contrary  to  Himself.  For  if  it 
were  asked  of  us,  what  is  contrary  to  white,  we  should 
answer,  black;  if  it  were  asked,  what  is  contrary  to  hot,  we 
should  answer,  cold;  if  it  were  asked,  what  is  contrary  to 
quick,  we  should  answer,  slow;  and  all  such  like  things. 
But  when  it  is  asked  what  is  contrary  to  That  Which  is,  it 
is  rightly  answered,  that  which  is  not. 


22  The  Son,  made  Man,  truly  horn  of  a  Woman. 

DEFiDE      8^  i3yt,  since   (as   I  have   said)   throuifh   a   temporal   dis- 

ETSYM-  .  .  ,  /  D  I 

BOLo.  peusation,  in  order  to  our  salvation  and  restoration,  through 
the  operation  of  the  goodness  of  God,  by  That  Unchangeable 
Wisdom  of  God   our  changeable  nature  was  assmned ;   we 
add  the  belief  in  temporal  things  done  for  us  in  order  to  our 
health,  believing  in  That  Son  of  God,  Who  was  born  by 
THE  Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary.     For  by  the  gift  of 
God,  that  is,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  was  granted  unto  us  so 
great  humiliation  of  so  great  a  God,  as  that  He  deigned  to 
>  toium  assume   the   entire   Man '   in   the  womb  of  the  Virgin,   His 
nem.      Mother's   body  undefikd    indwelling  in,  undefiled  leaving. 
Which  temporal  dispensation  in  many  ways  the  heretics  lay 
wait  against.     But,  if  one  shall  hold  the  Catholic  Faith,  so 
as  to  believe  that  the  entire  Man  was  assumed  by  the  Word 
of  God,  that  is,  body,  soul,  spirit,  he  is  sufficiently  fortified 
against  them.     Forasmuch  as,  seeing  that  that  assumption 
was  made  for  our  salvation,  one  must  take   heed  lest,  by 
believing  that  some  part  of  us  pertains  not  unto  that  as- 
sumption, it  pertains  not  unto  salvation.     And  whereas  man, 
except  the  form   of  his  limbs,  which   hath   been   assigned 
different  to  different  kinds  of  living  beings,  is  not  separate 
from  the  cattle,   save  by  a  reasonable  spirit,  which   also  is 
called  mind ;  how  is  the  faith  sound,  wherein  it  is  believed 
that  the  Wisdom  of  God  assumed  that  of  ours  which  we  have 
in  common  with  the  cattle,  but  did  not  assume  that  which  is 
enlightened  by  the  light  of  wisdom,  and  which  is  peculiar  to 
man  ? 

9.  But  they  also  are  to  be  abhorred,  who  deny  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  a  mother,  Mary,  upon  earth  ;  whereas 
that  dispensation  hath  honoured  either  sex,  the  male  and  the 
female,  and  hath  shewn  that  it  pertaineth  unto  God's  care, 
not  only  that  sex  which  He  assumed,  but  that  also  by  means 
of  which  He  assumed  it,  by  bearing  man's  nature,  by  being 
born  of  a  woman.    Nor  are  we  compelled  to  deny  the  Mother 

John  2,  of  Christ,  by  that  saying  of  His,  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do 
uilJi  tliee?  not  yet  is  Mine  hour  come.  But  He  admonishes 
us  rather  that  we  may  understand  that  according  to  that  He 

"^  perso-  was  God  He  had  no  mother,  the  character'  of  which  majesty 

nam.  ^^  ^^,^^  about  to  display  by  turning  water  into  wine.  But 
in  that  He  was  crucified,  according  to  that  He  was  Man  was 


Objections  to  thin  shewn  to  he  futile.  23 

He  crucified;    and  that  was   the  hour,  which  was  not  yctDEFioE 
come,  when  it  was  said,  IF/iat  have  1  to  do  witJi  thee?  not 


BOLO. 


yet  is  3Iine  hour  come;   that  is,  the  hour  in  which  I  shall 
acknowledge   thee.      For  then   being  crucified  as  Man   He 
knew  His  human'  Mother,  and  most  humanely  entrusted  her'  homi- 
to  His  best  beloved  disciple.     Nor  let  that  move   us,  that  j*;,]^^ 1 9 
when  word   was  brought  to  Him  of  His  mother  and   His2<!.  27. 
brethren,   He    answered,    fVho  is  3It/  motlter,  or  ivlio  My  Mat.i2, 
brethren  ?  S;c.     But  let  it  rather  teach  us,  that  our  ministry, 
whereby  we  minister  the  Word  of  God  to  our  brethren,  when 
parents  hinder,  they  ought  not  to  be  known  by  us.     For  if 
each  one  shall  therefore  think  that  He  had  no  mother  upon 
earth,  because  He   said,  Who  is  3Iy  mother?   he  must  of 
necessity  be  compelled  to  deny  also  that  the-  Apostles  had 
fathers  upon  earth;  seeing  that  He  gave  them  charge, saying, 
Call  ye  not  any  your  father  upon  earth:  for  One  is  your M?it.23, 
Father,  Who  is  in  Heaven. 

10.  Nor  let  it  take  away  in  us  from  that  faith,  the  thought 
of  the  w^oman's  womb,  as  that  it  should  therefore  be  neces- 
sary to  reject  such  a  conception  of  our  Lord,  because  base- 
minded -men  think  it  base.     Because  most  truly  does  the^sordidi. 
Apostle  declare,  both  that  the  foolishness  of  God  is  zcisencor.i, 
than  man,  and  that  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.     There- ^^/^  ^ 
fore  they,  who  thus  think,  ought  to  consider,  that  the  rays  of  15. 
this  sun,  which  at  least  they  praise  not  as  a  creature  of  God, 
but  adore  as  God,  is  every  where  poured  abroad  through  foul 
smells  of  sewers  and  whatsoever  things  are  horrible,  and  in 
these  works  according  to  its  nature,  and  yet  becomes  not 
thence  vile  by  any  contamination,  although  the  visible  light 
be  naturally  more   allied    to  visible  filth  :    how  much  less 
therefore  could  the  Word  of  God,  Which  is  neither  corporeal 
nor  visible,  be   polluted    out  of  a   female   body,  where   It 
assumed  human  flesh  together  with  soul  and  spirit,  by  the 
intervention  of  which  the  Majesty  of  the  Word  dwells  more 
retired    and    separate    from    the    frailty   of  a  human    body. 
Whence  it  is  clear  that  in  no  way  could  the  Word  of  God 
be  spotted  by  a  human  body,  whereby  not  even   the  very 
human  soul  is  spotted.     For  not  when  it  rules  and  quickens 
the  body,  but  when  it  lusts  after  its  mortal  goods,  the  soul  is 
spotted  of  the  body.     But  if  they  wished  to  avoid  the  spots 


24       Our  Lord's  Crucifixion^  Resurrection^  Ascension. 
DE  FIDE  of  the  soul,  they   would  dread  rather  these  lies  and  blas- 

ETSYM-       , 

BOLo.  pheraies. 

v^^  11.  But  it  was  little  that  our  Lord  for  us  humbled  Himself 

in  being  born  :  there  was  added,  that  He  deigned  also  to  die 
Phil.  2,  for  mortal   men.      For  He  humbled  Himself,  being  made 
subject  even   unto  death,  and  that  the  death  of  the  Cross; 
lest  any  of  us,  although  he  should  be  able  not  to  fear  death, 
might  yet  shrink  from  some  kind  of  death,  which  men  judge 
most   ignominious.       Therefore   we    believe    in   Him,  Who 
UNDEH  Pontius  Pilate  was  crucified  and  buried.     For 
it  was  necessary  that  the  name  of  the  judge  be  added,  that  the 
times  might  be  known.     Bat  when  that  burial  is  believed  in, 
there  is  made  a  calling  to  mind  of  the  new  tomb,  whereby,  to 
Him  about  to  rise  again  unto  newness  of  life,  witness  should  be 
borne,  as  unto  Him  about  to  be  born,  by  the  Virgin's  womb. 
John  19,  For  as  in  that  sepulchre  no  other  dead   body  was   buried, 
neither  before  nor  after;  so  in  that  womb  neither  before  nor 
after  was  any  thing  mortal  conceived. 

12.  We  believe  also  that  He  on   the  third   day  rose 
again    from   the    dead,   the   First-begotten   unto  brethren 
Eph.  1,  about  to  follow  after  Him,  whom  He  called  unto  the  adoption 
of  sons  of  God,  whom  He  deigned  to  make  co-partners  and 
co-heirs  vuith  Himself, 
vi.  13.  AVe  believe  that  He  ascended  into  heaven,  which 

Mat. 22,  place  of  blessedness  He  promised  unto  us  also,  saying,  Tliey 
Gal  4    ^^>'^^^  ^^  '^^  angels  iu  the  heavens,  in  that  City,  which  is  the 
26.         wioMe/- o/"?^5  a//,  Jerusalem,  eternal  in  the  heavens.     But  it 
is  wont  to  offend  certain  either  impious  heathen  or  heretics, 
that  we   believe   that  an   earthly   body  was   taken    up   into 
heaven.      But  the   heathen   for  the   most  part   are   anxious 
to  treat  with  us  with  the  arguments  of  the  Philosophers,  so 
as  to  assert  that  nothing  earthly  can  be  in  heaven.     For  our 
Scriptures   they  know  not,  nor  understand    in  what  way  it 
1  Cor.    was   said,  H  is  soivn  an  animal  bodg,  it  arises  a  spiritual 
'     ■   hodg.     For  it  was  not  so  said,  as  if  body  were  changed  into 
spirit,  and  became  spirit;  because  now  also  our  body  which 
'  anima. is  called  animal,  hath  not  been  turned  into  soul',  and  made 
soul.    But  by  a  s])iritual  body  that  is  understood,  which  hath 
been  so  subjected  unto  the  spirit",  as   that  it  is  suited*  to 

•=  al.  '  Because  it  is  to  he  .so  oidered.' 


His  silling  al  the  Right  Hand  of  The  Father.         25 

a  heavenly  habitation,  all  frailty  and  earthly  stain  having  been  defide 
changed  and  turned  into  heavenly  purity  and  sledfastness.  This  ^o^o!" 
is  the  change,  of  which  again  the  Apostle  says,  We  shall  all  I  Cor. 
rise  again,  but  ice  shall  not '  all  he  changed.    Which  change  ij^'^r^^^' 
the  same  Apostle  teaches  is  made  not  for  the  worse,  but  for 
the  better,  in  that  he  says,  And  ice  sliall  he  changed.   Where  1  Cor. 
however  and  in  what  manner  the  Body  of  the  Lord  is  in  ^'  ^  • 
heaven,  it  were  most  over-curious  and  superfluous  to  inquire; 
only  we  must  believe  that  He  is  in  heaven.     For  it  belongs 
not  to  our  frailty  to  discuss  the  secrets  of  the  heavens,  but 
it  belongs   to   our  faith   to   entertain   high   and    honourable 
thoughts  concerning  the  dignity  of  our  l^ord's  Body. 

14.  We  believe  also  that  He  sitteth  at  the  eight  hand    vii. 
OF  the  Father.     Yet  must  we  not  therefore  suppose  that 
God  the  Father  is  inclosed,  as  it  were,  within  a  human  form  ; 

so  that,  when  we  think  of  Him,  there  suggest  itself  to  our 
mind  a  right  or  left   side :    neither  the   very  fact   that  the 
Father  is  said  to  sit,  must  we  think  that  that  is  done  with 
bended  knees,  lest  we  fall  into  that  blasphemy,  wherein  the 
Apostle  curses  them,  who  changed  the  glorg  of  the  incor- ^om.], 
ruplible  God   into  the   likeness  of  corruptible  man.       For 
such  a  likeness  unto  God  it  is  impious  for  a  Christian  to 
place  in  a  temple ;  much  more  is  it  impious  to  place  it  in 
the  heart,  where  truly  is  the  temple  of  God,  if  it  be  cleansed 
from  earthly  lust  and  error.     Wherefore  we  must  understand 
that,  '  at  the  right  hand,'  is  used  in  this  sense,  in  the  highest 
blessedness,  where  is  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy ;  as 
the  kids  are  set  at  the  left  hand,  that  is,  in  misery,  by  reason 
of  unrighteousness,  labours,  and  torments  ^.     Wherefore  that  Mat.25, 
God  is  said  to  sit,  signifies,  not  a  position  of  the  limbs,  but 
a  Judicial  power,  of  which  That  Majesty  is  never  void,  in 
assigning  to  men  their  deserts^;  although  in  the  last  Judg-adigna 
ment  much  more  manifestly  among  men  will  be  hereafter  the  ^^""'* 
undoubted  brightness  of  the  Only-begotten  Son  of  God,  the 
Judge  of  the  quick  and  of  the  dead. 

15.  We  believe  also  that  He  will  thence  come  at  the    viii. 
most  fitting  time,  and  that  He  will  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead.     Whether  by  those  names  are  meant  the  just  and 

the  sinners ;  or  whether  those  whom  at  that  time   lie  shall 

''  al.  '  the  labour?  and  torments  of  unrighteousness.' 


26    Each  Person  of  Himself  God,  yet  the  Three  One  God. 

DEFiDElind  before  death  upon  the  earth,  are  called  the  quick,  and 
^^q^q" those  the  dead,  who  at  His  Coming  shall  rise  again.     This 
temporal   Dispensation"  is  not  simply,  as   that  Generation 
according  to  that  He  is  God,  but  also,  halli  been,  and  sltall 
he.     For  our  Lord   hatli   been   upon   earth,   and  now  is  in 
Heaven,  and  sluill  be  in  His  brightness  the  Judge  of  the 
quick  and  of  the  dead.     For  He  shall  so  come,  as  He  hath 
Acts  1,  ascended,  according  to  the  authority  ^  which  is  contained  in 
^^'        the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.     According  to  this  temporal  dis- 
pensation then  He  speaks  in  the  Apocalypse,  wherein  it  is 
Bev.  1,  written,  Thus  saitli  He,  IVJio  is,  and  JVho  ivas,  and  Who  is 

^'l\ix,»-  ^^  come\ 

fiivts.  iQ,  Thus  then  having  been  set  in  order  and  commended 

^^'    to  faith,  both  the  divine  Generation  of  our  Lord,  and  His 
human  Dispensation,  there  is  added  unto  our  Confession,  in 
order  to  perfect  the  faith  which   we  have  concerning  God, 
THE  Holy  Ghost,  not  of  an  inferior  nature  ^  to  the  Father 
and  the  Sou,  but,  so  to  say,  con  substantial  and  coeternal ; 
inasmuch    as  That  Trinity   is   One   God,  not   so    that    the 
'  idem.  Father  be  the  same  Person  ^,  Who  is  also  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Ghost;  but  that  the  Father  be  the  Father,  and  the  Son 
be  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  be  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
Deut.  6,  This  Trinity  One  God,  as  it  is  written,  Hear,  O  Israel,  the 
Lord  your  God  is  One  God.     Yet  if  it  be  demanded  of  us 
concerning  each  separately,  and  it  be  said  unto  us,  '  Is  the 
Father  God  ?'  we  will  answer,  '  He  is  God.'     If  it  be  asked 
whether  the  Son  be  God,  this  too  we  will  answer.     Nor,  if 
there   shall  be   such   a  question  put  concerning  the   Holy 
3  aliud.   Ghost,  ought  we  to  answer  that  He  is  any  other  thing''  than 
God;  earnestly  taking  heed  against  so  understanding  it,  in 
Pe.82,6.  the  sense  in  which  it  is  said  of  men.   Ye  are  gods.      For 
they  are  not  by  nature  Gods,  whosoever  have  been  made  and 
created,  of  the  Father,  through  the  Son,  by  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     For  it  is  the  very  Trinity  Which  is  signified, 
Eom.     when  the  Apostle  says,  Since  of  Him,  and  in  Him,  and 
See  S.     through  Him,  are  all  things.     Although  therefore,  when  it 
Aug.  on  |jg  demanded  of  us  concerning  each  severally,  we  answer, 

Jrs.  Oj  o. 

*  Dispensatio,  used  of  the  Incarna-     Introduction,  Ep.  to  Leander,  c.  v. 
tion,  as  OiKincfiia,  in  Greek.  ?  Ben.  conj.   '  minor'  for  '  niinore;' 

^  auctoritatem.     See  S.  Greg.  Mor.     '  not  inferior  in  nature.' 


Some  natural  things  imperfectly  three  in  one.         27 

that  He,   concerning  Whom  the  question   is  put,  is  God, de fide 
whether  the  Father,  or  the   Son,  or  the  Holy  Ghost;    yet  bqlo. 
should  not  any  one  think  that  three  Gods  are  worshipped 
by  us. 

17.  Nor  is  it  wonderful   that  these  things  are  said  con- 
cerning an  ineffable  Nature,  when  even  in  those  very  things, 
which  we  see  with  the  eyes  of  the  body,  and  judge  of  by 
the   sense   of  the   body,  some    such    thing    happens.      For 
when  as,  being  asked  concerning  the  fountain,  we  cannot  say 
that  it  is  itself  the  river;  nor,  being  asked  concerning  the 
river,  can  we  call  it  the  fountain  ;    and  again,  the  draught 
which  is  of  the  fountain  or  river,  we  can  neither  call   the 
river  nor  the  fountain.     Yet  in  this  trinity  we  use  the  name 
'  water,'  and  when  the  question  is  put  concerning  such,  we 
answer  of  each,  water.     For,  if  I  ask  whether  it  be  water  in 
the  fountain,  it  is  answered,  water:  and  if  we  ask  whether  it 
be  water  in  the  river,  there  is  no  other  answer  made,  and  in 
that  draught  no  other  answer  will  be  possible  ;  and  yet  we 
call  them  not  three  waters,  but  one.     Certainly  good  heed 
must    be    taken,    that   no    one    so    think    of    the    inefl'able 
Substance  of  That  Majesty,  as  of  that  visible  and  corporeal 
fountain,  or  river,  or  draught.    For  in  these  the  water,  which 
is  now  in  the  fountain,  goes  forth  into  the  river,  and  abides 
not  in  itself;  and,  when  it  passes  from  the  river  or  from  the 
fountain  into  the  draught,  it  abides  not  there,  whence  it  is 
taken.     Therefore  it  may  be  that  the  same  water  belongs  at 
one  time  to  the  term  fountain,  at  another  to  the  term  river, 
at  another  to  the  term  draught :   whereas  in  That  Trinity  we 
said,  that  it  cannot  be  that  the  Father  at  one  time  is  the  Son, 
at  another  the  Holy  Ghost:  as  in  a  tree",  the  root  is  nothing 
else  than  the  root,   nor  the  trunk  any  thing  else  than   the 
trunk,  nor  can  we  call  the  boughs  any  thing  else  than  the 
boughs ;  for  what  is  called  root,  that  cannot  be  called  tiaink 
and    boughs ;    nor   can    that    wood   which    pertains    to    the 
root  by  any  passage   be  at  one  time  in  the  root,  at  another 
in  the  trunk,  at  another  in  the  branches ;  that  rule  of  the 
name  remaining,  that  the  root  is  wood,  and  the  trunk  wood, 
and  the  boughs  wood;  and  yet  that  they  are  not  called  three 
woods,  but  one  wood.     Or,  if  these  have  some  dissimilitude, 
so  that  they  may  be  not  absurdly   called   three  woods,  by 


28  The  Son,  hoic  dislinyulshedjrom  The  Father. 

DE  FIDE  reason  of  differeuce  in  solidity  ;  yet  that  other  at  any  rate  all 
^gj^^"  allow,  if  from  out  one  fountain  three  cups  be  filled,  that  they 
"~  may  be  called  three  cups,  but  can  not  be  called  three  waters, 
but  altogether  one  \a  aler  ;  althcugh  when  asked  concerning 
each  several  cup,  you  answer  that  in  any  one  of  them  is 
water;  although  there  in  this  case  take  place  no  passage, 
such  as  we  were  just  now  speaking  of,  from  the  fountain  iuto 
the  river.  But  these  instances  in  bodies  have  been  given, 
not  by  reason  of  their  likeness  to  that  Divine  Nature'',  but 
because  of  the  unity  even  in  things  visible,  that  it  might  be 
understood  to  be  possible,  that  some  three  things,  not  only 
singly,  but  also  altogether,  may  have  one  single  name ;  and 
that  no  one  wonder  or  think  it  absurd,  that  we  call  the 
Father  God,  the  Son  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  God,  and  yet 
that  we  worship'  not  three  Gods  in  That  Trinity,  but  One 
God,  and  One  Substance. 

18.    And    concerning   indeed   the    Father   and    the    Son, 

learned    and    spiritual    men    have    treated    in    many    books, 

wherein,  as  far  as  men  could  unto  men,  they  have  endeavoured 

to  suggest,  both  in  what  manner  the  Father  and   the  8on 

1 ' unus,' were    not   One    Person,    but   One    Substance';    and  What 

'"""""•' severally-  the  Father  was,  and  What  the  Son;  the  One  the 

s  *  "pro* 

prie.'  Begetter,  the  Other  the  Begotten  ;  the  One  not  of  the  Son, 
the  Other  of  the  Father;  the  One  the  Beginning  of  the 
1  Cor.  Other;  whence  also  He  is  called  the  Head  of  Christ, 
^^'^*  although  Christ  also  is  the  Beginning'',  but  not  of  the 
Father;  but  This  the  Image  of  the  Other,  although  in 
no  wise  unlike,  and  altogether  without  any  difference 
equal.  These  things  are  treated  of  more  largely  by  those 
who,  not  so  briefly  as  we,  wish  to  unfold  the  profession  of 
the  whole  Christian  Faith.  Therefore,  in  so  far  forth  as  He 
is  the  Son,  He  received  of  the  Father  that  He  Is,  whereas 
He  received  not  this  of  the  Son  :  and  in  so  far  forth  as 
through  unspeakable  mercy,  by  a  dispensation  in  time.  He 
assumed  Manhood,  that  is  to  say,  a  creature  subject  to 
change   in   order  that  it   may   be   changed    for  the    better; 

h    No   corporeal    illustration    seems  same  instances  are  used, 

capable   of    expressing    at    once    the  '  al.  «  that  there  are  not.' 

numerical  unity  of  the  Divine  Essence,  ^  John  viii.  25.  cf.  Gr.  ih  a^X^t  o, 

and  the  perfection  of  each  Person.    Sie  ri  xa)  XaXu  Iftiv.     '  Principium  qui  et 

St.   Hil.  de   Trin.  ix.   37.   where    the  loquor  vobis.'  Vulg.  See  also  Col.  i.  16. 


Distinct  ton  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  Son  less  cleared.  20 

many  things  coiicernine  Him  in  Uie  Scriptures  are  found  sodefidb 
said,  as  that  the  impious  minds  of  heretics  wishing  to  teach  bqlo. 
before  they  understand,  have  been  by  them  led  into  error, 
so  as  to  think  Him  not  equal  to  the  Father,  nor  of  the  same 
Substance;  such  as  are  these;  since  the  Father  is  greater ^^^^i'^, 
than  I;  and,  The  head  of  the  woman  is  the  man,  the  Head\  cor. 
of  the  man  is  Christ,  and  the  Head  of  Christ  is  God;  and,J^^^^ 
Then  shall  He  Himself  be  subject  unto  Him  Who  made  all  15,28. 
things  subject  unto  Him;  and,  I  go  unto  3Iy  Father,  and ^^hn^o, 
your  Father,  3Iy  God,  and  your  God;  and  some  other  of 
this  sort;  all  which  have  had  place,  not  to  signify  inequality 
of  Nature  and  Substance,  that  those  other  be  not  false,  I  and  Johnio, 

30 

the  Father  are  One;  and.  He  that  hath  seen  3Ie,  hath  seeni  unum. 
My  Father;   and,    The    Word  was  God;   for  He   was  notJ°li°i-*' 
made,  seeing  that  all  things  were  made  by  Him:  and.  He 36hn  t, 
thought  it  not  robbery  to  bo  equal  with  God;  and  all  other  pj^j,  2 
such:    but  these  have  had  place,  partly  by  reason  of  that 6. 
ministration  of  Manhood  which  He  took  upon  Him,  whereby 
it  is  said.  He  emptied  Himself;  not  that  That  Wisdom  was  Pbil-  2, 
changed,  seeing  that    It   is    altogether  unchangeable;    but 
because  in  so  humble  a  guise  He  willed  to  he  made  known 
unto  men  :   partly  therefore   by  reason   of  this  ministration 
were   those   things  thus  written,  which   the  heretics  falsely 
charge ;  partly  for  this  reason,  because  the  Son  owes  to  the 
Father  that  He  is,  this  also  assuredly  owang  to  the  Father, 
that  He  is  equal  and  alike-  to  the  Same  Father;  but  the'^*'^' 
Father  oweth  to  no  one  whatsoever  He  is. 

19.  But  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost  it  hath  not  yet  been 
so  fully  and  carefully  discussed  by  learned  and  great 
expounders  of  the  divine  Scriptures,  as  that  there  may 
easily  be  understood  His  propriety  also,  by  which  propriety 
it  comes  to  pass  that  we  can  call  Him  neither  the  Son  nor 
the  Father,  but  only  the  Holy  Ghost ;  saving  only  that  they 
proclaim  Him  to  be  the  Gift  of  God',  that  we  may  believe 
that  God  giveth  not  a  Gift  inferior  to  Himself.  This  how- 
ever they  observe,  that  they  proclaim  not  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
be  begotten  as  the  Son  of  the  Father ;  for  Christ  is  the  Only 
Son ;  nor  of  tlie  Son,  as  if  a  grandson  of  the  Supreme 
Father :    nor  yet  that  He  is  indebted   not  to  any  for  That 

'  Thus  St.  Hilary  repeatedly  names  Him  by  the  title  Munus. 


80  The  Holy  Ghost  called  the  Lore  of  The  Father  and  The  Son. 

DEFiDE  which   He  is;  but  to  the  Father,  of  Whom  are  all  things; 

BOLo.  ^^^t  ^®  establish  not  two  Beginnings  without  a  beginning, 
which  is  most  false  and  most  absurd,  and  not  proper  to  the 
Catholic  Faith,  but  to  the  error  of  certain  heretics.  Yet 
certain  have  ventured  to  believe  the  very  Communion  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  and,  so  to  say,  the  Godhead,  Which  the 
Greeks  call  QsoTYjg,  to  be  the  Holy  Ghost "" :  that,  seeing 
that  the  Father  is  God,  and  the  Son  God,  the  very  Godhead, 
whereby  They  are  joined  One  to  Another,  the  One  by 
begetting  the  Son,  the  Other  by  co-hering  to  the  Father, 
may  be  made  equal  to  Him  by  AVhom  He  was  begotten. 
This  Godhead  therefore,  which  also  they  would  have  under- 
stood to  1)6  the  mutual  Love  and  Charily  of  the  Two,  One 
toward  the  Other,  they  say  has  been  called  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  by  many  proofs  of  the  Scriptures  they  support  this  their 
opinion;  whether  it  be  by  that  which  is  said.  Since  the  love 
of  Qod  hath  been  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  Who  hath  been  given  us;  or  whether  by  other  many 
such  testimonies  ;  and  by  the  very  fact  that  by  the  Holy 


Rom.  5, 


™  The  notion  as  here  stated,  at 
least  if  taken  to  tlie  letter,  is  hetero- 
dox, and  he  shades  it  off  into  truth 
instead  of  deuying  it.  The  Essential 
Godhead  is  clearly  the  Essence  of  the 
Father,  not  the  Person  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  analogy  of  Being,  Know- 
ledge, and  Love,  to  the  Holy  Tri- 
nity is  stated  hy  him  also,  De  Civ. 
Dei,  xi.  24,  &c.  And  in  B.  xv.  De 
Trinitate,  §.  29 — 31.  he  says  expressly 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  may  be,  and  is,  in 
Holy  Scripture,  properly  called  Love, 
as  the  Son,  Wisdom ;  though  every 
Person  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  be  of 
Himself  essentiallj'  Wisdom  and  Love. 
See  also  P.  Lombard,  Sent.  i.  Dist.  10. 
and  the  commentators  on  it,  and  St. 
Thos.  Aq.  Sum.  Theol.  i.  qu.  xxxvii. 
art.  1.  The  statement  quoted  by  P. 
Lombard,  from  St.  Jerome  on  Ps.  xvii. 
\.  is  found  in  the  '  Breviarium  in  Psal- 
terium,'  vrhich  passes  under  his  name. 
"  The  Holy  Ghost  is  neither  Father 
nor  Son,  but  the  Love,  which  the 
Father  hath  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son 
in  the  Father."  See  also  the  remarks 
of  Nicolas  de  Lyra  on  John  i.  1.  The 
danger  involved  in  this  way  of  speaking 
is  that  of  imagining  the  Attribute  to  be 
What  we  call  the  Holy  Spirit,  instead 


of  remembering  that  He  is  a  Person, 
whose  Nature  is  shadowed  forth  to  us 
by  the  Name  of  the  Attribute;  a  point 
guarded  by  all  these  writers,  and  by 
St.  Aug.  himself,  De  Trin.  xv.  37. 
cited  by  Petavius.  "  And  if  the  Love 
with  which  the  Father  loves  the  Son 
does  ineiFably  declare  the  communion 
of  Both,  what  more  htting  than  that 
He  be  called  Love,  Who  is  the  Spirit 
common  to  Both.  For  this  is  the 
sounder  way  of  believing  or  under- 
standing, that  not  the  Holy  Spirit  only 
is  Love  in  That  Trinity,  yet  not  with- 
out meaning  is  He  properly  called  Love 
because  of  what  hath  been  said.  As 
not  He  alone  in  That  Trinity  is 
'  Spirit,'  or  '  Holy,'  since  the  Father 
is  Spirit  too,  and  the  Son  Spirit;  and 
the  Father  Holy,  and  the  Son  Holy, 
which  piety  dcubteth  not:  and  yet  He 
is  not  without  meaning  called  The 
Holy  Spirit.  For  because  He  is  com- 
mon to  Both,  He  is  called  that  properly 
which  Both  are  in  common.  Else  if  in 
That  Trinity  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  is 
Love,  certainly  then  the  Son  is  found 
to  be  Son,  not  of  the  Father  only,  but 
also  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  See  the  rest 
of  this  Book,  and  Petav.  de  Trin.  vii. 
12. 


Texts  of  Holy  Scripture  wltich  seem  to  speak  thus.     31 

Gliost  we  are  reconciled  unto  God;  whence  also,  when  IIe»EFiDE 
is  called  the  Gift  of  God,  they  will  have  that  it  is  sufficiently  bolo. 
shewn,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Love  of  God.     For  we 
are  not  reconciled  unto  Him,  save  only  by  love,  whereby 
also  we  are  called  sons :    not  now  under  fear,  as  servants, 
because  love  perfected  casteth  out  fear ;   and  we  have  re- 1  John 
ceived  the  Spirit  of  liberty,  icherein  ice  cry,  Abba,  Father.  I'jJi^n 
And  because,  having  been  reconciled  and  called  back  into  -^^  18. 
friendship  by  love,  we  shall  be   able  to  understand  all  the  15. 
secret  things  of  God,  therefore  it  is  said  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
He  shall  lead  you  into  all  truth.     Therefore  also  that  con-Eom.  5, 

_  g in 

fidence  in  preaching  the  truth,  wherewith  the  Apostles  were  j^j^^g 
filled  at  His  coining,  is  rightly  assigned  unto  love;  because  13. 

"  .  .        Acts  2 

also    distrust   is    ascribed    unto    fear,  which   the  perfecting  4, 

of  love  shutteth  out.     Therefore  also  It  is  called  the  GiftEph.  3, 

of  God,  because  that  which    each    man    knows,  he  enjoys  '•   ' 

not,    unless    he    also    love    it.      But    to   enjoy  the  Wisdom 

of  God,  is  nothing  else  than  to  cling  to'  It  with  affection :' cohse- 

nor  does  any  one  abide  in  that  which  he  perceives,  except 

by  affection  ;  and  therefore  He  is  called  '  Spiritus  Sanctus,' 

since  all  things  whatsoever  are  sanctioned  %  are  sanctioned  ^'^^°';'" 

.    .  .  untur. 

in  order  to  abiding,  nor  is  there  any  doubt  that  the  term 
'  sanctitas^  is  used  from  '  sancio.''     But  especially  do  they 
who  maintain  this  opinion  make  use  of  that  witness,  where 
it  is  written,  That  nJiich  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  John  3, 
that   which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  Spirit;   seeing  that  God  j'^^^^  ^ 
is  a  Spirit.     For  herein  He  speaketh  of  our  Regeneration,  24. 
which  is,  not  according  to  Adam  of  the  flesh,  but  according 
to  Christ  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Wherefore,  if  mention  is  made 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this  place,  when  it  is  said,  seeing  that 
God  is  a  Spirit :   they  say,  that  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  it 
is  not  said.  Seeing  that  the  Spirit  is  God";  but,  Seeing  that 
God  is  a  Spirit;  so  that  the  very  Godhead  of  the  Father  and 
of  the  Son  is  in  this  place  called  God,  which  is  the  Holy 
Ghost.     To  this  is  added  another  witness,  in  that  John  the 
Apostle    says.  Seeing  that   God    is    Love.      For    here   also  1  John 
he  says  not.  Love  is  God,  but,  God  is  Love;   that  the  Very    '     ' 
Godhead  may  be  understood  to  be  Love.     And  whereas,  in 
that    enumeration    of  things    connected    one   with    another, 

»  al.  '  the  Spirit  is  of  God.' 


32     3Iysieries  of  Godhead  seen  only  hy  the  pure  in  heart. 

■DEFiDE  ^,j^gj.g  jj.  |g  said,  All  things  ore  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ^s, 

BOLo.  a)id  Christ  is  God's;  and.  The  head  of  the  woman  is  the 

\  Cor. 3,  pifif,   fifid  ijfg  Head  of  the  man  is  Christ,  and  the  Head  of 

22.  23.  ^  J  •>  J 

1  Cor.     Christ  is   God;   no   mentiou  is  made  of  the    Holy  Ghost; 

^'>  ^'  this  they  say  falls  under  the  rule,  that  the  very  connection  is 
not  usually  numbered  among  those  things  which  are  con- 
nected one  with  another.  Wherefore  they  who  read  with 
more  attention  seem  to  recognise  the  Very  Trinity  in  that 

Rom.     place  also,  where  it  is  said,  For  of  Him ^  and  Ihrouqh  Him, 

'     '  and  in  Him,  are  all  tlrinys.     Of  Him,  Who  oweth  to  no  one 

His  Being;  through  Him,  as  through  a  Mediator;  in  Him, 

as  in  Him  Who  holdeth  together,  that  is,  unites  and  joins. 

20.  This  opinion  is  opposed  by  them  who  judge  that  that 

communion,  which   we    call    either   Godhead,    or  Love,  or 

Charity,  is  not  a  Substance  ;  but  they  require  that  the  Holy 

Spirit  be  set  forth  to  them  according  to  that  He  is  Substance, 

and  understand  not  that  it  could  not  otherwise  have  been 

1  John   said,  God  is  Love,  unless  Love  were  a  Substance.     That  is, 
4  16.  .  .  .  . 

'     '     they  are  guided  by  experience  of  things  corporeal ;  since,  if 

two  bodies  be  joined  one  to  another,  so  as  that  they  be  set 
near  one  another,  the  very  joining  is  not  a  body;  since, 
when  those  bodies  which  had  been  joined  are  separated, 
it  is  no  more  ;  and  yet  it  is  not  understood  to  have,  as  it 
were,  departed  and  passed  away,  as  those  bodies  themselves. 
But  let  such  as  these  make  pure  their  heart,  as  far  as  they 
can,  that  they  may  be  able  to  see,  that  there  is  not  any 
thing  such  in  the  Substance  of  God,  as  if  in  It  Substance 
were  one  thing,  and  that  which  is  Accident  to  Substance 
were  another  thing,  and  not  Substance,  but  whatsoever  can 
be  in  It  conceived  of,  is  Substance.  But  these  things  may 
easily  be  said  and  believed,  but  seen,  how  ihey  are  in  them- 
selves, they  altogether  cannot  be,  save  by  the  pure  heart. 
Wherefore,  whether  that  opinion  be  true,  or  whether  it  be 
any  thing  else,  the  Faith  must  be  held  unshaken,  that  we 
call  the  Father  God,  the  Son  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  God ; 
nor  yet  three  Gods,  but  That  Trinity  One  God ;  nor  yet 
different  of  nature,  but  of  the  same  Substance  ;  nor  yet  so 
that  the  Father  at  one  time  be  the  Son,  at  another  time  be 
the  Holy  Ghost;  but  the  Father  ever  the  Father,  the  Son 
ever  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ever  the   Holy  Ghost. 


TJie  Chnvch.     Remissio/i      Spirif,  Sotil,  and  Body.     33 
Nor  rashly  concerning  things  unseen  affirm  we  any  thing  asDEFiDit 

ETSYM- 
BOLO. 


knomng,  but  as  believing ;  since  seen  they  cannot  be  save  ^'^^"^'^" 


by  the  cleansed  heart;  and  he  who  sees  them  in  this  life 
171  part,  as  has  been  said,  and  in  a  riddle,  cannot  effect  that  i  Cor. 
he  also,  to  whom  he  speaks,  shall  see  them,  if  he  be  hindered     ' 
by  impurities  of  heart.     But,  Blessed^  are  thcij  of  a  clean  Matt.  5, 
heart,  for  they  shall  see  God.     This  is  our  faith  concerning  ' 
God  our  Creator  and  Renewer. 

21.  But,  since  love  is  commanded  us,  not  only  towards 
God,  when  it  is  said.  Thou  shall  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  Deut.  6, 
all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind; 

but  also  towards  our  neighbour;  for.  Thou  shall  love,  saithMat.22, 
He,  thy  neighbour  as  thyself:  again,  since  that  faith,  if  it  '  " 
contain  not  a  congregation  and  society  of  men,  wherein 
brotherly  love  may  work,  is  less  fruitful ;  we  believe  also  in 
the  Holy  Church,  meaning  thereby  assuredly  the  Catholic. 
For  both  Heretics  and  Schismatics  call  their  congregations 
Churches.  But  Heretics  by  holding  false  notions  concerning 
God  violate  the  very  faith  ;  and  Schismatics,  on  the  other 
hand,  by  unrighteous  rendings  asunder,  break  away  from 
brotherly  love,  although  they  believe  the  same  things  as 
ourselves.  Wherefore  neither  Heretics  pertain  unto  the 
Catholic  Church,  which  loves  God  ;  nor  Schismatics,  since 
it  loves  its  neighbour;  and  therefore  easily  pardons  the  sins 
of  its  neighbour,  because  it  prays  that  itself  may  obtain 
pardon  from  Him,  Who  hath  reconciled  us  unto  Himself, 
blotting  out  all  things  past,  and  calling  us  unto  a  new  life : 
unto  the  perfection  of  which  life  until  we  attain,  we  cannot 
be  without  sins ;  yet  it  concerns  us  of  what  kind  they  be. 

22.  Nor  must  we  only  treat  of  the  difference  between  sins,  Matt.  6, 
but  must  altogether  believe,  that  in   no   way  can  the  sins  ^^' 
which  we  commit  be  forgiven  us,  if  we  ourselves  shall  be 
inexorable  to  forgive  sins.    Therefore  we  beheve  also  in  the 

REMISSION  OF  SINS. 

23.  And  since  there  are  three  things  whereof  man  consists, 
spirit,  soul,  and  body ;  which  again  are  called  two,  because 
often  the  soul  is  named  together  with  the  spirit;  for  a  certain 
reasonable  part  of  the  same,  which  beasts  are  without,  is 
called  the  spirit:  that  which  is  chief  in  us  is  the  spirit; 
next,  the  life  whereby  we  are  joined  unto  the  body,  is  called 

D 


34  Spiritual  I  fie.     Resurrection  of  ihe  Flesh. 

DE  FIDE  the  soul;  finally,  the  body  itself,  since  it  is  visible,  is  that 
^B^o^Lo!  ^vliit'h  in  lis  is  last.  But  all  this  creature  groaneth  and  is  in 
Rom.  8,  travail  unlil  now :  yet  hath  the  spirit  given  its  first  fruits  % 

in  that  it  hath  believed  in  God,  and  is  now  of  a  good  will. 

This  spirit  is  also  called  the  mind,  of  which  the  Apostle  says, 
Rom.  7,  With  the  mind  I  serve  the  Law  of  God.  Who  also  in  another 

25  •    • 

Rom.  1  place  saith,  God  is  my  witness,  Whom  I  serve  in  my  spirit. 

^-  But  the  soul,  when  it  yet  seeks  after  fleshly  goods,  is  called 

the  flesh.  For  a  certain  part  of  it  resists  •"  the  spirit,  not  by 
nature,  but  by  custom  of  sins.  Whence  il  is  said,  With  the 
mind  I  serve  the  Law  of  God,  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of 
sin.  Which  custom  hath  been  changed  into  nature  accord- 
ing to  our  mortal  generation  by  the  sin  of  the  first  man. 
And    therefore    it.   is  written.   And  we  some  time  were  by 

Epb.  2,  nature  children  of  wrath,  that  is,  of  vengeance,  whereby  it 
hath  been  brought  to  pass  that  we  serve  the  law  of  sin.  But 
the  nature  of  the  soul  is  then  perfected  when  it  is  subdued 
unto  its  own  spirit,  and  when  it  follows  the  spirit,  the  spirit 
following  God.  Therefore  the  carnal  man  perceiveth  not 
I  Cox.  2,  the  things  which  belong  unto  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  not  so 
speedily  is  the  soul  subdued  unto  the  spirit  unto  good  works, 
as  the  spirit  unto  God  unto  true  faith  and  good  will :  but  at 
times  its  natural  impulse  is  more  slowly  checked,  whereby  it 
fails  away  unto  things  carnal  and  temporal.  But  since  it 
also  is  cleansed,  being  established  in  its  own  nature  through 
the  rule  of  the  spirit,  which  is  its  head,  imto  which,  its  head, 
Christ  is  a  Head ;  we  must  not  despair  of  the  restoration  of 
the  body  also  unto  its  proper  natiire,  but  certainly  not  so 
speedily  as  the  soul,  just  as  the  soul  not  so  speedily  as  the 
1  Cor.  j^pirit;  but  in  a  fit  season  at  the  last  trumpet,  when  the  dead 
63.'  shall  rise  again  uncorrupted,  and  we  shall  be  changed.  And 
therefore  we  believe  also  in  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh; 
not  only  because  the  soul  is  restored,  which  now  by  reason 
of  fleshly  affections  is  called  flesh;  but  this  visible  flesh  also, 
which  is  by  nature  flesh,  whose  name  the  soul  hath  received, 
not  by  reason  of  its  nature,  but  of  its  fleshly  affections : 
therefore  this  visible  flesh,  which  is  properly  called  so,  we 
must  without  doubting  believe  that  it  will  rise  again.     For 

"  Ben.   has   spiritils,  '  Yet   hath    it         p  4  Mss.  '  and  resists,'  omitting  '  for 
given  the  first  fruits  of  the  spirit.'  a  certain  part  of  it.' 


The  Body  shall  rise  Jiited  for  a  heavenly  state.         85 

the  Apostle  Paul  seems  to  point  out  this  itself  as  if  with  thecEFiDE 
finger,  when  ho  says,  It  behoveth  that  this  corriqjtible  put  on^'^^^^' 


BOLO. 


earn. 


incorruption.  For  when  he  says,  This,  he,  as  it  were,  points 
his  finger  towards  it.  But  that  which  is  visible  may  be 
pointed  at  by  the  finger :  since  the  soul  also  might  have 
been  called  corruptible ;  for  itself  is  corrupted  by  moral 
vices.  And  when  we  read,  And  that  this  mortal  put  on 
immortality,  the  same  visible  flesh  is  meant,  because  at  it 
from  time  to  time  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  finger  pointed.  For 
the  soul  too,  as  it  is  called  corruptible  by  reason  of  moral 
vices,  so  may  it  also  be  called  mortal.  That  is,  it  is  the 
death  of  the  soul  to  fall  away  from  God'^;  which  its  first  sin 
in  Paradise  is  contained  in  the  Sacred  Writings. 

24.  Therefore  the  body  will  rise  again  according  to  the 
Christian  Faith,  which  cannot  deceive.  Which  if  it  seem  to 
any  one  incredible,  he  regards  what  the  flesh  now  is,  but 
considers  not  what  it  will  be  :  because  in  that  time  of  angelic 
change,  it  will  be  no  longer  flesh  and  blood,  but  only  body^ 
For  the  Apostle  speaking  of  the  flesh,  says,  The  flesh  of  "^  Cot. 
cattle  is  one,  the  flesh  of  birds  another,  of  fishes  another,  0/40.' 
creeping  things  another;  and  there  are  bodies  celestial,  and 
bodies  terrestrial.  For  he  says  not,  '  and  flesh  celestial :' 
but  he  says,  '  both  celestial  and  terrestrial  bodies.'  For  all 
flesh  is  also  body,  but  all  body  is  not  also  flesh :  first,  in 
those  things  terrestrial,  since  wood  is  body,  but  not  flesh : 
but  to  man  or  cattle  there  belongs  both  body  and  flesh  :  but 
in  things  celestial  no  flesh,  but  bodies  simple  and  bright, 
which  the  Apostle  calls  spiritual;  but  some  call  ethereal. 
And  therefore  that  which  he  says.  Flesh  and  blood  shall  noti  Cor. 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  contradicts  not  the  resurrection  ^^'  °^' 
of  the  flesh ;  but  declares  what  that  will  one  day  be,  which  is 
now  flesh  and  blood.  Into  which  sort  of  nature  whosoever 
believes  not  that  this  flesh  can  be  changed,  he  must  be  led 
step  by  step  unto  the  faith.  For  if  you  demand  of  him 
whether  earth  can  be  changed  into  water;  by  reason  of  the 
nearness,  it  seems  not  to  him  to  be  incredible.  x'Vgain,  if  you 
demand  whether  water  can  be  changed  into  air ;  he  answers, 

1  cf.  Eccles.  X.  12.  a^x^  vvs^nipauas,         ^  See  the  passage  from  his  Retracta- 

k'th^uvtu  a<pifraf/.iiiiu  avo  Ku^'iev.  LXX.  tions  quoted  at  the  beginning  of  the 

"  iuitium  superbise  hominis,  apostare  a  treatise. 
Deo."  Vulg. 

d2 


3fi      Eteriwl  Life.     The  Creed  why  learned  by  novices. 

DEFiDEtliat  neither  is  this  absurd;  for  they  are  near  one  another, 
"And  if  the  question  be  asked  concerning  air,  whether  it  can 


BOLO. 


be  changed  into  an  ethereal,  that  is,  celestial,  body;  already 
the  very  nearness  persuades.  What  therefore  he  allows  may 
be  done  by  these  steps,  that  earth  be  changed  into  ethereal 
body,  why  does  he  not  believe  that,  when  there  is  added 
thereto  the  will  of  God,  whereby  a  human  body  was  able  to 
walk  upon  the  waters,  it  may  be  done  most  speedily,  as  it  is 
^  Cot.  said,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  without  any  such  steps,  just 
'  '  as  generally  smoke  is  changed  into  flame  with  wonderful 
quickness.  For  our  flesh  is  certainly  of  earth ;  but  phi- 
losophers, (by  whose  arguments  most  frequently  the  re- 
surrection of  the  flesh  is  opposed,  in  that  they  assert  that 
there  cannot  exist  any  terrestrial  body  in  heaven,)  allow  that 
any  body  whatever  may  be  turned  and  changed  into  all 
bodies.  After  that  this  resurrection  of  the  body  shall  have 
taken  place,  being  set  free  from  the  condition  of  time,  we 
shall  enjoy*  throughly  eternal  life  with  love  ineffable, 
and  stedfastness  without  corruption.  For  then  that  shall 
1  Uor.  take  place  which  is  written.  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory ^ 
1^'  ^^-  where  is,  0  Death,  thy  sting  ?  where  is,  O  Death,  thy  strife  ? 
25.  This  is  the  Faith  which  in  the  Creed  is  given  unto 
Christian  novices  in  few  words  to  hold.  Which  few  words  ai^e 
known  to  the  faithful,  that  by  believing  they  may  be  made 
subject  unto  God,  having  been  made  subject  may  live 
rightly,  by  living  rightly  may  cleanse  their  heart,  with 
a  cleansed  heart  may  understand  what  they  believe. 

•  al.  '  The  body  being  set  free,  &c.  shall  enjoy.* 


S.    AUGUSTINE 

OF 

FAITH    AND    WORKS. 


S.  Aug.  Retract,  ii.  38,  mentions  this  work  as  written  soon  after  that  '  De 
Spiritu  et  Litera,'  i.  e.  at  the  beginning  of  A.U.  413.  "At  that  time  were 
sent  me  by  some  lay  Brethren,  studious  however  of  the  Divine  oracles, 
some  writings  which  so  sever  Christian  Faith  from  good  works  as  to 
maintain  that  without  it  one  could  not,  but  without  them  one  could  attain 
eternal  life.  In  answer  to  whom  I  wrote  a  book  entitled  '  De  Fide  et 
Operibus.'  In  which  I  have  set  forth  not  only  how  they  should  live  that 
are  by  the  grace  of  God  regenerate,  but  also  what  sort  of  persons  should 
be  admitted  to  the  laver  of  Regeneration," 

Some  have  thought  the  '  writings'  mentioned  were  St.  Jerome's  on  Isaiah 
or  on  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  but  St.  Jerome  does  not  go  to  the  length  of 
holding  what  is  here  refuted.    Ah.  from  Ben. 


1.  It  is  the  judgment  of  certain,  that  all  men   without defide 
distinction  are  to  be  admitted  to  the  laver  of  regeneration,  ^^jgus" 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  om'  Lord,  even  although  they  shall      [] 
be  unwilling  to  change  an  evil  and  shameful  life,  rendered 
notable  by  sins  and  scandalous  crimes,  and  shall  even  declare 
and  make  open  profession,  that  they  will  continue  therein. 
For  instance,  if  any  one  is  joined  to  a  harlot,  that  he  be  not 
first  charged  to  leave  her,  and  then  to  come  to  be  baptized;  but 
even    continuing  with    her,    and    confidently   purposing,   or 
even  professing,  that  he  will  so  continue,  that  he  be  admitted 
and  baptized,  and  be  not  hindered  in  becoming  a  member 
of  Christ,  even  although  he  shall  continue  to  be  a  member  of 
an  harlot;  but  that  he  be  afterwards  taught  how  evil  this  is,  iCor.6, 
and  when  now  he  hath  been  baptized,  be  instructed  con-  ^^' 
cerning  the  change  of  his  manner  of  life  for  the  better.     For 
they  think  it  a  perversion,  and  out  of  due  order,  first  to  teacli 
how  a  Christian  ought  to  live,  and  after  to  have  him  baptized. 
15ut  it  is  their  opinion  that  the  Sacrament  of  Baptism  ought 
to  go  first,  that  there  may  follow  after  teaching  concerning 
the  life  and  morals:   wliich  if  he  shall  be  willing  to  hold  and 
guard,  he  will  do  what  is  for  his  interest;  but  if  he  shall  be 
unwilling,  retaining  the   Christian   Faith,  without  which  he 
would    perish    for    ever,    let   him   continue   in   what   sin   or 


oSSomewouklBapdsemen  in  knonn  sin, rather  than  not  al  all. 

T>EFiDE  iinpuiity  soever  he  will,  that  he  will  be  saved  as  if  through 

iCor.3,  fire,  as  one  who  hath  built  upon  the  foundation,  which  is 

~~    ■  Christ,    not    gold,    silver,    precious    stones,  but  wood,  hay, 

stubble ;  that  is,  not  righteous  and  chaste  ways  of  life,  but 

unrigliteous  and  shameless. 

2.  But  they  seeni  to  have  been  moved  thus  to  dispute,  as 
concerned  at  those  not  being  admitted  to  Baptism,  who  have 
put  away  their  wives  and  married  others,  or  of  females  who 
have  put  away  their  husbands,  and  been  manied  to  others  ; 
because  of  these  the  Lord  Christ  without  any  doubt  testifies. 
Mat.  19, that  they  are,  not  man'iages,  but  adulteries.  For  whereas 
they  could  not  deny  that  to  be  adultery,  which  the  Truth, 
without  leaving  place  for  evasion,  affirms  to  be  adultery  ;  and 
(yet)  wished  to  forward  them  toward  their  receiving  Baptism, 
whom  they  saw  to  be  so  caught  in  a  snare  of  this  sort,  as 
that,  if  they  were  not  admitted  to  Baptism,  they  would 
choose  to  live,  or  even  to  die,  without  any  Sacrament,  rather 
than  to  burst  the  bond  of  adultery,  and  be  set  free  ;  they 
were  by  a  certain  human  sense  of  pity  moved  in  such  wise 
to  undertake  their  cause,  as  to  judge  that  all,  together  with 
them,  men  of  evil  and  scandalous  lives,  even  unrebuked  by 
any  prohibition,  uncorrected  by  any  instruction,  unchanged 
by  any  penitence,  were  to  be  admitted  to  Baptism  ;  thinking 
that  unless  it  were  done,  they  would  perish  for  ever ;  but 
that,  if  it  were  done,  even  should  they  continue  in  those  evil 
things,  they  would  be  saved  through  fire, 
ii.  3.   In  answer  to  whom,  this  first  1   say,  that   no  one  so 

understand  those  declarations  of  the  Scriptures,  which  either 
point  to  as  present,  or  speak  of  beforehand  as  future,  the 
mingling  of  the  good  and  evil  in  the  Church,  as  to  believe 
that  severity  of  discipline,  or  the  diligent  keeping  of  it,  is  to 
be  altogether  loosed  and  set  aside ;  not  so  taught  by  those 
Scri])tures,  but  deceived  by  his  own  imagination.  For 
neither,  because  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  endured  most 
patiently  that  mingling  in  the  first  People,  did  he  therefore 
not  lake  vengeance  on  many  even  with  the  sword.  And 
Numb,  Phinees,  the  priest,  thrust  through  with  the  avenging  sword 
25,  5-8.  jj^^,  adulterers  whom  he  found  together.  Which  very  thing 
it  was  signified  was  to  be  done  by  degradations  and  ex- 
communications at  this  time,  when  in  the  discipline  of  the 
Church  the  visible  sword  was  to  lie  by.     Nor,  because  the 


St.  Paul  suffered  not  evil  livhu)  in  the  Church.        39 

blessed  Apostle  groans  with  all  long-suffering  in  the  midst  et  ope- 
oi  false  brethren,  and  certain  even  driven  on  by  the  devilish  — "^^1 

'.2  Cor. 

Stings  of  envy,  he  yet  allows  to  jjreach  Christ;    does   he  11,26. 
therefore  think  that  he  must  spare  him,  who  had  his  own  Phil.  1, 
father's  wife;  concerning  whom  he  gives  charge,  that,  when 
the  Church  hath  been  gathered  together,  he   be   delivered 
over  unto  Satan,  unto  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  Me  ^  Cor.  5, 
spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus :  or  did  he  ~ 
therefore  himself  not  deliver  over  others    unto  Satan,    that 
they  might  learn  not  to  blaspheme :  or  does  he  say  in  vain,  1  Tim. 
/  wrote   unto   you   in   an   epistle,   not    to   company   with  ' " 
jornicators,  yet  not  altogether  with  the  fornicators  of  this  9— 13. 
world,  or  the  covetous,  or  robbers,  or  idolaters ;   otherwise 
ye  had  need  to  go  forth  out  of  this  world :  but  now  I  have 
written  unto  you  not  to  company,  if  any  brother  be  named 
either  a  fornicator,  or  an  idolater,  or  a  covetous  man,  or 
a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner  ;  with  such  no  not 
to  eat.     For  hoic  does   it  concern  me  to  Judge  concerning 
them  that  are  without  ?    Do  ye  not  yourselves  Judge  con- 
cerning them  that  are  within  ?     But  concerning  them  that 
are  ivithout,  God  loill  Judge.     Take  away  the  evil  {man ' )  ^maium, 
fromout  of  yourselves.     Where  indeed  some  so  understand  ^/.'^^t' 
ihe -^Yirsise,  froin  out  cf  yourselves -,  0.^  that  each  man  iixke'^exvubis 
away  from  out  of  himself  the  evil;  that  is,  that  he  be  himself  ^■'^*'*' 
good.     But   in  whichever  way   it   be  understood,  whether 
that  by  the  severity  of  the  Church  the  evil  be  rebuked  by 
excommunications,    or    that    each    man,    by    rebuking   and 
correcting  himself,  take  away  from  out  of  himself  the  evil; 
yet  that  which  is  said  above  admits  not  of  any  doubtful 
sense,  wherein    he    gives    a   charge    not   to   company  with 
those    brethren,    who    in    any    sin    mentioned    above    are 
'  named,'  that  is,  are  known,  and  spoken  of.     But  with  what    iij. 
spirit   and    what   charity    that    merciful    severity   is   to    be 
made  use  of,  he  shews,   not  only  in   the  place  where   he 
says,   That   the   spirit  may   be  saved  in    the   day   of  the 
Lord  Jesus;    but  clearly    in  other   places  also,  saying,    If  2Thess. 
any  man   obey   not  our   word  through   our   epistle,  m.ark^->^^-^^' 
this   man,  and  company  not   with   him,    that  he   may  be 
ashamed:  yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  rebuke  him 
as  a  brother. 


40    Our  Lord  couD/ianded  to  exclude  obsiinale  offenders. 

DEFiDE      4.  And  the  Lord  Himself,  a  singular  example  of  patience, 

Who  even  among  His  twelve  Apostles  still  endured  a  devil 

Mat.  13  wutil  His  Passion;  and  Who  said,  Siiffer  both  to  grow  until 

29.  30.    ijifj  harvest,  lest  haidy^  xvhilst  ye  would  gather  up  the  tares, 

ye  root  out  the  wheat  also;   and  Who   foretold  that  those 

nets,  which  were  a  figure  of  the  Church,  should  have  good 

and  evil  fishes,  even  unto  the  shore,  that  is,  even  unto  the 

end  of  the  world  ;  and  all  other  things  whatsoever  He  spake 

either  openly  or  by  M'ay  of  figure  concerning  the  mingling 

of  the  good  and  the  evil:  yet  did  He  not  therefore  judge  that 

the  discipline  of  the  Church  was  to  be  set  aside:  yea,  rather, 

He  admonished   that  it  was  to  be   made  use   of,  when   He 

Mat.  18,  said,   Take  heed  unto  yourselves:   if  thy  brother  shall  sin 

15—18.  (igf^i^igt  thee,  go,  and  rebuke  hitn  between  thee  and  him  alone. 

If  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  toilt  have  gained  thy  brother. 

But  if  he  shall  not  hear  thee,  take  with  thee  one  or  two,  that 

in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  ivitnesses  every  word  may  stand. 

But  if  he  shall  not  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  Church.     But 

if  neither  will  he  hear  the  Church,  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an 

heathen  man  and  a  publican.     Next,  a  most  weighty  terror 

of  that  very  severity  He  added  also  in  that  place,  saying.  What 

things  ye  shall  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  also  in  heaven  ; 

and  ivhat  things  ye  shall  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  also 

Matt.  7,  in  heaven.     He  also  forbids  that  what  is  holy  be  given  unto 

^'  dogs.     Nor  is  the  Apostle  contrary  to  the  Lord,  in  that  he 

iTim.5,  says.  Them  that  sin  rebuke  before  all,  that  the  rest  may  have 

'^^'        fear;  whereas  He  says,  Reprove  him  between  thee  and  him. 

For  either  thing  is  to  be  done,  according  as  we  are  admonished 

by  the  diversity  of  their  disease,  whom  we  have  undertaken 

assuredly  not  to  destroy,  but  to  correct  and  heal;  and  one 

man  we  must  cure  in  this  way,  another  in  that.     Thus  also 

1  ratio    there  is  a  way  '  of  passing  over,  and  bearing  with,  evil  men 

in  the  Church  :  and  there  is  again  a  way  of  chastising  and 

rebuking  them,  of  not  admitting  them  to,  or  removing  them 

from,  the  Communion. 

iv.         5.  But  men  err,  through  not  observing  a  mean ;  and  when 

they  have  begun  to  descend  rapidly  in  one  direction,  they 

look  not  back  on  other  declarations  of  divine  authority,  such 

as  may  recall  them  from  that  their  purpose,  and  cause  them 

to  stand  fast  in  that  truth  and  moderation  which  is  attempered 


Error  of  looking  only  to  one  side  in  Holy  Scripture.     41 
of  both  together:   and  that,  not  in  this  matter  only,  which  Isetope- 

•11-  1  T^  •  RIBUS. 

now  m    question,  but   also    m  many  others,     l^or  certain, 

looking  to  the  declarations  of  the  divine  writings,  wherein 
One  God  is  put  into  our  minds  as  the  object  of  worship,  have 
thought  that  the  Same '  Who  is  the  Son,  is  the  Father,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost:  others  again,  as  it  were,  suffering  under 
the  contrary  disease,  fixing  their  attention  on  those  things 
whereby  the  Trinity  is  declared,  and  being  unable  to  under- 
stand how  there  is  one  God,  when  as  neither  is  the  Father 
the  Son,  nor  the  Son  the  Father,  nor  the  Holy  Ghost  either 
the  Father  or  the  Son,  have  thought  that  they  must  maintain 
'  differences  also  of  substances.  Certain,  looking  to  the  praise 
of  holy  virginity  in  the  Scriptures,  have  condemned  marriages: 
certain,  on  the  other  hand,  following  those  declarations 
wherein  chaste  marriages  are  commended,  have  set  marriage 
on  a  par  with  virginity.  Certain  on  reading.  It  is  good,  Rom. 
brethren,  not  to  eatjlesh,  nor  to  drink  wine;  and  some  other  '  ' 
like  words ;  have  thought  the  creature  of  God,  and  what 
meats  they  would,  to  be  unclean:  whereas  certain,  reading. 
Every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  nothing  is  to  be  rejected,  iTim.4, 
which  is  received  with  giving  of  thanks,  have  fallen  into 
greediness  and  drunkenness ;  not  having  it  in  their  power  to 
remove  from  themselves  sins,  unless  there  should  succeed  to 
them  as  great,  or  greater,  sins  on  the  opposite  side. 

6.  Thus  in  this  matter  also,  w^hich  we  have  in  hand, 
certain  looking  to  the  precepts  of  severity,  whereby  we  are 
admonished  to  rebuke  the  unruly,  not  to  give  what  is  holy 
unto  dogs,  to  hold  as  an  heathen  man  one  who  despises  the 
Church,  to  pluck  away  from  the  frame  of  the  body  the 
member  which  causes  offence ;  so  distort  the  peace  of  the 
Church,  as  that  they  endeavour  before  the  time  to  separate 
the  tares,  and,  blinded  by  this  error,  are  themselves  rather 
separated  from  the  Unity  of  Christ.  Such  as  is  the  case 
which  we  have  against  the  schism  of  Donatus.  And  this, 
not  with  those,  who  know  that  Caecilianus  was  assailed,  not 
by  true,  but  by  scandalous,  charges,  and  who,  through  a 
shame  which  works  death,  refuse  to  relinquish  their  fatal 
opinion;  but  with  those  unto  whom  we  say,  What  though  they 

*  Latin  writers  constantly  thus  indicate  '  Person'  by  the  masculine  pronoun. 


42  Some  evil  to  be  horvc  with  fnr  iinUifs  sake. 

DKFiDEhad  been  evil  men,  by  reason  of  wliom  ye  are  not  in  tV.e 
Chnrcli,  still  ye  ought  by  bearing  with  those,  whom  ye  could 
in  no  wise  correct  or  set  apart,  to  have  continued  in  the 
Church.  But  certain,  making  the  opposite  hazard,  having 
seen  clearly  that  the  mingling  of  the  good  and  evil  in  the 
Church  is  pointed  out  and  foretold,  and  having  learnt  pre- 
cepts of  patience,  (which  so  render  us  most  sure,  as  that, 
even  if  there  seem  to  be  tares  in  the  Church,  yet  is  not  eitlier 
our  faith  or  our  charity  hindered,  so  as  that,  because  we  see 
that  there  are  tares  in  the  Church,  we  ourselves  depart  from 
the  Church,)  think  that  the  discipline  of  the  Church  is  to  be 
abandoned,  assigning  to  them  that  are  set  over  it  a  certain 
most  perverse  absence  of  care,  so  that  there  pertain  not  unto 
them,  save  only  to  say  what  is  to  be  shunned  and  what  to  be 
done,  but  whatsoever  each  man  may  do,  never  to  heed. 
V.  7.  But  we  judge  that  it  pertains  unto  sound  doctrine  out  of 

*"^'^',"both  declarations'  to  attemper  our  life  and  opinion,  so  that 

texts,  we  both  endure  dogs  in  the  Church,  for  the  sake  of  the 
peace  of  the  Church,  and,  where  the  peace  of  the  Church  is 
safe,  give  not  what  is  holy  unto  dogs.  When  therefore 
through  the  negligence  of  them  who  are  set  over  it,  or 
through  some  necessity  such  as  admits  of  excuse,  or  through 
their  secretly  creeping  in,  we  find  in  the  Church  evil  persons, 
whom  we  cannot  correct  or  restrain  by  ecclesiastical  dis- 
cipline; in  that  case  (lest  there  aiise  up  in  our  heart  an 
impious  and  fatal  presumption,  as  that  we  suppose  that  wo 
are  to  separate  ourselves  from  them,  lest  we  be  polluted  by 
their  sins,  and  so  we  endeavour  to  draw  after  us,  as  it  were, 
pure  and  holy  followers,  separated  from  the  whole  frame  of 
unity,  as  if  from  fellowship  with  the  evil)  let  there  come 
into  our  mind  those  figures  out  of  the  Scriptures,  and  those 
divine  oracles  or  most  sure  examples,  whereby  it  was  shewn 
and  foretold,  that  there  will  be  evil  persons  in  the  Church 
mixed  with  the  good  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  and  the 
time  of  the  Judgment,  and  that  the  good,  who  consent  not 
to  their  deeds,  will  be  in  no  way  hindered  by  them  in  unity 
and  participation  of  the  Sacraments.  But  when  those  by 
whom  the  Church  is  ruled,  with  safety  to  the  peace  of  the 
Church,  have  at  hand  the  power  of  exercising  discipline  on 
evil  and  ungodly  men,  then  again,  that  we  sleep  not  through 


Preparation  for  Baptism,  best  tinte  for  correction.      43 

indolence  and  slotli,  we  must  be  excited   by  the  spurs   oFetope- 
other  precepts,  wliich  have  respect  unto  severity  of  restraint ;  ^^^^^- 
that,  directing  our  steps  in  the  way  of  the  Lord  out  of  both 
declarations,  (He  being  our  Guide  and  Helper,)  we  neither 
grow  listless  under  the  name  of  patience,  nor  be  cruel  under 
the  pretext  of  diligence. 

8.  This  moderation  then  being  observed  which  is  accord-     vi. 
ing  to  sound  doctrine,  let  us  look  to  the  point  at  issue,  that 

is,  whether  men  are  to  be  so  admitted  to  receive  Baptism,  as 
that  no  diligence  keep  watch  in  this  case,  lest  what  is  holy 
be  given  unto  dogs ;    to  such  an  extent  as  that  it  should 
seem   that   not   even    they,   who    are    guilty    of  most   open 
adultery,  and  who  make  profession  of  continuing  therein,  are 
to   be   kept  from  a  Sacrament  of  so   great  holiness;  unto 
which,  without  any  doubt,  they  would  not  be  admitted,  if, 
during  those  very  days,  (on  which,  being  about  to  partake  of 
that  grace,  after  their  names  have  been  given  in,  they  are 
under  cleansing  by  abstinence,  fastings,  and  exorcisms,)  they 
were    to   make    ])rofession    that   they   would    lie    with    their 
lawful  and  true  wives,  and  that  in  this  matter,  although  at 
another  time  allowed,  they  would  during  these  few  solemn 
days  observe  no  continence.     How   then  is   the  adulterer, 
who  refuses    correction,   admitted   unto   those    holy    things, 
whereunto    the    married    is    not     admitted,    if    he    refuse 
observance } 

9,  But  first,  they  say,  let  him  be  baptized;  afterwards  let 
him  be  tauglit  what  pertains  unto  a  good  life  and  morals. 
This  takes  place,  when  it  so  chances  that  the  last  day  of  life 
constrains  any  one,  so  that  he  believe  after  the  fewest  possible 
words',  (wherein  yet  all  tilings  are  contained,)  and  receive  i  ad  ver- 
the  Sacrament;  in  order  that,  if  he  shall  pass  out  of  this  life.^^P^"' 

.  ,  .  .         cissima. 

he  may  go  forth  set  free  from  the  guilt*  of  all  his  past  sins,  ^reatu 
But  if  he  ask  it  in  health,  and  there  is  space  for  learning, 
what  other  time  can  be  found  more  opportune,  wherein  to 
hear  in  what  manner  he  ought  to  become  a  believer  and  live, 
than  that,  when,  with  a  mind  more  intent,  and,  through  very 
religious  awe,  anxious,  he  is  seeking  the  Sacrament  of  most 
saving  Faith.  What?  do  we  to  that  degree  dissemble  trom 
our  own  consciousness^  that  we  either  remember  not  our  ^  a  sen- 
own  selves,  how  intent  we  wei'e  and  anxious  what  precepts  nostris. 


44         Old  Man  fo  be  put  q/f /or  Bajifism,  not  after. 

DEFiDE  they,  by  whom  we  were  being  catechized,  would  give  us, 
when  we  were  petitioning  for  the  Sacraments  of  that  fount, 
and  on  this  account  were  also  called  Competentes ;  or  mark 
not  others,  who,  year  by  year,  run  to  the  laver  of  Regenera- 
tion, what  kind  of  persons  they  are  on  the  very  days  on 
which  they  are  catechized,  exorcised,  examined;  with  how 
great  watchfulness  they  come  together,  with  how  great  zeal 
they  glow,  with  what  anxiety  they  are  held  in  suspense  ? 
If  then  be  not  the  time  for  learning,  what  life  is  suitable  to 
that  so  great  Sacrament,  which  they  desire  to  receive;  when 
will  it  be?  What?  when  they  shall  have  received  it,  in  so 
great  crimes  continuing  even  after  Baptism,  not  new  men, 
but  old  offenders?  So  that  forsooth  it  be  first  said  unto  them 
by  a  strange  perversion,  '  Put  on  the  new  man;'  and,  when 
they  shall  have  put  it  on,  it  be  after  said,  '  Put  off"  the  old 
Col.  3,  man ;'  whereas  the  Apostle  keeping  a  sound  order  says.  Put 
E  h^  4   ^ff  ^''^  o^^  man,  and  put  on  the  new  man;   and  the  Lord 

22.  24,   Himself  cries  aloud,  No  man  seweth  a  new  piece  unto  an 

Matt.  9  .         . 

16.  if.  'old  garment,  and  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles. 

For  what  else  is  the  purport  of  that  whole  time,  during  which 

they  hold  the  place  and  name  of  Catechumens,  except  that 

they  may  hear  what  the  faith,  and  of  what  kind  the  life,  of  a 

Christian  ought  to  be;    that,  after  they  shall   have   proved 

their  own  selves,  they  may  then  eat  of  the  Table  and  drink 

1  Cor.    of  i\iQ  Clip  of  the  Lord?     Seeing  that  He  that  eateth  and 

2y!         drinketh    unworthily,   eateth    and   drinketh    condemnation 

unto  himself.     But  what  is  done  during  the  whole  time,  at 

which  it  is  the  wholesome  appointment  of  the  Church,  that 

they,  who  are  approaching  unto  the  name  of  Christ,  be  in 

the  rank  of  Catechijmens,  this  is  done  much  more  diligently 

and  urgently  on  those  days,  on  which  they  are  called  Com- 

petentes,  when  they  have  already  given  in   their  names  in 

order  to  receive  Baptism. 

vii.         10.  What,    if,    they    say,    a    virgin    hath    been    married 

unknowingly  unto  the  husband  of  another?     If  she  continue 

in  ignorance  of  this  for  ever,  she  will  never  be  by  reason  of 

this  an  adulteress:  but  if  she  come  to  know  it,  from  this  very 

moment  will  she  begin  to  be  an  adulteress,  from  the  time, 

that  is,  that  she  hath  knowingly  lain  with  another's  husband. 

As  in  the  law  of  estates,  each  man  is  most  rightlv  said  to  be 


Adulterous  Marrtaye,  when  known  as  such,  is  Adultery.  45 
the  possessor  in  good  faith,  so  long  as  he  is  ignorant  that  hcETOPE- 

Ttl  RUS 

is  in  possession   of"  what  is   another's:    but  when   he   shall - 


come  to  know  it,  and  shall  not  withdraw  from  another's  pos- 
session, then  is  he  held  to  be  of  ill  faith,  and  is  justly  called 
unjust.  Far  be  it  therefore  that  with  a  feeling  clearly  not 
Imman,  but  clearly  vain,  we  so  grieve  when  scandalous 
crimes  are  corrected,  as  if  it  were  the  putting  asunder  of 
marriages;  especially  in  the  City  of  our  God,  in  His  Holy 
Hill,  that  is,  in  the  Church,  wherein  of  marriage,  not  thePs.48,1. 
bond  alone,  but  the  Sacrament  is  so  set  forth',  as  that  it  is' '  com- 
not  lawful  for  a  man  to  deliver  his  wife  unto  another;  which  tur.' 
in  the  times  of  the  Roman  Republic,  Cato  is  reported  to  have 
done,  not  only  without  any  blame  whatever,  but  even  with 
praise.  Nor  is  there  need  now  to  treat  any  more  at  length 
on  this  point,  when  even  they,  to  whom  I  am  replying,  dare 
not  to  affirm  that  this  is  no  sin,  and  deny  not  that  it  is 
adultery,  that  they  be  not  openly  convicted  of  opposing  the 
Lord  Himself,  and  the  Holy  Gospel.  But  whereas  it  is  their 
will  that  such  be  first  admitted  to  partake  of  the  Sacrament 
of  Baptism,  and  unto  the  Lord's  Table,  although  they  shall 
in  most  plain  language  refuse  correction  :  nay  further  that  it 
behoveth  not  that  thev  be  at  all  admonished  on  this  matter, 
but  be  afterward  taught;  so  that,  if  they  shall  receive  to 
observe  the  precept,  and  shall  correct  their  fault,  they  be 
counted  among  the  wheat ;  but,  if  they  shall  contemn  it,  be 
borne  with  among  the  tares:  they  sufficiently  shew  that  they 
themselves  ai'e  not  defending  those  crimes,  or  acting  as  if 
they  were  light  crimes  or  none  at  all.  For  what  Christian  of 
good  hope  could  esteem  adultery  to  be  no  crime  at  all,  or  a 
slight  one  ? 

II.  The  order,  however,  in  which  these  things  in  others 
are  either  corrected  or  borne  with,  they  think  that  they  bring 
forward  out  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  when  they  say  that  the 
Apostles  so  acted;  and  from  their  letters  they  bring  forward 
certain  texts'^,  wherein  they  are  found  to  have  first  introduced'  testi- 
the  doctrine  of  faith,  and  after  to  have  delivered  precepts  of' 
morality.  And  hence  they  would  have  it  understood,  that 
we  are  to  make  known  only  the  rule  of  faith  to  them  who  are 
to  be  baptized,  and  afterward,  when  now  they  have  been 
baptized,  are  to  deliver  unto  them  precepts  also  concerning 


^monia 


46     Faith  why  placed  before  rules  of  life  in  the  Epistles. 

DEFTDEthe  change  of  life  for  the  better;  as  though  they  read  certain 
Apostohc  Epistles  addressed  to  men  about  to  be  baptized, 
wherein  they  treated  of  faith  only;  and  others,  unto  men 
already  baptized,  wherein  are  contained  precepts  concerning 
the  avoiding  evil,  and  the  entering  upon  good,  habits  of  life. 
When,  then,  it  is  certain  that  they  addressed  letters  unto 
Christians  already  baptized,  why  are  these  woven  together 
of  both  discourses,  both  that  which  relates  unto  faith, 
and  that  which  relates  unto  a  good  life?  What?  is  it, 
haply,  now  their  will  that  we  cease  to  give  both  to  them 
who  are  to  be  baptized,  and  restore  both  to  them  who 
have  been  baptized?  But,  if  it  be  absurd  to  say  this,  then 
let  them  confess  that  the  Apostles  set  in  tlieir  Epistles 
their  doctrine  made  perfect  of  both;  but  that  they  for  this 
reason  generally  first  introduced  faith,  and  after  added  what 
pertains  unto  a  good  life,  because,  in  man  himself,  unless 
faith   go   first,   a  good  life  will  be  unable   to   follow.     For 

WHATSOEVER  A   MAN  SHALL  HAVE   HONE,  AS   IF  AEIGHT,  UnleSS 

it  be  referred  to  that  piety  which  is  toward  God,  it  ought  not 
to  be  called  right.  But  if  some  foolish  and  very  unlearned 
men  judged  that  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostles  were  addressed 
to  Catechumens,  certainly  even  themselves  would  confess, 
that  unto  them  who  are  not  yet  baptized,  we  are  to  make 
known  precepts  concerning  the  manner  of  life  which  is 
suitable  unto  faith,  together  with  rules  of  faith:  unless 
haply  these  by  their  argument  draw  us  to  this  strait,  that 
they  would  have  the  first  portions  of  the  Apostolic  Epistles 
wherein  they  speak  of  Faith,  to  be  read  to  the  Catechumens; 
but  the  latter,  to  believers,  wherein  now  charge  is  given 
how  Christians  ought  to  live.  But  if  to  speak  thus  be  most 
foolish  ;  there  is  then  no  proof  of  this  opinion  out  of  the 
Epistles  of  the  Apostles,  why  we  should  therefore  judge  it 
right  to  admonish  them  who  are  to  be  baptized  concerning 
the  faith,  and  them  who  have  been  baptized  concerning  the 
manner  of  life,  because  they  in  the  former  portions  of  their 
letters  set  forth  faith,  and  afterward  in  due  order  exhorted 
that  believers  should  live  well.  For  although  that  be  first 
and  this  after,  yet  very  often  in  one  continuous  discoju'se 
are  we  with  most  sound  and  diligent  teaching  to  preach 
both  unto  Catechumens,  both  unto  believers,  both  unto  them 


Uepevtancey  put  before  Faiih,  implies  Christian  practice.  47 

that  are  to  bo  baptized,  both  unto  them  that  have  beenExofE- 
baptized,  whether  it  bo  in  order  that  they  be  instructed,  orill^^^ 
that  they  forget  not,  or  that  they  make  profession,  or  that 
they  be  strengthened.  Therefore  unto  the  Epistle  of  Peter, 
unto  the  Epistle  of  John,  out  of  which  they  allege  certain 
texts,  let  them  add  the  Epistles  of  Paul  also  and  of  other 
Apostles:  the  fact  which  they  have  noted,  that  they  speak 
first  of  faith,  and  after  of  manner  of  life,  is  to  be  taken  in 
that  sense,  which,  if  I  mistake  not,  I  have  most  clearly  set  forth. 

12.  But,  they  say,  Peter,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  so    viii, 
addressed  those,  who,  upon  hearing  the  word,  were  baptized 

in  one  day  three  thousand,  as  that  he  preached  unlo  them 
faith  alone,  whereby  to  believe  in  Christ.     And  when  they 
had  said,    llliat  shall  we  do?   he  answered  them,  Repent,  Acts  2, 
a  fid  be  baptized  every  one  of  rjou  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ^  ^^^  ' 
Jesus  Christ,  for  the  reviission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive ugife 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Why  therefore  do  they  not  note'^j-^^ 
that  it  was  said.  Repent.    For  in  that  is  the  stripping  off  of  the 
old  life,  that  they  who  are  baptized  may  be  clothed  with  the 
new.     But  to  whom  is   the  repentance,  which  is  from  dead 
works,  fruitful,  if  he  continue  in  adultery  and  other  crimes, 
wlserein  is  involved  the  love  of  this  world? 

13.  But,  they  say,  of  that  unbelief  alone,  whereby   they 
believed  not  in  Christ,  he  willed  them  to  repent.    Wonderful 
presumption  !   (I  would  not  give  it  a  heavier  name,)  when, 
upon  that  being  heard  which  was  said.  Repent  ye,  it  is  said 
to  have  been  of  unbelief  alone,  whereas  the  evangelic  teaching 
delivered  a  change  of  life  from  the  old  unto  the  new,  wherein 
certainly  that  also  is  contained  which  the  Apostle  lays  down  » 
in  that  sentence,  Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  7nore ,-    and  the  Eph.  4 
rest,  wlierein  he  follows  out  what  it  is  to  lay  aside  the  old^^- 
man,  and  to  put  on  the  new.     But  in  these  very  words  of 
Peter  they  have  whence  they  might  be  admonished,  if  they 
would  attend  diligently.     For  after  that  he  had  said,  Repent 

ye,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  Jesns  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall 
receive  the  <jift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     For  unto  us^  is  this^Gr.you, 
promise  and  unto  our  children,  and  unto  all  who  are  afar^'^^^' 
off,  whomsoever  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call ;  the  wiiter  of 
tlie  book  straightway  added  and  said,  And  with  many  other 


48    Argument  from  silence  of  Holy  Writ  proves  too  much. 

DEFiDE  words  testified  he,  saying.  Save  yourselves  from  this  jierverse 
generation.     But  they  most  eagerly  caught  and  received  his 

^  et  ere- words,  [and  believed^,)  and  were  baptized;  and  there  were 
added  on  that  day  three  thousand  soitls.  Who  would  not 
here  understand,  that  in  those  7na7iy  other  words,  on  which, 
by  reason  of  their  length,  the  writer  is  silent,  this  was  the 
object  of  Peter,  that  they  should  save  themselves  from  this 
perverse  generation;  since  the  sentence  itself  is  given  briefly, 
in  order  to  persuade  to  which  Peter  urged  them  with  many 
words.  The  sum  and  substance,  that  is  to  say,  was  set  down, 
when  it  was  said.  Save  yourselves  from  this  perverse  gene- 
ration. But,  in  order  that  this  might  be  done,  Peter  with 
many  words  testified.  Among  these  words  was  the  con- 
demnation of  dead  works,  which  they  who  love  this  world 
work  evilly,  and  the  setting  forth  of  a  good  life,  for  them  to 
hold  and  follow,  who  save  themselves  from  this  perverse 
generation.  Now  therefore,  if  they  will,  let  them  endeavour 
to  maintain,  that  be  saves  himsell'  from  this  perverse  gene- 
ration, who  only  believes  in  Christ,  although  he  continue  in 
what  scandalous  sins  soever  he  will,  even  unto  the  making 
profession  of  adultery.  Which  if  it  be  impious  to  assert,  let 
them  who  are  to  be  baptized  hear,  not  only  what  they  ought 
to  believe,  but  also  how  they  may  save  themselves  from  this 
perverse  generation.  For  in  that  case  it  is  necessary  that 
they  hear  how,  believing,  they  ought  to  walk. 
ix.         14.  The   Eunuch,  they  say,  he,   whom  Philip   baptized, 

Acts  8,  said  nothing  more  than,  /  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
~  Son  of  God ;  and  in  this  profession  straightway  was  bap- 
tized. Is  it  then  their  pleasure  that  men  make  answer  this 
alone,  and  straightway  be  baptized  .''  nothing  concerning 
the  Holy  Ghost,  nothing  concerning  the  Holy  Church, 
nothing  concerning  the  Remission  of  sins,  nothing  concerning 
the  Resurrection  of  the  dead  ;  that,  in  fine,  concerning  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  nothing,  save  that  He  is  the  Son 
of  God,  not  concerning  His  Incarnation  of  the  Virgin,  not 
concerning  His  Passion,  concerning  His  Death  of  the  Cross, 
concerning  His  Burial,  concerning  His  Resurrection  on  the 
third  day,  concerning  His  Ascension  and  Seat  at  ihe  right 
hand  of  the  Father,  is  there  to  be  any  thing  for  him  that 
catechizes  to  say,  or  for  him  that  believes  to  make  profession 


Preaching  Christ  implies  ieachiiuj  Christian  practice.    49 

of?    For  if,  when  the  Euniicli  liad  made  answer,  /  believe  ^'^ ^^^' 

that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  this   seemed  to  him 

sufficient,  so  that  straightway  being  baptized  he  departed  ; 
why  do  we  not  follow  this  ?     Why  do  we  not  imitate  it,  and 
away  with  the  rest,  which  we   account  it  necessary,   even 
when  straitness  of  time  is  urgent  on  us  to  ba])tize,  to  draw 
forth  by  questioning,  so  that  he  that  is  to  be  baptized,  shall 
make  answer  to  all  things,  although  he  have  not  leisure  to 
commit  them  to  memory  ?     But  if  Scripture  hath  been  silent, 
and  hath  left  for  us  to  understand  the  rest  of  what  Philip  did 
with  the  Eunuch  about  to  be  baptized,  and,  in  that  it  saith, 
Philip  baptized  him,  hath  willed  that  we  should  understand 
that  all  things  were  fulfilled,  which  although  they  be  passed 
over  in  the  Scriptures  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  we  yet  by  the 
line  of  tradition  know  are  to  be  fulfilled  ;    in  like  manner 
also,  in  that  it  was  written,  that  Philip  preached^  unto  the  ^evange- 
Eunuch  the  Lord  Jesus,  we   are   in  no  way  to   doubt  that 
those  things  also  were  said  in  the  teaching-,  which  pertain  ^'"cate- 
unto  the  life  and  manner  of  him  who  believed  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     For  this  is  to  preach  Christ,  not  only  to  say 
what  things  are  to  be  believed  concerning  Christ,  but  also 
what  things  are  to  be  observed  by  him  who  approaches  unto 
the   frame  of  the   body  of  Christ ;    yea   rather,   to  say   all 
things,  which  are  to  be  believed  concerning  Christ,  not  only 
Whose  Son  He  is,  from  Wliom  according  to  His  Godhead, 
from  Whom  according  to  the  flesh  He  was  begotten,  what 
things    He    suffered    and    wherefore ;    what    is    the    power 
of  His  Resurrection,  what  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  which  He 
promised  and  gave  to  believers ;  and  yet  further,  what  kind 
of  members,  unto  whom  to  be  a  Head,  He  seeks,  informs, 
loves,  sets  free,  and  leads  safely  unto  everlasting  life  and 
honour.     When  these  things  are  said,  at  times  more  shortly 
and  concisely,  at  times  more  largely  and  more  fully,  Christ 
is  preached;  and  yet,  not  only  that  which  pertains  unto  the 
faith,  but  that  also  which  pertains  unto  the  life  of  believers, 
is  not  omitted. 

15.  This  may  be   understood  also   in  that  saying  of  the     X; 
Apostle  Paul  which  they  make  mention  of,  /  determined  to  i  Cor. 2, 
know  nothing   among  you,   save   Jesus   Christ,   and  Him 
crucified.     Which    they    suppose    to   have  been   spoken  in 

E 


50     *  Christ  Crucified''  implies  Crucijlxion  to  the  world. 

DEFJDE  such  a  sense,  as  if  nothing  else  had  been  made  known  to 
*^,^-''"*'them  :  so  that'  they  might  in  the   first  place  believe,  and 
afterwards  being  baptized,  might  learn  whatsoever  pertaineth 
unto  life  and  morals.     This,  they  say,  was  enough  and  more 
than  enough  to  the  Apostle,  who  told  them,  that,  although 
they    had   many    schoolmasters   in    Christ,    yet    not    many 
Fathers,  because  that  in  Christ  Jesus  through  the  Gospel 
1  Cor. 4,  himself  had   begotten  them.      If  therefore  he,  who   begat 
them  through  the  Gospel,  although  he  return  thanks  that  he 
had  baptized  none  of  them  save  Crispus  and  Gains  and  the 
iCor. ijliouse  of  Stephanas,  taught  them  nothing  further  than  Christ 
crucified;  what  if  one  shall  say  that  neither  did  they  hear  of 
the  resurrection   of  Christ,  when  through  the  Gospel  they 
were  begotten  ?    Whence  then  is  it  that  he  says  to  them, 
1  Cor.    For  I  delivered  unto  you  in  the  first  place,  that  Christ  died 
'''   '   ■  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  that  He  was  buried,  and 
that   He   rose   again    on    the   third  day   according  to   the 
Scriptures,    if  he  had  taught  nothing,   save    that   He  was 
crucified  ?     But  if  they  do  not  so  understand  it,  but  contend 
that   this  also   pertaineth  unto   Christ  crucified ;    let   them 
know  that  in  Christ  crucified  men  learn  many  things,  and 
Rom.  6,  especially,  that  our  old  man  hath  been  crucified  with  Him, 
Gal  6    ^^^^^  ^^'^  body  of  sin  may  be  made  void,  and  that  henceforth 
14.        -ii-e  serve  not  sin;   whence  also  of  himself  he  says,  But  from 
me,  far  be  it  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  Cross  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  through    Whom  unto  me  the  world  is 
crucified,  and  I  unto  the  ivorld.     Then  let  them  observe  and 
see  in  what  manner  Christ  crucified  is  taught  and  learned, 
and  they  will  know  that  it  pertaineth  unto  His  Cross,  that 
we  also  in  His  body  are  crucified  uuto  the  world:  wherein 
is  understood  all  the  restraining  of  evil  desires  ;  and  thus  it 
cannot  be  brought  to  pass,  that  unto  them,  who  are  formed 
by   the  Cross  of  Christ,  professed    adulteries    be   allowed. 
For  the  Apostle  Peter  also  concerning  the  mystery  of  the 
Cross  itself,  that  is,  of  the  Passion  of  Christ,  admonishes 
that  they  who  are  by  it  consecrated  cease  from  sin,  thus 
lPet.4,  gayingj  Christ  therefore  having  suffered  in  the  flesh,  be  ye 
also  armed  with  the  same  thought ;   for  he  who  is  dead  in 
the  flesh,  hath  ceasedfrom  sin,  that  now  not  according  to  the 
desires  of  men,  but  according  to  the  will  of  the  Lord  God,  he 


Love  of  God  implies  the  love  of  our  Neighbour.         51 

may  for  the  future  live  in  the  jiesh.     And  what  follows,  et  ope- 
whereiu  he  shews  in  order,  that  he  pertaineth  unto  Christ  ^^^^^' 
crucified,  that  is,  (unto  Christ)  Who  hath  suffered  through  the 
flesh,  who  in  His  Body,  having  his  carnal  desires  crucified, 
lives  well  through  the  Gospel. 

16.  What,  that  those  two  Commandments  also,  whereon 
the  Lord  says  that  the  whole  Law  and  Prophets  do  hang,  are 
by  those  judged  to  favour  this  their  opinion  ?  And  they  so 
make  mention  of  them,  as  that,  since  the  first  Commandment 

is  said  to  be.  Thou  shall  love  the  Lord  thy  God  out  of  thy  ^la.t.22, 
whole  heart,  and  out  of  thy  whole  soul,  and  out  of  thy  whole    ~    ' 
mind;  but  the  second  is  like  unto  this,  Thou  shall  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself;  the  first  they  believe  to  pertain  unto 
them  who  are  to  be  baptized,  wherein  the  love  of  God  is 
enjoined;    but   the    second    unto    them    who    are    already 
baptized,  wherein  there  seem  to  be  moral  rules  of  human 
life    and   conversation.      Thus    forgetting   what   is    written, 
If  thy  brother  ivhom  thou  seest  thou  lovest  not,  God,  Whom  iJohn4, 
thou  seest  not,  how   wilt  thou  be  able  to   love  ?   and   that     * 
other  in  the  same  Epistle  of  John,  If  any  one  love  the  world,  iJohn2, 
there  is  not  the  love  of  the  Father  in  him.     But  unto  w^hat 
pertain  all  the  crying  sins  of  evil  living,  save  unto  the  love 
of  this  world?    And  thus  that  first  Commandment,  which 
they  judge  to  pertain  unto  them  who  are  to  be  baptized,  can 
in  no  way  be  observed  without  good  living.     I  am  unwilling 
to  continue  more  at  length  :    for  those  two  Commandments, 
being  carefully  considered,  are  found  to  be  so  connected  the 
one  with  the  other,  that  neither  can  the  love  of  God  exist 
in  a  man  if  he  love  not  his  neighbour,  nor  the  love  of  his 
neighbour    if  he    love    not    God.       But    for    our    present 
subject,  what  we  have  said  concerning  these  two  Command- 
ments is  sufficient. 

17.  But  further,  the  people  of  Israel  was  first  led  through     xi. 
the  Red  Sea,  which  is  a  figure  of  Baptism  ;  and   afterward 
received  the  Law,  wherein  to  learn   after   what  manner  to  Ex.  14, 
live.  '  Why  therefore  to  them  who  are  to  be  baptized  do  ^^Q^qi-u. 
deliver  even  the  Creed,  and  demand  that  it  be  given  back  to 

us  ?  For  no  such  thing  was  done  towards  them,  whom 
through  the  Red  Sea  the  Lord  set  free  from  the  Egyptians. 
But  if  they  rightly  understand  that  this  is  signified  by  the 

E  2 


52         '  Repen/ance  from  dead  tvorhs'  a  ^first  principle. 

DE  FIDE  mysteries  which  went  before  concerning  tlie  blood  of  the 
Ex.  12,  lamb  stricken  on  the  door-posts,  and  concerning-  the  un- 
iCor.5,  leavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth  ;  why  do  they  not  in 
^'  order  understand  tliat  also,  that  the  very  scjDaration  from  the 

Egyptians  signifies  a  departing  from  sins,  whereof  they  who 
are  to  be  baptized  make  profession.  For  mi  to  this  per- 
taineth  that  saying  of  Peter,  Repent,  and  be  baptized  each 
one  of  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  as  though 
he  should  say,  Depart  from  Egypt,  and  pass  through  the  Red 
Sea.  Whence  also  in  the  Epistle  which  is  entitled  to  the 
Hebrews,  when  mention  is  made  of  the  principles  belong- 
ing to  them  who  arc  receiving  baptism,  there  is  set 
Heb.  6,  repentance  from  dead  uorks.  For  thus  he  says:  Where/ore 
^■^*  leaving  the  word  concerning  the  principles  of  Christ,  let  us 
look  unto  theftdl  accomplishment,  not  again  laying  a  found- 
ation of  repentance  from  dead  works,  and  of  faith  in  God,  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  laver,  of  imposition  of  hands,  of  the  re- 
surrection also  of  the  dead,  and  of  eternal  judgment.  There- 
fore that  all  these  things  pertain  unto  the  principles  of 
Neojihytes  is  sufficiently'  and  clearly  borne  witness  to  by 
Scripture.  But  what  is  repentance  from  dead  works,  save 
from  thoso  works  which  must  bo  made  dead,  that  we  may 
live  ?  Which  if  adulteries  and  fornications  are  not,  what 
any  longer  is  to  be  named  among  dead  works  ?  But  a  pro- 
fession of  departing  from  such  works  is  not  enough,  unless 
also  all  past  sins,  which  are,  as  it  were,  pursuing  us,  be 
blotted  out  by  the  Laver  of  Regeneration,  just  as  it  was  not 
enough  unto  the  Israelites  to  depart  from  Egypt,  unless  that 
multitude  of  enemies,  which  was  following  upon  them, 
perished  in  the  waves  of  the  same  sea,  which  opened  for 
passage  and  deliverance  unto  the  peo])le  of  God.  He  there- 
fore, who  professes  his  unwillingness  to  change  from 
adultery,  how  shall  he  be  led  through  the  Red  Sea,  when  as 
yet  he  refuses  to  depart  from  Egy])t?  Next  they  observe 
not,  that,  in  the  Law,  which  after  the  passage  of  the  Red 
Sea,  was  given  unto  that  people,  the  first''  Commandment  is, 

^  St.  Aug.  in  Exod.  Qutest.  LXXI.  three  of  duty  to  God,  and  seven  of  duty 

speaks  doubtfully  of  the  division  of  the  toman.  Headds  that  in  the  tenth,  which 

Decalogue,  but  prefers  taking  the  1st  he  reads   as  in  Deut.  5,  21.  the  begin- 

and    2d    Commandments  (in   our  divi-  ning,  T/i on  sha/t  tiof  covet,  is  repeated, 

siyn)  as  ojie,  because   then    there    are  as  if  for  two  commandments  correspond- 

i^'-. 


Law,  given  afler  Red  Sea,  contains  faith  with  practice.  53 

There  shall  not  be  unto  thee  other  gods  besides  Me.     ThotcETOPE- 
shalt  not  make  unto  thyself  idols,  nor  any  likeness,  lohat- 


Ex.  20, 

soever  things  there  are  in  heaven  above,  and  whatsoever  ^—5- 
things  there  are  in  the  earth  beneath^  and  ichatsoever  things 
in  the  water  and  tinder  the  earth  ;  thou  shall  not  worship 
them,  neither  shall  thou  serve  them :  and  all  else  which 
pertains  unto  this  Commandment.  Therefore  let  these 
affirm,  if  they  will,  against  their  own  very  assertion,  that  we 
are  to  preach  concerning  the  worship  of  the  One  God,  and 
the  shunning  of  idolatry,  not  unto  men  who  are  yet  to  be 
baptized,  but  after  Baptism  :  and  let  them  no  longer  say,  that  ' 

unto  them,  who  are  about  to  receive  Baptism,  we  are  to  set 
forth  only  faith  which  is  in  God,  and  after  the  reception  of 
that  sacrament  are  to  instruct  them  concerning  manner  of 
life,  as  if  concerning  that  second  Commandment,  which  per- 
tains unto  the  love  of  one's  neighbour.  For  both  are  con- 
tained in  the  Law,  which  the  people  received  after  the  Red 
Sea,  as  though  it  were  after  Baptism  ;  nor  was  there  any  such  ; 

appointment  of  the  Commandments  made,  as  that  before  the 
passage  of  that  sea  the  people  should  be  instructed  concern- 
ing the  shunning  of  idolatry,  and,  after  they  had  past,  should 
hear  that  their  father  and  mother  were  to  be  honoured,  that 
adultery  was  not  to  be  committed,  that  they  were  not  to  kill, 
and  all  other  things  which  belong  to  a  good  and  innocent 
intercourse  with  men. 

18.  If  therefore  each  one  shall  so  come  to  seek  the  holy  xii. 
Laver,  as  to  make  pi'ofession  that  he  will  not  depart  from  the 
sacrifices  of  idols,  save  haply  hereafter  when  it  shall  so  seem 
good  to  him,  and  yet  demand  baptism  straightway, and  require 
that  he  be  made  the  temple  of  the  living  God,  being  not  only 
a  worshipper  of  idols,  but  also  continuing  in  some  so  impious 
priesthood  ;  I  ask  of  them,  whether  it  is  their  opinion  that 
he  is  to  be  made  even  a  catechumen  ;  and  this  without  any 
doubt  they  will  cry  out  ought  not  to  be  done.  For  we  may 
not  judge  otherwise  of  their  heart.  Let  them  then  give  a 
reason  according  to  the  testimonies  of  the  Scriptures,  which 


ing  to  the  se-^enth  and  eighth  Origen  ;  one,  the  number  ten  is  incomplete.  And 
Horn.  viii.  on  Exodus ;  isofthecontrary  his  argument  holds  of  the  text  in 
opinion,  because  if  these  two  are  made     Exodus  xx.  even  in  the  Vulgate. 


54      Fornication  ax  ill  suits  GocVs  Temple  as  Idolatry. 

DE  FIDE  they  think  ought  thus  to  be  understood,  in  what  manner  they 

will  dare  to  refuse  this  man,  and  aflSrm  that  he  is  not  to  be 

admitted,  crying  oat  and  saying,  '  I  have  learnt  and  I  worship 

Christ  crucified,  I  believe  that  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 

God,  put  me  off  no  further,  require  nothing  further  of  me. 

Them,   whom    through   the   Gospel  the    Apostle  begat,  he 

willed  should  then  know  nothing  further  than  Christ  crucified; 

after  the  words    of  the  Eunuch,  wherein   he   said  that  he 

believed  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the   Son  of  God,  straightway 

Philip  deferred  not  to  baptize  him  ;  why  doest  thou  restrain 

me  the  worship    of  idols,  and    adraittest    me   not  unto  the 

sacrament  of  Christ,  before  I  have  departed  thence  ?     That 

worship  I  have  learned  from  my  childhood,  therein  I  have 

on  me  the  most  heavy  weight  of  custom  ;  I  will  do  it,  when 

I  shall  have  the  power,  when  it  shall  be   convenient;  and 

yet,  although  I  shall  do  it  not,  yet  not  without  the  Sacrament 

of  Christ  let  me  close  this  life,  lest  God  demand  my  soul  at 

your  hands.'     What  answer  think  they  is  to  be  given  to  this 

man  ?     Is  it  their  pleasure  that  he  be  admitted  ?     Far  be  it ; 

in  no  manner  would  I  believe  that  they  advance  thus  far. 

What  then   will  they  answer   to  one   who   thus   speaks,  and 

who  adds  that  nothing  ought  to  be  said  to  him  concerning 

the  leaving  idolatry  at  any  rate  before  Baptism,  in  like  manner 

as  that  first  people  heard  nothing  on  that  subject  before  the 

Red  Sea,  seeing  that  this  is  contained  in  the  Law,  which 

they    received   after   they   wei^e  now   set  free  from  Egypt. 

1  Cor.  6,  Surely  they  will  say  to  him :  Thou  art  to  be  the  Temple  of 

God,  after  thou  shalt  have  received  Baptism;  but  the  Apostle 

2 Cor. 6, says.  What  agreement  hath  the  Temple  of  God  with  idols'? 

Wherefore  then  do  they  not  see  that  they  must  say  in  like 

inanner :  Thou  art  to  be  a  member  of  Christ,  after  thou  shalt 

have  received  Baptism;  the  members  of  Christ  cannot  be  the 

members  of  a  harlot  ?     For  this  also  the  Apostle  says,  who 

1  Cor.  6,  also  in  another  place.  Be  not  deceived^  saith  he,  neither  for - 

'  ^°*     nicators,  nor  idolaters,  and  the  rest  which  he  there  numbers 

up,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.     Why  therefore  do  we 

refuse  to  admit  unto  Baptism  idolaters,  and  yet  think  that  we 

are  to  admit  fornicators,  whereas  unto  these  and   the  rest  of 

1  Cor.  6,  evil  men,  he  says.  And  such  were  some  of  you  ;   hut  ye  were 

^^'         washed,  but  ye  were  sanctified,  but  ye  were  justified  in  the 


St.  John  Baptist  taught  good  worksfrom  thejirst.     55 

name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  aud  in  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  etope 

What  cause  is  there  therefore,  why,  when  the  power  of  restraining '■ 

both  is  open  to  nie,  I  allow  one  coining  unto  Baptism  to 
remain  a  fornicator,  and  do  not  allow  an  idolater ;  when 
both  to  the  one  and  to  the  other  I  hear  it  said,  And  such 
were  some  of  you,  but  ye  were  washed?  But  this  it  is  that 
moves  them,  that  they  think  that  their  salvation  is  in  safet}', 
although  through  fire,  whosoever  shall  have  believed  in 
Christ,  and  received  His  Sacrament,  that  is,  shall  have  been 
baptized,  although  they  be  so  neglectful  of  correction  of 
morals,  as  to  live  wickedly.  On  which  question  I  will  bye 
and  bye  see,  with  God's  help,  what  opinion  according  to  the 
Scriptures  is  to  be  held. 

19.  At  present  I  am  still  occupied  in  this  question,  wherein  xiii.  I 
it  appears  to  them  right  to  admonish  them  that  are  already 
baptized  concerning  the  morals  which  pertain  unto  a  Christian 
life,  but  in  the  case  of  them  wdio  ai*e  yet  to  be  baptized  to 
introduce  faith  only.  Which  if  it  were  so,  besides 
so  many  things  which  we  have  said,  John  the  Baptist 
would  not  say  unto  persons  coming  unto  his  baptism,  (Je-Matt.  3, 
neration  of  vipers,  tvho  hath  pointed  out  to  you  iojlee  from 
coming  tvraih  ?  Produce  therefore  worthy  fruits  of  re- 
pentance. Which  admonitions  of  his  are  surely  not  on  the 
matter  of  faith,  but  of  good  works.  Whence  also  unto  the 
soldiers  who  said,  What  shall  we  do,  he  said  not,  In  the 
mean  time  believe  and  be  baptized,  afterwards  ye  shall  hear 
what  ye  ought  to  do;  but  he  before  said,  he  before  premonished 
them,  that  as  a  forerunner  he  might  cleanse  the  way,  for  the 
Lord  Wlio  w^as  to  come  into  their  hearts :  Do  violence  to  no  Luke  3, 
man,  bring  false  accusation,  against  no  man,  let  your  own 
pay  suffice  to  you.  In  like  manner  unto  the  publicans  who 
asked  what  they  ought  to  do,  he  said,  ^.rac^  nothing  further 
than  what  is  appointed  unto  you.  In  briefly  making  mention 
of  these  things,  the  Evangelist  (for  he  needed  not  to  insert 
whole  Catechisms)  hath  shewed  sufficiently,  that  it  pertaineth 
unto  him  who  catechizes  one  about  to  be  baptized,  to  teach 
and  admonish  him  concerning  morals.  But  if  they  had 
made  answer  to  John, '  We  will  not  at  all  produce  worthy  fruits 
of  repentance,  we  will  accuse  falsely,  we  will  do  violence,  we 
will  exact  those  things  which  are  not  owed  to  us;'  and  yet 


56  Our  Lot'iVs  ansu-er  to  the  Youmj  Man  teaches  practice, 

DEFiDE  notwithstanding  he  were  to  baptize  them  after  this  profession ; 
yet  not  even  thus  could  it  be  said,  (what  is  the  present  ques- 
tion,) that  it  is  not  proper  to  the  time  at  which  each  man  is 
to  be  baptized,  to  discourse  unto  him  first  after  what  manner 
he  ought  to  lead  a  good  life. 

20.  What  the  Lord  Himself,  to  pass  over  other  things, 
when  that  rich  man  sought  of  Him,  what  good  thing  he 
should  do,  that  he  might  attain  life  etemal,  let  them  call  to 
Mat.  19,  mind  what  He  answered;  If  thou  wilt  come,  said  He,  unto 
^'^'  life,  keep  the  Commandments.  But  he  said.  What  -^  Then 
the  Lord  made  mention  of  the  Commandments  of  the  Law, 
Thou  shall  not  kill.  Thou  shall  not  commit  adultery,  and 
the  rest.  Wherenpon  when  he  had  made  answer  that  he  had 
performed  these  from  his  youth.  He  added  also  a  Command- 
ment of  perfection,  that  he  should  sell  all  that  he  had,  and 
give  in  alms  unto  the  poor,  and  have  treasure  in  heaven,. and 
follow  the  same  Lord.  Let  them  then  see  that  it  was  not  said 
unto  him  that  he  should  believe  and  be  baptized,  by  the  aid 
of  which  alone  those  men  think  that  a  man  comes  unto  life  ; 
but  commandments  of  morals  were  given  unto  the  man, 
which  certainly  without  faith  cannot  be  guarded  and  ob- 
served. Neither,  however,  because  in  this  place  the  Lord 
appears  to  have  been  silent  as  to  the  suggestion  of  faith,  do 
we  lay  down  and  contend,  that  we  are  to  state  command- 
ments of  morals  alone  to  men  who  desire  to  attain  unto  life. 
For  both  are  connected  the  one  with  the  other,  as  I  said 
before ;  because  neither  can  the  love  of  God  exist  in  a  man 
who  loveth  not  his  neighbour,  nor  the  love  of  his  neighbour 
in  him  who  loveth  not  God.  And  so  at  times  we  find  that 
Scripture  makes  mention  of  the  one  without  the  other,  either 
this  or  that,  in  place  of  the  full  doctrine,  so  that  even  in  this 
wav  we  may  understand  that  the  one  cannot  exist  without 
the  other:  because  both  he  who  believes  in  God  ought  to 
do  what  God  commands ;  and  he  who  therefore  does  it 
because  God  commands   it,  must   of  necessity  believe    in 

God. 
xiv.        21.  Wherefore  let  us  now  consider  that,  which  ought  to 
be  cast  forth  from    the  hearts  of  religious  persons,  that  they 
lose  not  their  own  salvation  through  evil  security,  if  they 
shall  think  faith  sufficient  in  order  to  attain  to  it,  and  shall 


Failh  good  withoul  works  before,  not  after.  57 

neglect  to  live  well,  and  in  good  works  to  hold  the  way  ofETOPE- 
God.     For  even  in   the   times  of  the  Apostles,  throngh  the 


not  understanding  certain   rather  obscure  sentences  ol   the 
Apostle  Paul,  certain  judged  that  he  thus  spake.  Let  us  doRom.3, 
evil  things,  that  good  things  may  come-,  because  he  had  said,^' 
The  law  entered,  that  the  offence  might  abound;  but  uhereUom.d, 
the  offence  abounded,  grace  over-abounded.      Which  is  for'*^' 
this  cause  tnie,  because  men,  who  were  most  pi'oudly  pre- 
suming on   their  own  strength,  receiving  the  laAv,  and   not 
obtaining  through  right  faith  the  Divine  help  for  the  over- 
coming of  their  evil  desires,  were  weighed  down  by  more 
and  heavier  offences  through  the  further  violation  of  the  law: 
and  thus,  through  compulsion  of  great  guilt',  fled  for  refuge ireatu 
unto  faith,  whereby  to  obtain^  a  merciful  pardon,  and  help]}^^^^^^^' 
Jro7n  the  Lord,    nho  made  heaven  and  earth;  that,  loverentur. 
being  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts  through  the  Holy  Ghost,2  '^^^' 
they  might  with  affection  perform  those  things  which  they  Rom.  5, 
were  bidden  against  the  lusts  of  this  world,  according  to  that 
which  had  been  foretold  in  the  Psalm,  Their  weaknesses  were  Ps.i6,4. 
midtiplied ;  afterward  they  made  haste.    When  therefore  the 
Apostle  says,  that  he  judges  that  a  man  is  justified  through^^^-'^i 
faith  without  the  works  of  the  law,   this  is  not  his  object, 
that,  after   the    delivery  and    profession   of  faith,  works   of 
righteousness   be   despised,  but   that  each  man   may  know 
that  he  can  be  justified  throngh  faith,  although  the  works 
of  the  law  have  not  gone  before.     For  they  follow  after  one 
Avho  is  justified,  not  go  before  one  who  shall  be  justified. 
On  which  subject  there  is  no  need  to  discuss  more  fully  in 
my  present  work,  especially   since  I  have   very   lately  put 
forth  a  long  work  on  this  question,  entitled  '  Of  the  Letter 
and  Spirit.''     Whereas  therefore   this  opinion  had   at  that 
time  arisen,  other  Apostolic  Epistles  of  Peter,  John,  James, 
and   Jude,   direct  their  aim   chiefly   against  it,   so   as  with 
vehemence  to  maintain-^  that  faith  without  works  profiteth '  astru- 
not:  in  like  manner  as  Paul  himself  hath  laid  down,  that  not^"*" 
any  faith  whatsoever  whereby  God  is  believed  in,  but  that 
whose  works  proceed  of  love,  is  saving,  and  truly  according 
to  the  Gospel;  And  faith,  he  says,  which  worketh  through  g&\.  5, 
love.      Whence    that    faith    which    seems    to    some    to    be^' 
sufficient   unto   salvation,  he   so   asserts   to   be  of  no   avail, 


68  St.  Peter  guards  St.  PaiiPs  words  from  misconception. 

BE  FIDE  as    that   he    says,    ff  I  have   all  faith,  so   as    to   remove 
1  Cor.    mountains,  and  have  not  love^,  I  am  nothina.     But  where 

13    2  7  ^ 

1  car /ifa- faithful  love  vvorketh,  there  without  doubt  is  a  good  life,  for 
Rom      ^^^^  ^'^  the  fulness  of  the  law. 

13,10.  22.  Whence  clearly  Peter  in  his  second  Epistle,  exhort- 
ing unto  holiness  of  life  and  morals,  and  foretelling  that  this 
world  is  about  to  pass  away,  and  that  new  heavens  and  a 
new  earth  is  waited  for,  which  should  be  given  unto  the 
righteous  to  inhabit,  that  from  this  they  might  observe  how 
they  ought  to  live,  so  as  to  be  made  worthy  of  that  dwelling- 
place;  knowing  that  of  certain  rather  obscure  sentences  of 
the  Apostle  Paul  certain  unrighteous  men  had  taken  occa- 
sion, so  as  to  be  careless  about  a  good  life,  as  though 
secure  of  the  salvation  which  is  in  faith,  made  mention  that 
there  are  certain  things  difficult  to  understand  in  his  Epistles, 
which  men  perverted,  as  also  they  did  other  Scriptures^  unto 
their  own  destruction:  when  notwithstanding  that  Apostle 
held  the  same  as  the  other  Apostles,  concerning  eternal 
salvation,  as  what  was  not  given  save  to  them  who  live  a 

2  Pet.  3,  good  life.     Thus  then   Peter;    Seeing   therefore,   saith    he, 

■  that  all  these  things  do  pass  away,  uliat  manner  of  persons 
ought  ye  to  he  in  allhohj  conversation  and  godliness,  waiting 
for  and  hasting  unto  the  presence  of  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
whereby  the  heavens  being  onjire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the 
elements  through  fervent  heat  shall  he  melted  away?  but 
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  according  to  His  promises 
look  we  for,  wherein  righteousness  dwelletli.  Wherefore, 
most  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  are  looking  for  these  things,  be 
diligent  that  ye  be  found  with  Him  in  peace,  unharmed,  and 
without  spot.  And  account  that  the  long-suffering  of  our 
Lord  is  salvation,  even  as  our  most  beloved  brother  Paul, 
according  to  the  wisdom  which,  was  given  unto  him,  tvrote 
unto  you,  as  also  in  all  his  Epistles,  speaking  in  them  of 
these  things:  in  which  are  certain  things  hard  to  be  under- 
stood, which  the  unlearned  and  unstable  pervert,  in  like 
manner  as  they  do  the  rest  of  the  Scriptures  also,  unto  their 
own  destruction.  Ye  therefore,  most  loving,  seeing  thai  ye 
know  these  tilings  beforehand,  beware  lest  being  led  astray 
by  the  error  of  unhappy  men  ye  fall  from  your  own  sted- 
fastness:  but  increase  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our 


St.  James  agaitisi  dead  faith.    Salvation  through  Jire.  59 

Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus    Christ.     To   Him   he  glory,  both  et ope- 
now  and  unto  the  day  of  eternity.  ribus^ 

23.  But  James  is  so   veheiBent]y  opposed  to  them  who 
think  that  faith  without  works  avails  unto  salvation,  that  he 
likens  them  even  unto  devils;   T/iou  believest  that  there  is  J ames2, 
One    God;    thou    doest    well:    the    devils   also    believe   and^^' 
tremble.     What  could  be  said  more  shortly,  more  truly,  more 
strongly,  when  in  the  Gospel  also  we  read  that  the  devils,  Mark  i, 
when  they  confessed  Christ  and  were  rebuked  by  Him,  saidj^j^tt/s 
the  same  thing  which  obtained  praise  in  the  confession  of '■^^-  i^j 
Peter?     What  will  it  profit,  saith  James,  my  brelliren,  if  a  j^mes2. 
man  say  that  he  hath  faith,  and  have  not  works?  will  faith  '^* 

be  able  to  save  him  ?   He  saith  also  that  faith  without  works  James2- 
is  dead.     How  long  then  are  they  to  go  on  being  deceived,     * 
who  of  a  dead  faith  promise  unto  themselves  life  everlasting? 

24.  Wherefore  we  ought  diligently  to  take  heed  in  what    ^v-. 
sense  we  are  to  take  that  sentence  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  which 

is  clearly  hard  to  be  understood,  where  he  says:  But  other '^  Cor. 3 
foundation  can  no  man  lay,  beside  that  ichich  is  laid,  which  ~~ 
is  Christ  Jesus.  But  if  any  one  build  upon  this  foundation, 
gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble,  each  man^s 
work  shall  be  made  manifest.  For  the  day  shall  declare  it, 
because  in  fire  it  shall  be  revealed,  and  tlie  fire  sliall  prove 
each  man''s  work  of  what  kind  it  is.  If  any  man^s  work 
shall  abide,  which  he  shall  have  built  upon  it,  he  shall 
receive  a  reward.  But  if  any  nian\<!  icork  shall  burn,  he 
sliall  suffer  loss:  yet  Jiimself  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  through 
fire.  Which  some  think  is  to  be  so  understood,  as  that  they 
should  seem  to  build  upon  this  foundation  gold,  silver, 
precious  stones,  who  unto  the  faith  which  is  in  Christ  add 
good  works :  but  they,  on  the  other  hand,  hay,  wood, 
stubble,  who,  possessing  the  same  faith,  are  evil  workers. 
Whence  they  judge  that  through  certain  fiery  pains  they 
may  be  cleansed  unto  the  obtaining  of  salvation,  by  the 
merit  of  the  foundation, 

25.  If  this  be  so,  we  confess  that  they  with  praiseworthy  I 
love  do  strive  that  all  without  distinction  may  be  admitted 

unto  Baptism,  not  only  adulterers  and  adulteresses,  against 
the  sentence  of  the  Lord  putting  forth  the  plea  of  false 
marriages;  but  also  public  prostitutes,  continuing  in  their 


60  Scriptures  unmeaning  if /he  unclean  are  saved  at  last. 

DFFiDE  most  shameful  profession,  whom  at  any  rate  no  Church,  not 
even  the  most  careless,  has  been  wont  to  admit,  unless  after 
they  were  set  free  from  such  their  prostitution.     But  on  that 
view,  why  they  are  not  altogether  admitted,  I  am   entirely 
unable  to  see.     For  who  would  not  choose  rather  that  they, 
having  laid  the  foundation,  although  they  should  pile  toge- 
ther wood,  hay,  and  stubble,  should  be  cleansed  by  a  fire, 
although  it  be  for  a  somewhat  longer  time,  than  that  they 
should   perish    for   ever?     But    then    those    things    will    be 
untrue,  wiiich  have  in  them  nothing  obscure  and  ambiguous: 
I  Cor.     Althouc/h  J  have  all  faith,  so  as  to  remove  mount aius,  and 
Ja.mes2,h(ii'<i  i^ol  love,  I  am  nothinjj:  and.  What  will  it  profit,  iny 
14-         brethren,  if  a   man  say  that  he   have  faith,  and  have  not 
norks?     What,   u- ill  faith    be  able  to  save  him?     Untrue 
1  Cor. 6, also  will  be  that  saying:    Be  not  deceived;  neither  fornica- 
tors,  nor  idolaters,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  adulterers, 
nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  themselves  with   men,  nor 
drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the 
Gal.  5,   kingdom  of  God?    Untrue  also  that  other  saying,  The  works 
'of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  uhich  are,  fornications,  unclean- 
nesses,  lasciviousuess,  luxury,  idolatry,  witchcrafts,  wrath, 
strifes,  emulations,  hatreds,    variances,    heresies,    envyings, 
drunkenness,  revellings,  and  such  like,  of  the  uhich  I  tell 
you   before,  as   I  have  also  told  you  in  time  past,  that  they 
who  do  such   things  shall  not  inherit   the  kingdom  of  God. 
These  things  will  be  untrue.     P'or  if  only  they  believe  and 
are  baptized,  although  they  continue  in  such  evil  practices, 
they  shall  be  saved  through  fire:  and  therefore,  being  bap- 
tized in   Christ,  even  they  who  do  such  things  shall  inherit 
iCor.  6,  the  kingdom  of  God.     But  in  vain  is  it  said.  And  such  were 
some  of  you,  but  ye  were  washed;  seeing  that  even  after  they 
have  been  washed  they  are  such.     Vain   also   will    appear 
1  Pet. 3,  that  saying  of  Peter,  Thus  you  also  in  a  like  manner^  baptism 
^ forma  f^"fh   save,  not   the  putting  away  of  the  filth   of  the  flesh, 
Winter-   but    the    answer^   of  a   good    conscience;    if  indeed,    even 
rogafio.  aitfiough  they  have  most  evil  consciences  full  of  all  sins  and 
wickednesses,  and  unchanged  by   repentance  for  these  evil 
things,  yet  notwithstanding  Bai)tism  doth  save  them;  for  by 
reason  of  the  foundation  which  is  in  this  same  Baptism  laid, 
they  shall  be  saved,  although  it  be  through  fire.     That  other 


Chrisfs  sentence,  for  evil  ivorku,  to  eternal  punishment.  61 

also  I  see  not  wherefore  the  Lord  said,  If  thou  wilt  cowjeFTOPE- 

unto  life,  keep  the  Commandments;  and  made  mention  o{ — 

those  which  pertain  nnto  a   good  life  and  morals,  if ;   even  I7_i9.' 
although    these    be    not   kept,   a  man   may   come  unto   life 
through  faith  alone,  which  uithout  works  is  dead.     Next,  in 
what  manner  is   that  true    which   He   will    say   unto   them 
whom    He   will  set   on   his  left  hand.   Go  ye  into  everlasl-Ma.t.2o, 
in g  fire,  lohich   is  prepared  for   the  devil  and  his  angelsl^^' 
Whom   He  rebukes,    not   because    they  have   not  believed 
in    Him,    but    because   they    have    not    done    good    works. 
For   assuredly,  in   order    that   no    man    may    promise   unto 
himself  life    everlasting,  of  faith,   which    without   works   is 
dead,  therefore  said   He  that   He  will  separate  all  nations, 
which    were    mixed    together,    and    were    wont   to    use    the 
same  pastures:  that  it  may  be   evident,  that  they  will  say 
unto  Him,  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  suffering  this  and  that,  Mat.25, 
and  ministered  not  unto   Thee,  who  had  believed  in  Him,^^* 
but  had  not  been  careful  to  do  good  works,  as  if  of  their 
very  dead  faith  they  should  attain  unto  eternal  life.     What  ? 
and  will  they  haply,  who  have  omitted  to  do  works  of  mercy, 
go  into  everlasting  fire,  and  will  they  not  go  who  have  taken 
away  other  men's  goods,  and  by  corru]iting  the  Temple  of 
God  within  them,  have  been  unmerciful  towards  themselves? 
As  if  works  of  mercy  were  of  any  profit  without  love,  whereas 
the  Apostle  says.  If  I  distrilmte  all  my  goods  to  the  poor,  i  Cor. 
and  have  not  love.,  it  profiteth  me  nothing ;  or  as  if  any  man     '   ' 
love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  who  loves  not  himself?     For 
Whoso   loveth  unrighteousness  hateth  his  own  soul.      NorPs.11,5. 
will  that  allow  of  being  here   said,  wherein   some   deceive 
themselves,  saying,  that  the  f  re  is  said  to  be  everlasting,  not 
the  punishment  itself  everlasting:  insomuch  as  they  judge 
that  thiough  fire,  which  is  everlasting,  they  will  pass,  unto 
whom,  on  account  of  a  dead  faith,  they  promise  salvation 
through  fire  :  evidently,  that  the  fire  itself  be  everlasting,  but 
that  their  burning,  that  is,  the  operation  of  the  fire  on  them, 
be  not  everlasting;  whereas  the  Lord,  foreseeing  this  also,  as 
the  Lord,  thus  ended  His  sentence,  saying,  Thus  they  shall^^^^-'^^^ 
go  into  everlasting  burning^,  but  the  righteous  into  life  ever- 1  ^ixasiv 
lasting.     Therefore  the  burning  will  be  everlasting,  in  like  ^[jj^",^' 
manner  as  the  fire;  and  the  Truth  hath  said  that  into  it  they  V. 


62  A  dead  faith  saves  not  even  through  Jire. 

DEFiDE  will   go,  not  whose  faith,  but  whose  good  works,  He  hath 
declared  to  have  been  wanting. 

26.  If  therefore  all  these  sayings,  and  the  rest  which  may 
be  found  without  number  throughout  all  the  Scriptures, 
spoken  without  any  doubtful  sense,  shall  be  untrue ;  then 
will  it  be  possible  that  that  interpretation  be  true  concerning 
the  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,  that  they  shall  be  saved  through 
fire,  who  holding  faith  alone  in  Christ  have  neglected  good 
works.  But  if  those  other  are  both  true  and  clear,  without 
doubt  in  that  sentence  of  the  Apostle  we  must  look  for 
another  interpretation,  and  we  must  account  it  among  those 
things,  whereof  Peter  says,  that  there  are  certain  in  his 
writings  hard  to  be  understood,  which  men  ought  not  to 
pervert  unto  their  own  destruction,  so  as  in  opposition  to  the 
most  manifest  testimonies  of  the  Scriptures  to  set  free  from 
all  anxiety  concerning  the  obtaining  of  salvation  the  most 
wicked  men,  most  obstinately  clinging  to  their  wickedness, 
and  unchanged  by  amendment  or  repentance. 
xvi.  27.  Here  perhaps  I  may  be  asked,  what  my  own  sense  is  of 
this  same  sentence  of  Paul,  and  in  what  way  I  think  that  it 
ought  to  be  understood.  I  confess  that  on  this  point  I  should 
rather  hear  men  of  more  understanding  and  learning  than 
myself  speak,  who  so  expound  it,  as  that  there  remain  true 
and  unshaken  all  those  passages  which  I  have  made  mention 
of  above,  and  whatsoever  other  passages  I  have  not  made 
mention  of,  wherein  Scripture  most  openly  testifies  that  faith 
availeth    nothing,   save   that  faith   which   the   Apostle  hath 

Gal.  5,  defined,  that  is,  which  icorketh  through  love;  but  that 
without  works  it  cannot  save,  neither  beside  fire,  nor  through 
fire :    because  if  it  save  through  fire,  then  assuredly  itself 

James  saves.  But  it  is  said  absolutely  and  openly.  What  doth  it 
projit,  if  a  man  say  that  he  hath  faith,  and  have  not  works? 
Wliat,  will  his  faith  be  able  to  save  him?  I  will  however 
declare,  in  as  few  words  as  I  can,  what  my  own  sense  is  of 
that  sentence,  '  hard  to  be  understood,'  of  the  Apostle  Paul  : 
only  let  that  be  especially  kept  in  mind,  which  belongs  to 
the  profession  which  I  made,  that  I  had  rather  on  this 
subject  hear  persons  speak  who  are  better  than  myself 
Christ  is  the  Foundation  in  the  building  of  a  wise  master- 
builder  ;  this  stands  in  no  need  of  exposition ;  for  it  is  openly 


G, 


2,  14. 


Chief  duties  part  of  Foundation,  Perfection  built  thereon.  63 

said,  But  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  beside  that  which  etope- 
is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus.     But  if  Christ,  then  without  ^''"^^- 


doubt  faith  in  Christ:   forasmuch  as  through  faith  Christ Epb. 3, 
dwellcth  in  our  hearts,  as  the  same  Apostle  says.     Further, 
if  faith  in  Christ,  then  surely  that  which  the  Apostle  defined, 
tvhich  icorketh   through  love.     For  not  the  faith  of  devils, 
whereas   they    themselves    both    believe    and    tremble,   and 
confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  can  be  taken  as  a 
foundation.     For  what  reason,  save  because  that  is  not  faith 
which  worketh  through  love,  but  which  is  wrung  out  through 
fear?  Thus  the  faith  in  Christ,  the  faith  which  is  of  Christian 
grace,  that  is,  that  faith  which  worketh  through  love,  being 
laid  as  a  foundation,  suffereth  no  one  to  perish.    But  what  it 
is  to  build  upon  this  foundation,  gold,  silver,  precious  stones, 
and  wood,  hay,  stubble,  this,  if  I  endeavour  to  discuss  more 
exactly,  1  fear  lest  there  be  more  difficulty  in  understanding 
the  exposition  itself:   yet  1  will  strive,  so  far  as  the  Lord 
helps  me,  shortly  and,  as  much  as  1  may,  clearly  to  set  forth 
w^hat  my  own  sense  is.     Lo,  he  who  sought  from  the  good 
Master,  what  good  thing  he  should  do,  that  he  might  have 
life  everlasting ;  both  heard  it  said,  that,  if  he  would  come 
unto  life,  he   must   keep   the   Commandments;    and,   upon 
asking,  what  Commandments  ?  had  it  said  unto  him,   77<OMMat.i9, 
sJialt  not  kill,  Thou  shall  not  commit  adultery.  Thou  shall     ~    ' 
jiot  steal.   Thou  shall  not  bear  false  witness.  Honour  thy 
father  a)id  thy  mother,  and.  Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself.     These  things  doing  in  faith  in  Christ,  he  would 
without  doubt  hold  faith  which  worketh  through  love.     For 
neither  would  he  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  save  after 
having  received  the  love  of  God,  without  which  he  would 
not  love  himself*.     Further,  if  he  were  also  to  do  what  the*  see  §. 

25. 

Lord  added,  saying,  Jf  thou  irilt  be  perfect,  go,  sell  all 
tilings  which  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shall 
have  treasure  in  heaven;  and  come,  follow  3Ie;  he  would 
build  upon  that  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious  stones ;  for 
he  would  have  no  thoughts,  save  of  the  things  which  are 
God's,  how  to  please  God,  and  these  thoughts  are,  as 
1  think,  gold,  silver,  precious  stones.  Further,  if  ho  were 
possessed  by  a  certain  carnal  affection  about  his  riches, 
altbough  he  should  give  much   alms  of  them,  and  should 


64  '  Fire^  the  pain  of  carnal  affection  not  fully  mastered. 

DEFiDE neither  form  plans  of  fraud  or  violence  in  order  to  increase 

them,  nor  through  fear  of  lessening  or  losing  them  fall  into 

any  sin   or  act  of  guilt,  (were  he  to  do  otherwise,  he  would 

be  thus  now  withdrawing  himself  from  the  assuredness  of 

'  sed.     That  Foundation,)  still'  by  reason  of  a  carnal  affection,  as 

tenceis'I  Said,  which  he  had  in  them,  whereby  he  could  not  without 

imper-    pain   suffer  the  loss  of  such    good  things ;  he  would  build 

feet.        ■*  .  o  o     ' 

upon  That  Foundation,  wood,  hay,  stubble;  chiefly  if  he 
possessed  a  wife  too,  so  as  for  her  sake  also  to  have  thoughts 
of  the  things  which  are  of  the  world,  how  to  please  his  wife. 
Therefore  inasmuch  as  these  things,  being  with  carnal 
affection  loved,  are  not  lost  without  sorrow,  for  this  reason, 
they  who  so  have  them,  as  to  have  as  a  foundation  faith 
wliich  worketh  through  love,  and  who  do  not  in  any  way,  or 
through  any  desire,  prefer  these  things  to  that  faith,  having 
suffered  harm  in  the  loss  of  these  things,  attain  mito 
salvation  through  a  certain  fire  of  sorrow.  From  which 
sorrow  and  loss  each  one  is  so  much  the  more  secure  in 
proportion  as  he  has  loved  them  less,  or  had  them  as  though 
he  had  them  not.  But  he  who  for  the  sake  of  retaining  or 
gaining  these  things,  shall  have  been  guilty  of  murder, 
adultery,  fornication,  idolatry,  and  such  like,  shall  not,  by 
reason  of  the  foundation,  be  saved  tlirough  fire,  but  having 
lost  the  foundation  shall  be  in  everlasting  fire  tormented. 

28.  Wherefore  also  in  that  which  they  assert,  as  though 

desirous  of  pi'oving  of  how  great  avail  faith  is,  whei'e  the 

1  Cor.  7,  Apostle  says.  But  if  the  unbelieving  depart^  let  him  depart ; 

for  a  brother  or  a  sister  is  not  uuder  bondage  in  such  cases; 

that  is,  that  on  account  of  the  faith  of  Christ  even  the  very 

wife  joined  in  lawful  union  may  be  left  without  any  fault,  if 

she  shall  be  unwilling  to  continue  with  her  husband  being 

a   Christian,  for  the   reason    that   he   is   a   Christian :    they 

observe  not  that  in  this  way  she  is  most  rightl}'  suffered  to 

depart,  if  she  shall  say  to  her  husband,  I  will  not  be  your 

wife,  unless  you  heap   me  up  riches   even   by  robbery,  or 

unless,  even  now  that  you  are  a  Christian,  you  exercise  the 

wonted  lewd  practices  whereby  you  used  to  maintain  our 

'domurn  house-keeping  ^ ;  or  if  she  have  known  any  thing  else  in  her 

transi-    husband,  either  criminal  or  disgraceful,  by  the  delight  whereof 

gebas.    g]^g  ^as  vvont  to  fill  her  lust,  or  had  a  more  easy  provision 


Future  temporaryJire,if  such  there  be^savesnot  the  wicked.  65 

for  life,  or,  it  may  be,  went  more  richly  attired.     For  then  he  et  ope- 
unto  whom  his  wife  says  this,  if  he  truly  repented  from  dead  — — 
works  when  he  came  unto  Baptism,  and  hath  as  a  foundation 
faith  which  worketh  through  love,  will  without  any  doubt  be 
held  more  by  love  of  divine  grace,  than  of  his  wife's  flesh, 
and    the    member,  which    causeth   him    to   offend,  he   cou- 
rageously cutteth  off.     But  whatsoever  sorrow  of  heart  in 
this    separation    he    shall    sustain  by  reason   of  his  carnal 
affection  for  his  wife,  this  is  the  loss  which  he  will  suffer, 
this  is  the  fire  through  which,  the  hay  burning,  he  himself 
shall  be  saved.     But  if  he  already  had  his  wife  as  though  he 
had  her  not,  not  of  desire,  but  of  mercy,  that  haply'  he'neforte 
might  save  her,  rendering  rather  than  exacting  the  debt  of 
marriage;    certainly  neither  will   he   grieve   after   the  flesh, 
when  such  a  marriage  shall  be  taken  from  him  :  for  neither 
in  her^  had  he  any  thoughts,  save  of  the  things  which  are^soMss. 
of  God,  how  to  please  God.     And  thus  in  so  far  as  he  was  it.- 
by  these  thoughts  building  upon  the  foundation  gold,  silver,  ^  ^°"''  ''> 
and  precious  stones,  thus  far  he  would  suffer  no  loss,  thus 
far  his  building,  which  was  not  of  hay,  would  be  consumed 
by  no  burning. 

29.  Whether  therefore  it  be  in  this  life  only  that  men  suffer  ^  v.  note 
these  things,  or  whether  after  this    life    also   certain    such^*^!H 
judgments    follow,   the    sense    in   which    I   understand    this  the  trea- 
senteuce  is  not,  as  I  judge,  alien  from  the  manner  of  truth. 
However,  if  there  be  another  sense,  which   occurs  not  to 
myself,  such  as  should  be  taken  in  preference ;  yet,  so  long 

as  we  hold  this,  we  are  not  obliged  to  say  to  the  unjust, 
the  disobedient,  the  wicked,  the  impure,  murderers  of  fathers,  ]  Tim.  i, 
murderers  of  mothers,  manslayers,  whoremongers,  defilers  ~^^' 
of  themselves  with  mankind,  menstealers,  liars,  perjured 
persons,  and  if  there  be  any  other  thing  which  is  contrary  to 
sound  doctrine,  which  is  according  to  the  Gospel  of  the 
glory  of  the  Blessed  God ;  '  if  only  ye  believe  in  Christ,  and 
receive  the  Sacrament  of  His  Baptism,  although  ye  change 
not  that  most  evil  life  of  yours,  ye  shall  be  saved.' 

30.  Whence  neither  doth  that  woman .  of  Canaan  make 

a  precedent  against  us*,  because  the  Lord  gave  her  what  she 4  <  pra,. 
asked,  when  He  had  before  said,  It  is  not  good  to  take  away  ^'^'".'^'t 
the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  unto  dogs;  because  He,  Mat.  15, 


60  Woman  of  Canaan  penitent  hefore  favoured. 

DEFiDEthe  Seer  of  the  heart,  saw  her  to  be  changed,  when  He 
praised  her.     And  therefore  He  says  not,  O  dog,  great  is  thy 

Mat.  15, faith;  but,  O  teaman,  great  is  thy  faith.  He  changed  the 
term,  because  He  saw  a  change  in  the  affection,  and  under- 
stood that  that  rebuke  had  come  to  bear  fruit.  But  it  is 
a  wonder  to  me  if  He  praised  in  her  faith  without  works, 
that  is,  faith  not  such  as  that  it  was  already  capable  of 
working  through  love,  dead  faith,  and,  what  the  Apostle 
James  had  no  hesitation  in  saying,  faith,  not  of  Christians, 
but  of  devils.     Lastly,  if  they  are  unwilling  to  understand 

'  perdi-  that  the  woman  of  Canaan  changed  her  abandoned  conduct', 

res™°"  when  Christ  brought  her  to  a  sense  of  her  guilt  by  His 
neglect  and  rebuke ;  whomsoever  they  shall  find  believing 
merely,  and  so  far  from  even  concealing,  as  that  they  make 
free  profession  of  a  most  impure  life ;  let  them  heal  their 
sons,  if  they  can,  in  like  manner  as  the  daughter  of  the 
woman  of  Canaan  was  healed  ;  yet  let  them  not  make  them 
members  of  Christ,  when  they  themselves  cease  not  to  be 
members  of  an  harlot.  In  this  indeed  they  judge  not  ill, 
that  he  sins  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  is  without  pardon 

2  reum.  under  condemnation'-  of  everlasting  sin,  who  even  unto  the 
end  of  his  life  shall  refuse  to  believe  in  Christ;  but  this, 
provided  they  understood  aright  what  to  believe  in  Christ  is. 
For  this  is  not  to  have  the  faith  of  devils,  which  is  rightly 
accounted  dead  ;  but  faith  which  worketh  through  love. 

30.  Such  being  the  case,  when  we  refuse  to  admit  such 
persons  to  Baptism,  it  is  not  that  we  are  endeavouring  before 
the  time  to  pluck  out  the  tares,  but  that  we  are  unwilling, 
like  the  devil,  to  sow  tares  upon  the  wheat :  neither  are  we 
hindering  them  who  are  willing  to  come  to  Christ,  but  are 
by  their  own  very  profession  convicting  them  of  unwillingness 
to  come  to  Christ :  nor  are  we  forbidding  them  to  believe  in 
Christ,  but  are  shewing  them  that  they  are  unwilling  to 
believe  in  Christ,  who  either  deny  that  to  be  adultery  which 
He  declares  to  be  adultery,  or  believe  that  adulterers  can  be 
9.10.    "His  members,  who  He  declares  through  the  Apostle  inherit 

iTim.i,j,Q^  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  are  contrary  to  sound  doctrine, 

10 — 11.  b  '  J  ' 

which  is  according  to  the  Gospel  of  the  glory  of  the 
Lukei4  Blessed  God.  Whence  such  are  not  (o  be  accounted  among 
Ifi.  &c.  theni  who  came  to  the  marriage  feast ;  but  among  them  who 


xvu. 


Badmetnnay  enter  theChurch  ^hut  asprofessing  amendment  .Ql 

were   unwilling  to   come.     For  when   these  very  men  dare  et  ope- 

most  openly  to  contradict  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  to  be - 

contrary  to  the  holy  Gospel,  they  are  not  thrust  hack  from 
coming,  but  despise  coming.     But  they  who  renounce  the 
world,  at  least  in  words,  even  if  not  in  deeds,  come  indeed 
and    are   numbered    among   the    wheat,    and    are    heaped 
together   into    the    garner,   and    are  joined   unto   the   same 
flock   with   the  sheep,  and  enter  the  nets,  and  are  mixed 
with  the  guests  at  the  feast;  but  within,  whether  they  lie 
hid,  or  appear,  then  will  there  be  a  reason  of  bearing  with 
them,  in  case  there  be  no  power  of  correcting  them,  nor 
due  grounds  for  a  presumption  of  separating  them.      For 
far  be  it  that  we  so  understand  that  which  is  written,  that 
there    were   brought  unto    the   marriage  feast,  whomsoever  ^^^•'^'^^ 
they  found,  good  and  bad,  as  to  believe  that  they  brought 
unto  it  them  who  made  profession  of  continuance   in  evil. 
Otherwise  it  was  the  very  servants  of  the  householder  who 
sowed   the    tares,    and   that    saying  will  be  false.    But  /AeMatJS, 
enemy  who  sowed  them  is  the  devil.     But  forasmuch  as  this 
cannot  be  untrue,  the  servants  brought  unto  the  feast  good 
and   bad,    whether  it  be    them  who  lay  hid,  or  them  who 
appeared  after  that  they  had  been  brought  and  let  in  ;    or 
whether  the  expression  '  good  and  bad'  be  used  according 
to    a   certain    life    and    conversation    of  the    natural    man',ihuma- 
wherein  even  they  who  have  not  yet  believed,  are  wont  to"''^'" 
be  either  praised  or  blamed.     Whence  also  is  that  advice 
which  the  Lord  gives  to  the  disciples,  whom  He  originally 
sends  to  preach  the  Gospel,  that  into  whatsoever  city  they 
come,  they  inquire  who  therein  is  worthy,  that  they  may 
dwell  at  his  house,  until  they  go  out  thence.     Who  in  truth 
will   be  this   man    that   is  worthy,  save  he   that  shall   beMat.io, 
accounted  a  good  man  in  the  judgment  of  his  fellow-citizens  ? 
And  who  unworthy,  save  he  who  shall  be  known  unto  them 
as  an  evil  man .''    Of  both  Idnds  men  come  unto  the  faith  of 
Christ,  and  thus  both  good  and  bad  are  brought  thither; 
because  those  bad  ones  also  refuse  not  to  repent  from  dead 
works.     But,  if  they  refuse,  they  are  not  thrust  back  when 
they  are  desirous  to   enter  in,  but   of  themselves  by  open 
contradiction  depart  from  the  entrance. 

32.  Therefore  also  that  servant  will  be  safe,  and  will  not 

f2 


68     Tlie  Church  not  anstver able  for  those  who  reject  her, 

DEFiDEbe   condemned  among  the  slothful,  in   that  he  would  not 
leiogare expend'  his  Lord's  talent;  since  in  truth  it  was  they  who 
were  unwilling  to  receive  what  he  would  expend.     For  it  is 
Mat.25,  for  their  sakes  that  this  parable  is  set  forth,  who  are  unwilling 
2  s"*^^  to  take  upon  themselves  the  office  of  steward  in  the  Church, 
Chrys.    using  as  a  pretext  the  slothful  excuse,  that  they  are  unwilling 
inTri".  to  have  to  give  an  account  for  other  men's  sins;  who  hear 
Actor.    j^^(j  (]q  i^Qt^  that  is,  who  receive  and  do  not  make  a  return. 
But  when  the    faithful    and    diligent    steward,  being   most 
ready   in   expending,  and   most   greedy  of  the   gain  of  his 
Lord,  says  to  the  adulterer,  '  Be  no  longer  an  adulterer,  if 
thou  wilt  be  baptized ;  believe  in  Christ,  Who  declares  that 
which  thou  art  doing  to  be  adultery,  if  thou  wilt  be  baptized; 
be  no  longer  a  member  of  an  harlot,  if  thou  wilt  be  made  a 
member  of  Christ ;'  and  the  other  replies,  '  I  obey  not,  I  do 
not :'  it  is  he  himself  who  will  not  receive  the  true  money  of 
sadulte- the  Lord,  but  will  rather  carry  his  own  adulterated^  money 
nnam.    ^^^^^  ^^^^  Lord's  treasures.     But  in   case  he  were   to   make 
profession  of  doing,  and  were  not  to  do,  and  it  were  after 
impossible   in   any  way  to   amend  him  ;    a  way   would  be 
found  of  disposing  of  him,  so  as  that  he,  who  was  of  no  use 
■•inutilis. to   himself,   should    not   be  hurtful*  to   others;    so   that   if 
within  the  good  nets  of  the  Lord  he  were  an  evil  fish,  yet 
should  he  not  ensnare  the  fishes  of  his  Lord  in  evil  nets ; 
that  is,  so  that,  if  he  should  in  the  Church  retain  -an  evil  life, 
yet  should  he  not  there  set  up  evil  doctrine.     For  when  such 
persons  defend  such  their  deeds,  or  making  most  open  pro- 
fession of  their  intention  of  continuing  in  them,  are  admitted 
unto  Baptism ;  it  seems  that  nothing  else  is  proclaimed,  than 
that  fornicators  and  adulterers,  even  unto  the  end  of  this  life 
continuing  in  that  sin,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
by  the   merit  of  faith,  which  without  works  is   dead,  shall 
come  unto  everlasting  life  and   salvation.     These  are  evil 
nets  which  fishers  especially  ought  to  beware  of:  that  is,  if 
in  that  parable  in  the  Gospel  by  fishers  are  to  be  understood 
bishops,    or    others    of  lower   rank    who    are    set    over    the 
Matt. 4, Churches:  because  it  is  said,  Co7ne,and  I  will  make  you 
^^-        fishers  of  men.     For  by  good   nets  may  be  caught  fishes 
both  good  and  evil ;  but  by  evil  nets  cannot  be  caught  good 
fishes.     Since  in  good  doctrine  there  may  be  the  good  who 


Custom  of  the  Church  against  admitting  open  sinners.  69 

hears  and  does,  and  the  evil  who  hears  and  does  not;  butExoPE- 

in  evil  doctrine,  both  he  who  thinks  it  true,  although  he  obey li 

it  not,  is  evil ;  and  he  who  obeys  it,  is  worse. 

33.  This  indeed  is  matter  of  wonder,  that  brethren,  who  xviii. 
think  otherwise,  whereas  they  ought  to  depart  from  that, 
whether  old  or  new,  at  any  rate  pernicious  opinion,  of  them- 
selves assert  moreover  that  the  doctrine  is  novel,  whereby 
men  most  wicked,  making-  open  profession  of  their  intention 
of  continuing  in  their  scandalous  sins,  are  not  admitted  unto 
Baptism ;  as  though  they  were  sojourning  in  a  foreign  land, 
I  know  not  where,  when  harlots  and  stage-players,  and  any 
other  persons  whatsoever  who  are  engaged  publicly  in 
shameful  professions,  are  not  allowed  to  approach  the 
Christian  Sacraments,  save  after  they  have  set  themselves 
free  from,  or  broken  off,  such  bonds:  who  certainly  according 
to  their  view  would  all  be  admitted,  were  it  not  that  Holy 
Church  retained  her  ancient  and  unbending'  custom,  coming i  robus- 
as  it  does  from  that  most  clear  truth,  whereby  she  knows  ^^™' 
of  a  surety,  that  they  ivho  do  such  things,  shall  not^^^'^^ 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  unless  they  shall  haveiCor.6, 
repented  from  these  dead  works,  they  are  not  allowed  to  ^^' 
approach  unto  Baptism :  but  in  case  they  shall  have  crept 
in  unawares,  yet,  unless,  even  after,  they  shall  be  converted 
and  repent,  they  cannot  be  saved.  But  dninkards,  covetous 
men,  slanderers,  and  if  there  be  any  other  damnable  sins 
such  as  cannot  by  open  deeds  be  brought  to  proof  and  con- 
viction; yet  are  these  strongly  lashed  by  commandments  and 
catechizings,  and  all  such  seem  as  having  their  wills  changed 
for  the  better  to  approach  unto  Baptism.  But  if  haply,  as 
respects  adulterers,  whom  not  human  law  but  divine  con- 
demns, that  is,  who  have  other  men's  wives  for  their  own,  or 
women,  who  have  other  women's  husbands,  they  have  ob- 
served these  in  any  place  to  be  admitted  without  due  care ; 
these  things  they  should  endeavour  to  amend  from  those 
other  which  are  right,  that  is,  so  as  not  to  admit  even  these 
persons ;  not  from  these  latter,  which  are  wrong,  to  make 
wrong  those  other,  which  are  right,  so  as  to  hold  that  the 
Competentes  are  not  to  be  catechized  even  on  the  subject  of 
correction  of  life  :  and,  in  consequence,  to  judge,  that  even 
all  those  who  publicly  exercise  those  shameful  and   sinful 


70      If  some  sins  be  passed  over,  yet  must  not  adultery. 

DiTFiDE  jirofessions,  that  is,  harlots,  panders,  gladiators,  and  such  like, 
even  whilst  they  continue  in  those  evil  practices,  yet  ought  to 
be  admitted.  For  all  those  things  which  the  Apostle  reckons 
up,  saying  at  the  end,  that  they  ivho  do  such  things  shall  not 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  they  who  act  more  strongly 
rebuke,  as  is  becoming,  when  brought  to  their  knowledge, 
and  admit  not  to  receive  Baptism  them  who  oppose  them- 
selves, and  make  profession  of  their  intention  of  continuing 
therein. 

xix.  34.  But  they  who  think  that  all  other  sins  are  easily 
atoned  for  by  alms,  yet  have  no  doubt  of  three  being  deadly, 
and  such  as  require  to  be  punished  by  excommunications, 
until  they  be  healed  by  a  greater  humility  of  penance, 
namely,  unchastity,  idolatry,  murder.  Nor  is  it  now  neces- 
sary to  inquire  of  what  nature  that  opinion  of  theirs  is,  and 
whether  it  be  to  be  amended,  or  approved,  that  we  lengthen 
not  out  the  work  which  we  have  in  hand,  in  order  to  that 
other  question,  which  is  no  way  necessary  for  the  solution  of 
this  one.  For  it  is  enough,  that  if  all  sins  are  to  be  refused 
admission  into  the  Sacrament  of  Baptism,  among  these  all  is 
adultery;  or  if  only  those  three  are  to  be  excepted,  even 
among  those  three  is  adultery,  upon  which  the  present 
discussion  arose. 

35.  But  because  the  conduct  of  evil  Christians,  which  has 
been  before  this  of  the  very  worst  character,  yet  seems  not  to 
have  had  in  it  this  evil,  that  men  inarried  other  men's  wives, 
or  women  were  wedded  to  other  women's  husbands ;  hence 
perhaps  in  certain  Churches  this  neglect  hath  crept  in 
unawares,  that  in  the  catechizings  of  the  Competentes 
these  sins  were  not  inquii'ed  into  or  rebuked ;  and  hence  it 
hath  come  to  pass,  that  they  have  begun  even  to  be  de- 
fended :  which  sins  however  among  the  baptized  are  rare  as 
yet,  if  we  ourselves  by  our  neglect  make  them  not  to  be 
frequent.  In  fact,  it  would  appear  jirobable  that  it  was  such 
neglect  in  some,  want  of  skill  in  others,  ignorance  in  others. 

Mat.  13,  that  our  Lord  meant  by  the  term  sleep,  where  He  says.  But 
while  men  slept,  the  enemy  came,  and  solved  beside  tares. 
But  from  this  fact  we  are  to  think  that  these  things  appeared 
not  at  the  first  in  the  conduct  even  of  evil  Christians,  that 
the  blessed   Cyprian   in   his  letter   concerning  the  Lapsed, 


Even  doubtful  marriayes  to  he  avoided,  ihoiigJi  spared.  71 

when  making  mention  of  many  things  by  way  of  lamentation  etope- 
or  rebuke,  whereby  he  saitli  that  the  wrath  of  God  hath  been  "^^"''' 
justly  moved,  so  as  to  suffer  His  Church  to  be  scourged  by 
a  persecution  such  as  could  not  be  borne,  altogether  omits 
to  mention  these  in  that   place,  when   even   on   that   other 
point  he  is  not  silent,  and  affirms  that  it  pertaiueth  unto  the 
same  evil  conduct,  namely,  to  form  the  bond  of  marriage 
with   unbelievers,  affirming  it   to   be   nothing   else   than   to 
prostitute  unto  the  Gentiles  the  members  of  Christ :  which 
in  our  times  are  not  any  longer  thought  to  be  sins ;  since  in 
truth  there  is  no  commandment  on  the  subject  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  therefore  it  was  either  believed  to  be  lawful, 
or  left  as  doubtful.     Just  as  that  also  is  uncertain,  whether 
Herod  married  the  wife  of  his  brother,  after  his  death,  or  Mat.  14, 
during  his  life'':  and  so  it  is  rot  so  clear,  what  John  declared  '   * 
to  be  not  lawful  to  him.     Also  in  the  case  of  a  concubine,  if 
she  shall  make  profession  that  she  will  know  no  other  man, 
even  although  she  be  put  away  by  him  unto  whom  she  is  in 
subjection,  it  is  with  reason  doubted,  whether  she  ought  not 
to  be  admitted  unto  Baptism.     Whosoever  also   shall   have 
put  away  his  wife,  having  taken  her  in  adultery,  and  shall 
have  married  another,  it  seems  not  right  to  place  him  on  a 
level  with  them  who,  for  other  causes  save   that  of  adultery, 
put  away  and  marry:  and  in  the  divine  sentences  themselves 
it  is  so  obscure,  whether  he  also,  who   may  without   doubt 
lawfully  put  away  an  adulteress,  is  yet  to  be  counted  as  an 
adulterer,  if  he  shall  marry  another,  that,  as  far  as  I  think, 
each  one  who  is  in  this  matter  deceived  commits  a  venial 
faults     Wherefore   those   which    are    manifest    sins   of  un- iveniali- 
chastitv,  are  in  every  way  to  be  restrained  from  Baptism,  ^^^  lyi^' 

-  J  J  '•'que  tal- 

unless  they  be  amended  by  a  change  of  will  and  by  repent-  latur. 
ance :  but  where  they  are  uncertain,  we  must  every  way 
endeavour  that  such  unions  be  not  formed.  For  whaf^eed 
is  there  to  thrust  one's  self  into  so  great  danger  of  uncertainty .'' 
But  if  they  have  been  formed,  I  know  not  whether  it  seem 
not  that  they  who  have  formed  them,  ought  in  like  manner 
to  be  admitted  unto  Baptism. 

••  Josephus,  Antiq.  xviii.  7.  states,  iu  the  Koman  Breviary  on  the  Feast  of 
that  he  married  his  brother's  wife  the  Beheading  of  St.  John  Baptist, 
during  his  life,  and  the  same  is  chanted     Ben. 


14 


iQOnestillan  aduUerernot  '■made  ivJiole.''  Script  urePrecedeii  Is. 

DEFiDE      36.    So    far   therefore    as    pertains   unto    the    wholesome 
XX.    doctrine  of  the  truth,  in   order  that  unto   any  deadly  sin 
there  be  not  given  a  most  destructive  security,  or  even  be 
assigned  a  most  pestilent  authority,  the  order  of  the  process 
of  healing  is  this,  that  they  who  are  to  be  baptized  believe  in 
God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  in  that  form  wherein 
the  symbol  is  delivered;    and  that  they  repent  from  dead 
works,  and  doubt  not  that  they  shall  receive  entire  remission 
of  all  past  sins  whatsoever :  not  that  sin  may  be  lawful  unto 
them  hereafter,  but  that  past  sin  may  not  injure  them  ;  that 
there  may  be  a  remission  of  what  was  done,  not  a  permission 
so  to  do.      Then  can  it  be  truly  said,  even  in  a  spiritual 
John  5,  sense.  Behold,  thou  art  made  whole,  sin  no  more :  which  the 
Lord  therefore  spake  of  bodily  soundness,  because  He  knew, 
that  in  his  case  whom  He  had  healed,  the  very  sickness  of 
the  flesh  had  happened   as  what  his  sins  deserved.     But 
these  men,  where  the   man   enters  to  receive  Baptism   an 
adulterer,  and  goes  forth,  being  baptized,  an  adulterer,  it  is 
a  wonder  to  me  in  what  sense  they  think  it  said  unto  him. 
Behold,  thou  art  made  whole.     For  what  is  there  that  is  a 
grievous  and  deadly  disease,  if  adultery  shall  be  soundness  ? 
xxi.        37.  But  among  the  three  thousand,  say  they,  whom  the 
Apostles   baptized    in    one    day,  and  among  the   so   many 
Rom.     thousands  of  believers,  among  whom,  from  Jerusalem  even 
unto  Illyricum,  the  Apostle  fully  preached  the  Gospel,  there 
were    surely   some    men    united    to    other   men's   wives,   or 
women   united   to  other  \\  omen's  husbands :    among  whom 
the  Apostles  ought  to  have  established  a  rule,  to  be  after 
observed  in  the  Churches,  whether  or  not  they  should  be 
refused  admission  unto  Baptism,  unless  they  amended  those 
adulteries.     As  though  it  may  not  be  said  against  them  in 
like  manner,  that  they  find  not  mention  made  of  any  one, 
who,  being  such,  was  admitted.     Or  as  though  in  truth  the 
sins  of  individuals,  a   thing  which  were  without  any  end, 
could  be  made  mention  of;    whereas  that  general  rule  is 
enough    and   more    than    enough,  where  Peter,  with   many 
words  testifying,  said  unto  them  that  were  to  be  baptized. 
Acts  2,  Save  yourselves  from  this  froward  ivorld.     For  who   can 
doubt  that  adulteries,  and  they  who  have  chosen  to  persist  in 
the  same  unrighteous  way,  pertain  unto  the  untowardness  of 


15,  19 


40 


The  Jews  pttnished  for  wrong  acts  as  well  as  unbelief.  73 
this  world?     But  in  like  manner  it  may  be  said,  that  public  etope- 

,  T,  /-n  1  1        •  ^        11  •  RIBUS. 

prostitutes  (whom  assuredly  no  Church  admits  unto  -Baptism, 

save  after  they  have  been   freed   from  that  shameful  state) 
might  have  been  found  among  so  many  thousands  of  those 
who  then  believed  throughout  so  many  nations,  and  that  the 
Apostles  ought  to  have  established  precedents  concerning 
the  receiving  or  re;jecting  these.     However,  we  may  con- 
jecture   the    greater    from    certain    lesser    things.      For    if 
publicans  coming  to  John's  Baptism  were  forbidden  to  ask  Luke  3, 
any  thing  more  than  what  had  been  appointed  unto  them  ;  ^^' 
it  were  a  wonder  if  unto  them  who  came  unto  the  Baptism  of 
Christ  adultery  should  be  allowed. 

38.  They  have  made  mention  also  that  the  Israelites  had 
committed  many  and  grievous  offences,  and  had  shed  much 
blood  of  the  Prophets,  and  yet  that  not  by  reason  of  these 
things  deserved  they  altogether  to  be  blotted  out,  but  by 
reason  of  unbelief  alone,  whereby  they  would  not  believe  in 
Christ ;  not  considering  that  their  sin  was  not  this  alone, 
that  they  believed  not  in  Christ,  but  also  that  they  slew 
Christ;  whereof  the  one  pertains  unto  the  charge  of  unbelief, 
the  other  unto  the  charge  of  cruelty.  The  one  therefore  is 
contrary  to  a  right  faith,  the  other  is  contrary  to  a  good  life. 
But  he  is  free  from  both  faults,  who  hath  the  faith  of  Christ, 

not  that  which  without  works  is  dead,  which  is  found  even  james 
in  devils;   but  the  faith  of  grace,  which  worketh  through  ^,19.20. 

Gal.  5, 

love.  6. 

39.  This  is  that  faith,  concerning  which  it  is  declared; 

The  kingdom  oj  heaven^  is  within  you.     For  this  kingdom  L^kei? 
they  take  by  force,  who  do  violence  by  believing,  asking  and 2i- 
receiving  the  Spirit  of  Love,  wherein  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  v. '  of 
law,  without  which  Love^  the  law  in  the  letter  made  them  to  d'^^'iq 

'  ...  Kom.13, 

be  under  the  condemnation  because  of  transgression.     We  lo. 
must  not  then   think,  that    it  was   therefore   declared,   The  \  ^j^jcij 
kingdom    of  heaven    suffereth    violence,  and   they   who    </ofylfil- 
violence,  take  it  by  force;   because   even   the  bad,  merely  Mat.ii 
by  believing  and  living  the  very  worst  lives,  attain  unto  the  ^^■ 
kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  because  that  state  of  condemnation 
by  reason  of  transgression,  which  the  law  alone,  that  is,  the 
letter,  caused  by  giving  commandment  without  the  Spirit,  is 
by  believing  done  away,  and  by  the  violence  of  faith  the 


7  J  Faith  of  Grace  is  living,  and  works  by  Love. 

DEFiDE  Holy  Spirit  is   asked   and  received  ;   through  Whom,  Love 
Rom.  5,  being  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  the  law  is  fulfilled,  not  fi-om 

fear  of  punishment,  but  from  love  of  righteousness. 
xxii.  40.  Therefore  let  not  the  incautious  mind  be  at  all 
deceived,  so  as  to  think  that  it  knows  God,  if  it  confess 
Him  with  a  dead  faith,  that  is,  without  good  works,  after  the 
manner  of  devils :  and  on  this  account  entertain  no  further 
doubt  of  attaining  unto  life  everlasting,  because  the  Lord 
John  17,  says.  But  this  is  life  everlasting,  that  they  may  know  Thee, 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  Whom  Thou  hast  sent. 
In  truth,  that  other  also  ought  to  come  into  his  mind,  which 

1  John  is  written,  Herein  know  we  Him,  if  we  keep  His  Command- 

2  3   4 

'    '   ■  ments ;   whoso  saith,   1   knotv  Him,  and  keejietlt   not  His 
Commavdments,  is   a   liar,  and  in   him    the   truth    is   not. 
And,  that  no  one  may  think  that  His  Commandments  pertain 
only  unto  faith  ;  (although  no  one  has  dared  to  assert  this, 
especially  in  that  He  spake  Commandments,  and  lest  these 
Mat.22,  by  their  number  should  dissipate  the  thought,  On  these  iivo 
^^'        hangeth  the  whole  Law  and  the  Prophets;)  albeit  it  may  be 
rightly  said,  that  the  Commandments  of  God  pei'tain  unto 
faith  alone,  if  not  dead  faith,  but  that  living  faith  be  under- 
stood, which  worketh  through  love;  yet  after  did  John  himself 
1  John   declare  his  meaning,  when  he  said,  This  is  His  Command- 
'  "  ■     onent,  that  we  believe  in  the  Name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
and  love  one  another. 

41.  This  then  is  profitable,  to  believe  in  God  with  a  right 
faith,  to  worship  God,  to  know  God,  that  we  may  both  obtain 
'  mere-  from  Him  help  to  live  well,  and,  in  case  we  sin,  may  earn  ' 
pardon  from  Him;  not  continuing  carelessly  in  the  things 
which  He  hates,  but  departing  from  them,  and  saying  unto 
Ps.41,4.  Him,  1  said,  O  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me;  heal  my  soul,  for 
I  have  sinned  against  Thee  :   whereas  they  have  not  any  one 
to  whom  to  say  it,  who  believe  not  in  Him  ;  and  they  say  it 
"  tarn      in  vain,  who,  being  so  far-  Irom  Him,  are  alien  from  the  grace 
o"ge-    Q^  ^]^g  Mediator.     Whence  are  those  words  in  the  Book  of 
Wisdom,  which  I  know  not  how  a  security  fraught  with  ruin 
Wisd.     interprets  ;  even  though  we  sin,  we  are  Thine;  since  in  truth 
1^7  2.     ^,g  have  a  good  and  great  God,  Who  is  both  willing  and  able 
to  heal  the  sins  of  them  who  repent,  not  One  Who  dares  not 
to  destrov   utterlv   them   who   continue  in   their  evil   mind. 


The  Judgment,  threatened  to  evil  life,  is  damnation.     75 

Finally,  after  having  said,  ?re  are  Thine;  he  added,  knowing  et  ope- 
Thi/  poller:   thai  power  certainly  from  which  the  sinner  can-  "'^'^^'" 
not  withdraw  himself  or  hide  himself.    Therefore  he  went  on, 
and   added;    But   we   uill   not   sin,   knoiciitg   that   ice  are 
accounted  Thi)ie.     For  who  that  entertains  worthy  thoughts 
of  the  dwelling  with  God,  wherein  all  are  by  predestination 
accounted,  who  according  to  the  purpose  are  called,  but  must 
strive  so  to  live,  as  is  suitable  to  such  a  dwelling?    Whereas 
therefore  John  also  says,  These  things  I  have  written  unto\  John 
you,  that  ye  sin  not;   and,  if  any  man  sin,  v)e  have  an  ^   '   ' 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,  and 
He  is  an  effectual  intercession^  for  our  sins:  this  is  not  his'*'^°'"^* 
object,  that  we  may  sm  VMth  security;  but  that,  departing 
from   sin,   if  we    have    committed   any,   by   reason   of  That 
Advocate,  Whom  unbelievers  have  not,  we  may  in  no  way 
despair  of  pardon. 

42.  Neither  therefore  out  of  these  words  are  we  to  promise  xxiii. 
any  milder  condition  to  them  who  would  so  believe  in  God, 
as  to  continue  in  evil  conduct;  much  less  out  of  those  where 
the  Apostle  says.  They  who  have  sinned  without  law,  shall '^om.  2, 
perish  without  law,  but  they  who  have  sintied  in  the  law,  ^' 
shall  be  judged  through  the  law;  as  if  in  this  place  there 
were  some  difference  between  perishing  and  being  judged, 
whereas  it  is  the  same  thing  expressed  by  another  word.  For 
the  Scriptures  use  to  put 'judgment' also  for  eternal  damnation; 
as  in  the  Gospel  the  Lord  says.  The  hour  shall  come,  icherein  John  5, 
all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  His  voice;  and  they'^^''^^' 
that  have  done  well  shall  go  forth  unto  the  resurrection  of 
life;  but  they  that  have  done  ill  unto  the  resurrection  of 
judgment.     Nor  is  it  here  said,  '  They  that  have  believed' 
shall  do  this,  and  '  they  that  have  not  believed'  shall  do  that, 
but.  They  that  have  done  tcell  shall  do  this.  They  that  have 
done  ill  that.    That  is  to  say,  a  good  life  cannot  be  separated 
from  faith  which  vvorketh  through  love ;  yea  rather  the  faith 
itself  is  a  good  life.     We  see  therefore  that  the  Lord  said, 
the  resurrection  of  judgment,  in  place  of  the  resurrection  of 
eternal  damnation.     Out  of  all,  that  is,  who  shall  rise  again 
(where  without  doubt  will  they  also  be  who  altogether  believe 
not,  for  nehher  are  they  not  in  their  graves)  He  made  two 
parts,    declaring    that    the    one    shall    rise   again    unto   the 


76  Ifdn  is  only  ^  juchjed,'  so  may  he  unhelief. 

vTs^iixiY. resurrection    of  life,    the   other   nnto   the    resurrection    of 
judgment. 

43.  But  if  they  say  that  we  are  not  to  understand  in  that 

place  them  also  who  altogether  laelieve  not,  but  them  who 

shall  be  saved  through  fire,  because  they  have  believed,  even 

although  they  have  lived  ill,  so  as  to  pronounce  that  by  the 

term  judgment  is  meant  the  punishment  of  these  latter  which 

is  for  a  time.     (iVlthough  this  were  a  most  bold  assertion, 

when  altogether  the  Lord  hath  divided  all   that  shall  rise 

again,  among  whom  without  doubt  unbelievers  also  will  be, 

into  two   portions,  'life'  and  'judgment;'   willing  that  the 

judgment  be  understood  to  be  everlasting,  although  this  He 

has  not  added,  in  like  manner  as  the  life  also.     For  neither 

saith  He,  unto  the  resurrection  of  everlasting  life ;  albeit  He 

surely  meant  not  that  any  thing  else  should  be  understood.) 

Let  them  however  see  to  it,  what  answer  they  will  make, 

John  3,  where  He  saith.  But  he  thai  helieveth  not,  is  judged  already. 

*^'         For  in  this  place  without  doubt  they  either  understand  that 

judgment  is  put  for  everlasting  punishment,  or  will  dare  to 

assert   that  even  unbelievers   will    be   saved   through  fire; 

forasmuch  as,  He  that  believeth  not,  saith  He,  is  judged 

already;  that  is,  is  already  appointed  unto  judgment:  and 

there  will  not  be  any  thing  for  them  to  promise  as  a  great 

largess  to  them  who  believe  and  live  evil  lives,  seeing  that 

they    also    who    believe    not,    will    not    be    destroyed,   but 

judged  ^     And  if  they  dare  not  assert  this,  let  them  not  dare 

-  to  promise  any  thing  more  gentle  to  them,  of  whom  it  is  said, 

they  shall  he  judged  through  the  law;  because  it  is  certain 

that  the  term  judgment  is  wont  to  be  used  for  everlasting 

damnation.    What,  that  we  find  that  they  who  sin  knowingly, 

are  under  terms  not  only  in  no  sense  more  gentle,  but  even 

worse  ?    For  these  are  they  especially  who  have  received  the 

Rom.  4,  law.    For,  as  it  is  written.  Where  law  is  not,  neither  is  there 

Kom.  7  transgression.    Hence  also  is  that  other,  Lust  I  was  ignorant 

7.  8.      of,  hut  that  the  Law  said.  Thou  shall  not  lust.    Tims,  having 

taken  occasion,  sin  through   the  Commandment  worked  in 

me  all  manner  of  lust ;  and  many  other  things  which  the 

same  Apostle  says  on  this  subject.     From  this  more  grievous 

'  And  therefore  are  in  no  such   condition  as   to  need   Baptism  without  due 
preparation. 


Case  of  Jewish  and  Gentile  state  unfairly  quoted.      77 

state  of  condemnation  we  are  set  free  by  the  Grace  of  thoETOPE- 
Holy  Spirit  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  which,  by  the  ^^^^"- 
shedding  abroad  of  love  in  our  hearts,  bestoweth  on  us 
a  dehght  in  righteousness,  whereby  to  overcome  the  inordi- 
nateness  of  lust.  Hence  therefore  it  is  made  certain,  that  we 
are  not  only  to  understand  nothing  more  gentle,  but  some- 
thing more  grievous  in  their  case,  of  whom  it  is  said,  They, 
irho  have  sinned  in  the  law,  shall  he  judged  through  the 
law;  than  in  their  case,  who,  sinning  without  law,  shall 
perish  without  law :  nor  is  the  word  judgment  in  this  place 
put  for  a  punishment  which  passes  away,  but  for  that 
whereby  they  also  that  believe  not  shall  be  judged. 

44.  For  they  who  make  use  of  this  sentence  in  order  to 
promise    salvation    through    fire,    to    them    who,    although 
believers,  are  living  most  evil  lives,  so  as  to  say  to  them, 
TItey  who   have  sinned  uithout  law,  shall  perish  without 
law;  hut  they  who  have  sinned  in  the  law,  shall  he  judged 
through   the  law;   as  though   it  had  been   said,  shall   not 
perish,  but  shall   be   saved  through  fire ;    could  not   have 
observed  this  point  either,  that  the  Apostle   spake   this  of 
them  who  without  law,  and  of  them  who  in  the  law,  have 
sinned,  when  treating  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  Jews;  that  he 
might  shew  that  not  unto  the  Gentiles  only,  but  unto  both 
there  was  need  of  the    grace   of  Christ  to   set   them   free: 
which   the  whole  of  the  Epistle   to   the  Romans   evidently 
shews.     Now  then  let  them  promise,  if  they  will,  salvation 
through  fire,  unto  the  Jews  also  sinning  in  the  law,  of  whom 
it  is  said.  They  shall  he  judged  through  the  law,  the  grace  of 
Christ  not  setting  them  free,  seeing  that  of  these  it  is  said, 
They  shall  he  judged  through   the  law.     Which  if  they  do 
not,  lest  they  come  into  collision  with  themselves,  asserting 
as  they  do  that  they  are  bound  with  a  most  grievous  cliarge 
of  unbelief;  wherefore  do  they  transfer  unto  unbelievers,  and 
believers,  in  what  relates  to  faith  in  Christ,  what  was  said  of 
them  who  without  law,  and  of  them  who  in  the  law,  have 
sinned,  when  the  subject  treated  of  was  concerning  the  Jews, 
and  concerning  the  Gentiles,  tiiat   both   should   be  invited 
unto  the  grace  of  Christ  ?  For  neither  was  it  said,  They,  who  xxiv. 
have  sinned  without  faith,  shall  perish  ^vilhout  faith ;    but 
they,  who  have  sinned  in  the  faith,  shall  be  judged  through 


78  Christian  Liberty.     St.  Peter''s  sentence  on  evil  livers. 

DE  FIDE  the  faith  ;  but  it  was  said,  '  without  law,'  and,  '  in  the  law;' 
that  it  might  sufficiently  appear  that  it  affected  that  cause, 
which  was  being  treated  of,  between  Gentiles  and  Jews,  not 
that  which  is  between  good  and  evil  Christians. 

45.  Although,  even  if  they  would  have  law  in  that  place 
taken  in  the  sense  of  faith,  which  were  too  absurd  and  out  of 

"  hinc.  place,  yet  even  on  this'  they  may  read  a  most  open  sentence 
of  Peter,  who,  (speaking  of  them  who  had  taken  for  an 
occasion  of  the  flesh,  and  a  cloak  of  evil  jn'actice,  that  where 
it  is  written,  that  ive,  who  pertain  unto  the  New  Testament, 

Gal.  4,  (ire  sons,  not  of  the  hond-rvoman ,  bnt  of  the  free-woman.,  in 

31.(6  1 .)  .  '  .'  ^  ' 

soVulg. ^/*^  liberty  nherein  Christ  hath  set  ns  free :  and  had  thought 
that  this  was  to  live  freely,  that,  as  though  secure  of  so  great 
redemption,  they  should  think  whatsoever  pleased  them  to 

Gal.  5,  be  lawful  to  them,  not  considering  what  is  said.  Ye  have  been 

13.  .  . 

called  into  liberty,  brethren  ;  only  make  not  your  liberty  an 
i'Pet.2,  occasion  ofthejlesh:  whence  also  Paul  himself  says,  As  free, 

yet  not  having  your  liberty  as  a  cloak  of  evil  practice,)  says 
2  Pet. 2,  of  them  in  his  second  Epistle  also,  These  are  wells  that  are 

I'j 22. 

"  dry,  and  clouds  tossed  with  a  tempest;  unto  whom  the  gloom 

of  darkness  is  reserved  for  ever ;  for,  when  they  speak  proud 

words  of  vanity,  they  entice  in  the  lusts  of  the  uantonness  of 

^  margi- t/ie  Jlesh  them  who  are  but  just^  escaped,  after  living  in 

reading, ^^'^or,  offering  unto  them  liberty,  whereas  they  themselves 

and  so    ^^^.^  slaves  of  corruption.    For  of  ichom  one  is  overcome,  unto 

Vulg.  ./I  '       „        .  . 

and  him  is  he  made  over  as  a  slave.  For  if,  whilst  Jleeing  from 
the  pollutions  of  the  woi'ld  unto  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  they  are  again  entangled  therein, 
and  overcome,  the  latter  state  becomes  unto  them  worse  than 
the  former.  For  it  ivere  better  for  them  not  to  know  the 
way  of  righteousness,  than,  when  they  know  it,  to  turn  back 
from  the  holy  Commandment  delivered  unto  them.  But  it 
hath  happened  unto  them,  what  is  said  in  the  true  proverb, 
The  dog  is  turned  unto  his  own  vomit  again,  and  the  sow 
which  was  washed  unto  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  Why 
any  longer,  in  opposition  to  this  most  manifest  truth,  is  a 
better  condition  promised  unto  them  who  have  known  the 
way  of  righteousness,  that  is,  the  Lord  Christ,  and  who  live 
abandoned  lives,  than  if  they  had  altogether  been  ignorant  of 
it;  whereas  it  is  most  openly  said,  It  were  better  for  them 


some 

MS9. 


How  he  agrees  tclth  St.  James  a7id  St.  Jude.  79 

not  to  ktww  the  way  of  rigJiteonsness,  than,  when  they  know  etcve- 
it,  to  turn  hack  from  the  holy  Commandment  delivered  unto— — ^ 
them. 

46.  For  neither  by  the  holy  Commandment  must  he  in  this  xxv. 
place  understand  that,  wherein  we  were  bidden  to  believe  in 
God ;  although  the  whole  be  contained  in  this  very  thing,  if 

we  understand  the  faith  of  believers  to  be  that  which  worketh 
through  love ;   but  he  openly  set  forth,  what  he  called  the 
holy   Commandment,  that  is,   wherein   we   were  bidden   to 
depart  from  the  pollutions  of  this  world,  and  to  live  in  a  holy 
conversation.     For  thus  he  saith.  But  if ,  fleeing  from  the 
pollutions  of  the  ivorld  unto  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  they  are  again  entangled  therein  and 
overcome,  the  latter  state  becomes  unto  them  worse  than  the 
former.     He  says  not,  fleeing  from  the  ignorance  of  God,  or 
fleeing  from  the  unbelief  of  the  world,  or  any  other  such 
thing;  but  tlie  pollutions  of  the  world,  wherein  is  contained 
assuredly  every  uncleanness  of  shameful  sins.     For  speaking 
above  of  these,  he  said,  Feasting  together  with  you,  having iv^t.^^ 
eyes  fidl  of  adultery ,  and  of  sin  unceasing .     Therefore  also     '     * 
does  he  call  them  wells  that  are  dry ;  ivells,  that  is,  in  that 
they  had  received  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Christ ;  but 
dry,  because  they  live  not  in  a  manner  suitable  thereunto. 
For  of  such  the  Apostle  Jude  also  speaking,  says.  They  «re  Judei2. 
they  who  in  your  feasts  of  charity,  being  full  of  spots,  feast 
with  you,  feeding  themselves  without  fear,  clouds  are  they 
without  water ;  and  the  rest.     For  that  which  Peter  says, 
Feasting  with  you,  having  eyes  full  of  adultery;  the  same 
Jude,  1)1  your  feasts  of  charity,  being  full  of  spots,  they 
feast  tcith  you.     For  they  are  mingled  with  the  good  in  the 
feasts  of  the  Sacraments  and  in  the  feasts  of  charity  of  the 
poorer  sort^     And  whereof  Peter  says,  FountaiJis  which  are 
dry;  of  the  same  Jude,  Clouds  ivithout  water;  of  the  same 
James,  Faith  that  is  dead. 

47.  Let  not  therefore  a  promise  be  made  of  punishment, 
that  is  for  a  time,  of  fire,  unto  them  who  are  living  shameful 
and  wicked  lives,  because  they  have  '  known  the  way  of 
righteousness ;'  unto  whom  it  had  been  better  not  to  know 


'o* 


f  '  Dilectionibus  plebium.'     He  calls  the  same  '  Agapes,'  contra  Faustum, 
XX.  20. 


80        Baptism  a  curse  to  those  who  will  not  leave  sin. 

DEFiDEJt,  as  the  most  true  Scripture  testifies.     For  concerning  such  i 
Mat.r2,  tlie  Lord  also  says,  And  the  last  state  of  that  man  shall  he 
worse  titan  was  the  former :  since,  by  not  receiving  the  Holy  i 
Spirit  to  be  a  dweller  in  his  purified  state,  he  hath  made  the  ■ 
unclean  spirit  to  return  into   him   manifold  more.     Unless  ' 
haply  they,  of  whom  we  are  now  treating,  are  therefore  to  be 
accounted  better,  because  they  have  not  returned  unto  the 
uncleanness  of  their  adulteries,  but   have   never   departed 
from  it;  nor  after  cleansing  have  again  defiled  themselves, 
but  have  refiised  to  be  cleansed.     For  neither,  in  order  that  j 
they  may  disburthen  their  conscience  and  enter  unto  Baptism, 
do  they  deign  at  least  to  cast  forth  their  former  impurities, 
again,  after  the  manner  of  dogs,  to  suck  them  up;  but  in  the 
holiness  of  the  very  Laver  they  obstinately  persist  to  hold  the 
undigested  wickedness  in  their  crude  breast:  nor  do  they 
hide  it  by  any,  ev^en  feigned,  promise,  but  with  a  shameless- 
ness  of  profession  belch  it  forth  ;  nor  do  they,  when  going  ' 
Gen.  19,  forth  from  Sodom,  after  the  manner  of  Loth's  wife,  again  look 
back  on  things  past,  but  they  altogether  disdain  to  go  forth 
from    Sodom;    yea    they  strive   with   Sodom    to    enter   into 
iTim.i,  Christ.     Paul  the  Apostle  saith,  /  who  before  was  a  blas- 
jjhetner,  and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious ;   but  I  obtained 
mercy  because  I  did  it  irjnoranthj  in  unbelief ;  and   unto 
these    it    is    said,   *  Then    will   ye    rather    obtain    mercy,   if 
knowingly  ye  shall  live  evil  Hves  in  the  faith  itself     It  is 
too  long  a  task,  and  well  nigh  without  end,  to  wish  to  bring 
together  all   the   testimonies  of  the  Scriptures,  whereby  it 
' causam  appears,  that  not  only  is  the  case  '  of  them,  who  lead  a  most    i 
evil  and  unrighteous  life  knowingly,  no  wise  lighter  than  that 
of  them  who  do  so  unknowingly,  but  also  that  it  is  for  this 
very  cause  more  grievous ;  thus  then  let  these  be  enough. 
xxvi.       48.  Let  us  therefore  take  diligent  heed,  by  the  help  of  our 
Lord  God,  that  we  cause  not  in  men  an  evil  security,  by 
teUing  them,  that,  if  they  shall  have  been  baptized  in  Christ, 
.  of  what  nature  soever  their  lives  in  that  faith  shall  have  been, 
they  shall  come  unto  eternal  salvation ;  that  we  make  not 
Christians  in  the  manner  in  which  the  Jews  made  proselytes, 
Mat.23,unto   whom   the    Lord    says,    Woe   unto   you,    Scribes   and 
Pharisees,  who  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte; 
but  after  ye  have  made  him,  ye  make  him  a  child  of  hell     j 


Suitable  remedies  for  different  degrees  of  sin.         81 

twofold  more  than  yourselves.     But  let  iis  rather  hold  thcEToPE- 
sound  doctrine  of  God  our  Master  in  both  things ;  that  there  '^'°^^' 
be  a  Christian  life  in  harmony  with  holy  Baptism,  and  that 
eternal  life  be  promised  to  no  man,  if  either  be  wanting.    For 
He  who  said,  Except  a  man  he  horn  again  of  water '  and  of^y°^  3> 
the  Spirit,  he  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdum  of  heaven ;  ^  some 
Himself  also  said,  Except  your  righteousness  shall  ahoicnd°^fl^.f 
above  that  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  iie  shall  not  e^^erMatt.  5, 

20. 

into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     Of  them  it  is  that  He  saith. 
The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  on  Moses'  seat;  what  things  Mnt.23, 
they  say,  do  ye;  but  what  they  do,  do  ye  not;  for  they  say  '   ' 
and  do  not.     Therefore  their  righteousness  is  to  say  and  not 
do;  and  thus  He  willed  that  ours  should  be  abundant  above 
theirs,  to  say  and  do ;  which  if  it  shall  not  be,  there  shall  be 
no  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     Not  that  any  one 
ought  to  be  so  lifted  up,  as  (I  will  not  say  to  boast  in  the 
presence  of  others,  but)  to  dare  to  think  within  himself,  that 
he  is  in  this  life  without  sin ;  but,  were  there  not  certain 
things  so  grievous  as  to  require  even  the  stroke  of  excom- 
munication, the  Apostle  would  not  say.  When  ye  are  gaAhered\Cov.5, 
together,  and  my  spirit  also,  to  deliver  such  an  one  unto  ^'  ^' 
Satan,  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may 
be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     Whence  also  he 
says.  Lest  I  bewail  many,  who  have  before  sinned,  and  have  "2,  Cor. 
not  repented  for  the  uncleanness  and  fornication  which  they  "'     ' 
have  committed.      In  like   manner,  were  there  not  certain 
which   required  not  to   be  healed   by  that    humiliation  of 
penance,  such  as  is  assigned  in  the  Church  to  them  who 
are    properly    called   Penitents,   but   by    certain    medicines 
of  rebukes,  the  Lord  Himself  would  not  say,  Bebuke  himMat.is, 
between  thee  and  him  alo7ie;  and,  if  he  shall  hearken  unto  ^''' 
thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother.     Finally,  were  there  not 
certain,  without  w^hich  this  life  is  not  past,  He  would  not  set 
a   daily  healing  in  the   prayer  which   He   taught,   that   we 
should  say,  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  too  forgive  our  Matt.  6, 
debtors.  ^^• 

49.  I  have  now  sufficiently,  as  I  judge,  set  forth  my  views  xxvii. 
on    that   whole    opinion,    wherein    they    have    moved    three 
questions  ;    one,  concerning  the  mixture  in  the  Church  of 
the  good  and  evil,  as  of  the  wheat  and  tares ;  wherein  we 

G 


82     Tlie  Ark  Jiad  its  door,  ihovcjh  uiiclecui  beasts  went  in. 

-DjEvvD^  n-\\\s,i  take  heed,  that  we  do  not  think  that  we  have  these 
figures  proposed  to  us  (either  (his,  or  that  of  the  unclean 
animals  in  the  ark,  or  whatsoever  other  things  there  are  of  the 
same  signification)  for  this  purpose,  that  the  discipline  of  the 
Church  may  sleep,  concerning  whom  it  was  said  under  the 

Prov.     figm-e  of  the  woman.  The  ways  of  her  house  are  severe ;  but 

see  that  rashness  of  madness,  rather  than  severity  of  diligence, 
•  go  not  so  far  as  to  presume  to  separate,  as  it  were,  the  good 
from  the  evil,  by  means  of  unlawful  schisms.  For  neither 
through  these  figures  and  prophecies  is  counsel  of  sloth 
given  unto  the  good,  that  they  neglect  what  they  ought  to 
hinder;  but  of  patience,  that  while  they  preserve  entire  the  doc- 
trine of  the  truth,  they  endure  that  which  they  cannot  amend. 

Gen.  7,  Nor  because  it  is  written  that  there  entered  unto  Noe  into 

8   9 

the  ark  unclean  animals  also,  therefore  ought  not  they  who 
are  set  over  the  Church  to  forbid  it,  should  any  most  unclean 
wish  to  enter  unto  Baptism  dancing,  which  is  surely  a  nailder 
offence,  than  to  do  so  in  aduliery ;  but  through  this  figure  of 
what  was  done,  it  was  foretold  that  there  will  be  unclean 
persons  in  the  Church,  in  order  that  they  may  be  borne  with, 
not  that  doctrine  may  be  corrupted,  or  discipline  dissolved. 
For  not  wheresoever  they  would  did  unclean  animals  break 
'  through  the  frame  of  the  ark  and  enter  it,  but  it  remained  entire, 
and  they  entered  in  through  one  and  the  same  door,  which 
the  builder  had  made.  A  second  question  is  that,  wherein  it 
seemed  to  them  right  to  deliver  to  them  that  are  to  be 
baptized  faith  only,  but  after,  when  they  have  already  been 
baptized,  to  instruct  them  in  life  and  conduct.  But  it  hath 
been  suflSciently  shewn,  unless  I  am  deceived,  that  it  then 
more  especially  appertains  to  the  care  of  the  watchman, 
' <*oi^pe- when   all  who   are   seeking'  the  Sacrament  of  the  faithful, 

tunt.  ,         .  .  ,  ,  .  ,  1-1 

listen  to  all  that  is  said  to  them  more  uitently  and  anxiously, 
not  to  be  silent  on  the  punishment  which  the  Lord  threatens 
to  them  who  live  evil  lives ;  lest  they  become  guilty  under 
most  grievous  charges  in  tlieir  very  Baptism,  whither  they 
come  that  there  may  be  remitted  unto  them  the  guilt  of  all 
their  sins.  The  third  question  is  one  very  full  of  danger, 
whence,  in  that  it  hath  been  little  considered,  and  not 
handled  according  to  the  divine  sayings,  it  seems  to  me  that 
all  that  opinion  hath  arisen,  whereby  promise  is  made  unto 


Works  as  ivell  as  faith  a  condition  of  Salvation.       83 

persons  living  most  wicked  and  shameful  lives,  even  although  et  ope- 
they  go  on  so  to  live,  and  only  believe  in  Christ,  and  receive  ^^^^^' 
His  Sacraments,  that  they  shall  come  unto  salvation  and  life 
everlasting;  in  opposition  to  the  most  open  sentence  of  the 
Lord,  Who  made  answer  unto  him  that  was  longing  for  life 
everlasting,  If  thou  wilt  come  unto  life,  keep  the  Com tnand-  Ma.tiQ, 

'  *  •      1 7 

ments ;   and   made   mention  what  Commandments,  wherein 
those  very  sins  are  shunned',  unto  which  is  promised,  I  know  •  read 
not  how,  salvation  everlasting,  on  account  of  faith  ^^ithout jjj^j.?(^^j!_ 
woi'ks  dead.      These  three  quesiions  I   have   discussed,  as  bidden.' 
I  think,  sufficiently :  and  have  shewn,  that  we  are  so  to  bear 
with  evil  men  in  the  Church,  as  not  to  neglect  ecclesiastical 
discipline;  are  so  to  catechize  them  who  ask  for  Baptism,  as 
that  they  shall  hear  and  receive,  not  only  what  they  ought  to 
believe,  but  also  how  they  ought  to  live  ;  that  the  promise  of 
life  everlasting  is  so  made  to  believers,  that  each  one  judge 
not  that  he  can  attain  unto  it  even   through  a  dead  faith, 
which  without  works  cannot  save,  but  through  that  faith  of 
grace,  which  worketh  through  love.    Let  not  therefore  faithful 
stewards  be  blamed,  not  for  their  own  neglect  or  sloth,  but 
rather  for  the  obstinacy  of  certain,  who  refuse  to  receive  the 
Lord's  money,  and  compel  the  Lord's   servants  to  expend 
their  own  adulterate  coin,  whilst  they  are  unwilling  to  be  at 
least  such  evil  persons,  as  holy  Cyprian  makes  mention  of,  Ep.  ii. 
vrho  renounce  the  world  in  words  only,  and  not  in  deeds ; ,      /' 

•'  ^  ^  rum  Qe 

whereas  not  even  in  words  are  they  willing  to  renounce  the  Prec. 
works  of  the  devil,  when  they  with  most  open  voice  make  p,  24. 
profession  of  an  intention  to  continue  in  adultery.  If  any 
thing  is  wont  to  be  said  by  them,  which  haply  I  have  not 
touched  on  in  my  disjDutation,  I  have  judged  it  to  be  such  as 
not  to  require  me  to  answer  it;  either  in  that  it  belonged  not 
to  the  matter  under  discussion,  or  that  it  was  so  slight,  as  that 
any  one  could  very  easily  refute  it. 


Sftanfes  be  to  Gotr. 


G  2 


84  Note  to  page  Qb. 

NOTE. 

St,  Augustine  in  several  places  of  his  Commentary  on  the  Psalms,  as  on  Ps. 
■vi.  1.  and  xxxviii.  1.  speaks  of  punishment  at  the  Judgment,  or  after  this  life, 
for  those  who  are  saved  '  as  by  fire,'  without  expressing  a  doubt.  However,  in 
his  answers  to  the  questions  of  Dulcitius,  written  so  late  as  about  A.D.  420,  he 
speaks  of  it  most  distinctly  as  a  doubtful  point.  After  stating  nearly  what  he 
does  in  this  Treatise  about  the  pain  arising  from  worldly  affections,  he  adds,  §.  13. 
'  Some  such  thing  also  it  is  not  incredible  may  take  place  after  this  life,  and 
whether  it  be  so  may  be  enquired,  and  may  either  be  found  out  or  remain 
hidden  ;  that  some  believers  through  some  sort  of  cleansing  fire,  in  the  degree 
they  have  more  or  less  loved  perishing  goods,  may  attain  salvation  with  more  or 
less  delay :  not  however  such  of  whom  it  is  said,  that  they  shall  not  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God,  unless  on  fitting  penitence  the  same  crimes  be  remitted.'  De 
Civ.  Dei,  xx.  25.  xxi.  13.  written  somewhat  later,  he  expresses  less  doubt,  but 
scarcely  appears  to  have  made  up  his  mind.  His  principal  object  there  is  to 
contradict  the  notion  that  there  would  be  no  eternal  punishments.  In  the 
same  treatise,  xxi.  26.  he  again  writes  thus  doubtfully.  "  After  the  death  of 
the  body,  until  the  arrival  of  that  last  day  of  condemnation  and  reward  after  the 
resurrection  (of  the  body),  should  it  be  said  that  in  this  interval  the  spirits  of  the 
dead  suffer  a  fire,  such  as  they  do  not  feel  who  had  not  habits  and  likings  in  the 
life  of  this  body,  which  require  their  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  to  be  burned  up,  but 
they  feel  who  have  carried  with  them  the  like  worldly  tabernacles,  whether  there 
only,  or  here  and  there,  or  not  there  because  here,  though  they  experience  the 
fire  of  transitory  tribulation  rescuing  venial  offences  from  damnation  by  con- 
suming them,  I  do  not  oppose,  for  perchance  it  is  true." 


S.    AUGUSTINE 

ENCHIRIDION  TO  LAURENTIUS 

ON 

FAITH,    HOPE,    AND    CHARITY. 


St.  Augustine  enumerates  the  Enchiridion  addressed  to  Laurentius  amongst 
his  latest  works,  and  after  the  six  hooks  against  Julianus  written  ahout 
421,  in  his  second  hook  of  Retractations.  In  cap.  87,  he  alludes  to  the 
death  of  St.  Jerome,  which  took  place  Sept.  30,  A.D.  420. 

Laurentius  is  called  the  hrother  of  Dulcitius  in  the  book  on  Dulcitius'  eight 
questions,  q.  1.  n.  10.  Nothing  is  said  that  proves  him  not  to  have  been 
a  layman,  though  his  learning  and  piety  are  highly  praised.  One  Ms.  in 
the  heading  calls  him  a  Deacon,  others  Primicerius,  or  Primicerius 
Notariorum  urbis  Romse,  another  Primicerius  Romanse  Ecclesise. 

The  Author  admits  the  name  of  Enchiridion,  hut  usually  speaks  of  the 
work  as  '  on  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,'  to  which  heads  he  reduces  the 
questions  of  Laurentius.  The  first  he  treats  in  the  order  of  the  Creed, 
refuting,  without  naming,  the  heresies  of  the  Manichseans,  ApoUinarians, 
Priscillianists,  Arians,  and  especially  of  the  Pelagians.  The  second  is 
in  the  form  of  a  brief  exposition  of  the  Lord's  Prayer.  The  third  part 
is  a  short  discourse  on  Charity.     Ah.  from  Ben. 

Retract,  ii.  63.  '  I  also  wrote  a  book  on  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  on  the 
request  of  the  person  to  whom  I  addressed  it,  that  he  might  have  a  work 
of  mine  which  should  never  be  out  of  his  hands,  such  as  the  Greeks  call 
an  Enchiridion.  In  which  I  think  I  have  pretty  carefully  treated  of  the 
manner  in  which  God  is  to  be  worshipped,  which  knowledge  divine 
Scripture  defines  to  be  the  true  wisdom  of  man.' 


1.  Beyond  all  expression  am  I  pleased  with  your  learning,  enchi- 

my  very  dear  son  Laurentius,  and  Ions  for  you  to  be  wise ;  "^°^"n 

not  of  the  number  of  them   concerning   whom  it  is   said,  '^pe  et 

Where  is  the  ivise?  where  the  scribe?  where  the  discoverer  .?t^i" 

of  this  world?    Hath  not  Qod  made  foolish  the  ivisdom  o/iCor.  i" 

•^  20. 


8f>     Mail's  wisdom  comprised  in  Faith,  Hope,  Charitij. 

ENCHi-  this  world?  but  of  tliern  concerning  whom  it  is  written,  The 

^l^^^^  multitude  of  the  wise  is  the  soundness  of  the  world;  and 

Vvisd.e,  "^  ^  ^ 

24.         such   as  the  Apostle  wishes  them   to  become,  to  whom  he 
Rom.     writes,  But  I  wish  you  to  be  wise  indeed  in  what  is  good,  but 
'     '   sifiiple  in  what  is  evil.     But  as  no  one  can  of  himself  be,  so 
no  one  can  of  himself  be  wise,  but  of  Him,  enlightening, 
Ecclus.  concerning  Whom  it  is  written,  All  wisdom  is  from  God\ 
'  ii.     But  man's  wisdom  is  piety.     You  have  this  in  the  book  of 
holy  Job :  for  there  we  read,  that  Wisdom  Herself  said  to 
Job  28,  man.  Behold,  piety  is  wisdom.     But  if  you  enquire,  what 
piety  she  there  spake  of,  you  will  find  more  clearly  in  the 
Greek,  Osotre/Ssjav,  which  is  the  worship  of  God.     For  in  the 
Greek  there  is  another  word  also  for  piety,  that  is,  sias^sia, 
by  which  word  is  signified  good  worship,  although  this  too  is 
especially  referred  to  the   worship  of  God.     But  there  is 
nothing  more  suitable  than  that  word,  by  which  evidently  the 
worship  of  God  was  expressed,  when  it  was  said,  what  was 
wisdom   for  man.      Seek    you   any   thing  to   be   said  more 
briefly,  you  who  ask  of  me  to  speak  briefly  of  great  things  ? 
Or  haply  you  desire  to  have  this  very  point  briefly  opened, 
and  brought  together  into  a  short  discourse,  in  what  manner 
iii.    God  is  to  be  worshipped.     Here  if  I  shall  answer  that  God 
is  to  be  worshipped  by  Faith,  Hope,  and  Love ;   you  will 
certainly    say,   that   this   is    a   shorter   statement    than   you 
wished ;  and  then  you  will  ask,  that  what  things  belong  to 
each  of  these  three,  may  be  briefly  explained  to  you;  that 
is,  what  is  to  be  believed,  what  to  be  hoped  for,  what  to  be 
loved.     Which  when  I  shall  have  done,  therein  will  be  all 
these  things  which  in  your  letter  you  set  down  by  way  of 
enquiry'',  a  copy  of  which  if  you  have  with  you,  you  may 
easily  turn  over  and  read  them  again  ;  if  however  you  have 
iv.     not,  you  may  remember  them  as  I  repeat  them.     For  your 
wish,  as  you  write,  is,  "  that  T  should  write  you  a  book,  which 
i  Enchi-you  may  have  as  a  manual ',  (as  it  is  called,)  and  never  sutFer 
ndion.    ^^  ]gave  your  hands;  containing  the  things  demanded,  that 
is,  What  is  chiefly  to  be  followed ;  what,  by  reason  of  diverse 
heresies,  mainly  to  be  avoided ;  how  far  reason  contends  for 
religion,    or   what   in    reason    is    unsuitable,    when    faith    is 

■»  several  Mss.  omit '  But  as  no  one,"         ''  '  qua'rendo,'    al.  '  qiia?iemla,'  '  as 
^e.  questions  to  be  askefl.' 


Grounds  of  belief.     Christ  the  Foundation.  87 

aloue  *= ;  what  is  held  first,  wliat  last ;  what  is  the  sum  of  the  defide 
whole  prescribed  form  ' ;  what  the  certain  and  proper  found-  ^J^j^^'J 
ation  of  the  Catholic  Faith."     All  these  things  which  you  tate. 
inquire  after  you  will  without  any  doubt  know,  by  knowing  \defini- 
carefully  what  ought  to  be  believed,  what  to  be  hoped,  what 
to  be  LOVED.     For  these  things  especially,  nay  rather  alone, 
are   in   religion   to   be  followed.      These   things   vvhosoever 
contradicts,  is  either  altogether  an  alien  from  the  name  of 
Christ,  or  an  heretic.     These  things  are  to  be  defended  by 
reasoning,  either  having''  their  foundation  in  the  senses  of 
the  body,  or  discovered  by  the  power  of  understanding  in  the 
mind.     But  what   things  we   have  neither  experienced  by 
corporeal  sense,  nor  either  have  been,  or  are,  able  to  attain 
to  by  mental   powers,  these  without   any  doubt  are   to  be 
believed  on  their  testimony,  by  whom   was  composed  that 
Scripture  which  hath  by  this  time  deservedly  come"  to  be 2 meruit. 
called   divine ;   who,   by   divine  help,  whether   through   the 
body,  or  through  the  mind,  were  able  either  to  see,  or  even 
to   foresee  these  things.      But  when  the  mind    hath    been      v. 
imbued  with  the  beginning  of  faith,  which  worketh  by  love, 
it  goes  on  by  living  well  to  arrive  at  sight  ^  also,  wherein  is  ^  spe- 
unspeakable  beauty  known  to  holy  and  perfect  hearts,  the '''®"'' 
full    vision    of  which    is    the    higliest   happiness.      This    is 
assuredly  what  you  are  inquiring  after,  "  what  is  held  first, 
what  last:"  to  be  begun  in  faith,  to  be  made  perfect  in  sight. 
This  also  is  "  the  sum  of  the  whole  prescribed  form."     But 
the  "  certain  and  proper  foundation  of  the  Catholic  Faith"  is 
Christ.   For  other  foundation,  says  the  Apostle,«o  one  can  lay,  1  Cor.  3, 
beside  that  which  is  laid,  ivhich  is  Christ  Jesus.     Nor  must  '^' 
that  therefore  be  denied  to  be  the  proper  foundation  of  the 
Catholic  Faith,  because  it  may  be  thought  that  this  is  in 
common  to   us  with   certain   heretics.     For  if  those  things 
which  pertain  to  Chiist  be  carefully  thought  on,  as  far  as  the 
name,  Christ  is  found  among  certain  heretics,  who  wish  to  be 
called   Christians;  but  in   reality   He   is   not   among  them. 
Which  to  shew  is  too  long;  inasmuch  as  all  heresies  have 

•=  '  Quid  in  ratione,  cum  fides  sit  sola,  '  in   ratione  cum  fide,  si  sit  sola,  non 

non  conveniat.'  al.  '  quid  in  rationem,  conveniat.'  '  What  in  reason,  by  itself, 

cum  fides  sit  sola,  non  veniat.'  '  why  it  agrees  not  with  faith.' 

is    not   taken    account    of  when   faith  <*  some   Mss.   '  quffi  vel,'   '  such   as 

stands  alone.'    Arualdus  ap.  Ben.  conj.  either  have.' 


88  Hope  and  Love  closely  linked  ivith  Faith. 

ENCHi-  to  be  noticed,  wliich  either  have  beeu,  or  are,  or  have  been ' 


RIDION 


,  ,    ,   ,7  able  to  be  under  the  Clnistian  name,  and  the  truth  of  this 

'al. shall  _  _  ..... 

be  able,  to  be  pointed  out  in  each  :  which  discussion  is  one  for  so 
^'^-  many  volumes  that  it  may  seem  even  endless.  You  however 
demand  of  us  "  a  manual,"  that  is,  "  what  may  be  grasped  by 
the  hand,  not  what  may  load  the  bookshelves."  To  return 
therefore  to  those  three  things,  by  which  we  said  that  God  is 
to  be  worshipped,  faith,  hope,  love ;  it  is  easily  said,  what  is 
to  be  believed,  what  to  be  hoped  for,  what  to  be  loved;  but 
in  what  manner  it  may  be  defended  against  the  false  charges 
of  those  who  think  differently,  is  matter  of  more  laborious 
and  copious  teaching;  in  order  to  possess  which  there 
needeth,  not  that  the  hand  be  filled  with  a  short  manual,  but 
that  the  breast  be  inflamed  with  great  zeal. 
^"-  2.  For  see,  you  have  the  Creed  and  the  Lord's  Prayer : 
what  shorter  to  hear  or  read }  what  more  easy  to  commit  to 
memory }  For  in  that  by  reason  of  sin,  the  human  race  was 
weighed  down  by  heavy  misery,  and  needed  the  Divine 
mercy  ;    the  Prophet   foretelling   the   time   of  the   grace  of 

Joel  2,  Grod,  says.  And  it  shall  be,  every  one  that  shall  call  on  the 
Name  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  saved :  for  this  reason  is  the 
Prayer  ^  But  the  Apostle,  after  that,  for  the  recommending 
of  Grace   itself^,   lie   had  recounted    this  testimony  of  the 

Horn.  Prophet,  immediate  adds.  Bat  how  shall  they  call  on  Him, 
'  '  in  Whom  they  have  not  believed?  for  this  reason  is  the 
Creed.  In  these  two  things  view  those  three ;  faith  believes, 
hope  and  love  })iay.  But  without  faith  they  cannot  be  ;  and 
by  this  means  faith  also  prays.  Hence  in  fact  it  was  said. 
How  shall  they  call  on  Him,  in  Whom  they  have  not 
^'111-  believed^  But  what  can  be  hoped  for,  which  is  not  believed.'' 
Further,  something  also  which  is  not  hoped  for,  may  be 
believed.  For  who  of  the  faithful  does  not  believe  the 
punishments  of  the  ungodly  }  yet  he  hopes  not  for  them  ; 
and  whosoever  believes  them  to  hang  over  him,  and  shudders 
at  them  with  a  shrinking  feeling  of  mind,  is  more  rightly 
said  to  fear  than  to  hope  for  them.     Which  two  things  a 

2  2  Mss.  certain  one^  distinguishing  between,  says, '  May  it  be  allowed 
Lucaii.  one  fearing  to  hope^.'     Another  poet  however,  although  a 


n 


Phars.    iietter,  hath  said,  not  properly,  '  This  so  great  grief  if  I  have 

Jit    1 0, 

*'  al.  '  The  Lord's  Prayer.'  ^  i.  e,  as  superior  to  the  Law. 


FaitJi  is  of  good  and  evil,  Hope  of  future  good.         89 

been   able   to   hope   for'.'     In    short,   certain   in   the   art  ofoEFiDR 
grammar   use    this   word    as    an    instance    to    point  out   an  ^Jf^j. 
improper  expression,  and  say,  he  said  "  to  hope,"  for  "  to  'J ate. 
fear."     There  is  faith,  then,  both  of  evil  things  and  of  good  ;  'J'^""?* 

.  .  .  .    -^n.  IV. 

seeing  that  both  good  things  are  believed,  and  evil ;  and  this4i9. 

by  faith,  itself  good,  not  evil.     There  is  also  faith  both  of 

past  things,  and  of  present,  and  of  future.     For  we  believe 

that  Christ  was  dead,  which  is  now  past :  we  believe  that  He 

is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  which  now  is :  we 

believe  that  He  will  come  to  judge,  which  is  future.     Also 

faith  is  both  of  one's  own  things,  and  of  the  things  of  others. 

For  each  man  believes  both  himself  at  some  time  to  have 

begun  to  be,  and  not  certainly  to  have  been  from  all  eternity; 

and  other  men  likewise,  and  other  things :  nor  concerning 

other  men  only  do  we  believe  many  things  which  pertain  to 

religion,  but  concerning  angels  also.     But  hope  is  not,  but 

only  of  things  good,  and  also  future,  and  relating  to  him  who 

is  considered  to  entertain  hope  of  them.    Which  things  being 

so,  for  these  reasons  it  will  be  right  to  distinguish  faith  from 

hope,  as  by  word,  so  also  by  reasonable  difference.     For  as 

respects  the  not  seeing,  whether  they  be  the  things  which 

are   believed,  or  the    things  which    are    hoped    for,   this   is 

common   to    faith    and    hope.      In    fact,  in    the   Epistle    to 

the   Hebrews,  which    illustrious   defenders   of  the   Catholic 

Rule  ^  have  used  as  a  witness,  faith  is  said  to  be  '  the  proofs  ^  al, 

of  things  not  seen.'     Although,  when  any  one  says,  that  hcan^ 

has  believed,  that  is,  hath  lent*  his  faith  to,  not  words,  not^"'*^-' 

.         /  ,  1  .  -,  ^Heb.ll, 

witnesses,  not  m  short  any  arguments,  but  the  evidence  of  i. 

the  things  present,  he  does  not  seem  so  out  of  place^,  as   ?°"'' 

rightly  to  be  censured  for  the  word,  and  to  have  it  said  to*accom- 

him, '  You  saw,  therefore  you  did  not  believe:'  whence  it  may  ^absur-^ 

be  thought  not  to  follow,  that  whatsoever  thing  is  believed  isdus. 

not  seen.     But  we  better  call  that  faith,  which  the  Divine 

Oracles  have  taught,  that  is,  of  such  things  as  are  not  seen. 

Concerning  hope  also  the  Apostle  says,  Hope  ivhich  is  seen'S.om.s, 

is  not  hope ;  for  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  hope  for  ? 

But  if  what  we  see  not  we  hope  for,  through  patience  we 

wait  for  it.     When  therefore  good  things  are  believed  to  be 

about  to  happen  to  us,  they  are  nothing  else  but  hoped  for. 

Now  concerning  love'*  what  shall  I  say,  without  which  faith *^''i™°''e- 


90  Nature  of  Enquiry.     God  the  sole  Cause. 

ENCHi-  profiteth  nothing?  but  hope  without  love  cannot  be.    Finally, 
RiDioN  ^^  g^^^^^  ^i^g  Apostle  James,    The   devils   also  believe,  and 

James  *  ,  .  , 

2,  19.     tremble:  yet  do  they  not  hope  or  love ;  but  rather  what  we 

hope  for  and  love,  they,  in  believing  that  it  will  come,  dread. 

For  which  reason  the  Apostle  Paul  approves  of  and  com- 

Gal.  5,  xnenCii^  faith  which  ivorketh  by  love,  which  assuredly  without 

hope  cannot  be.     Wherefore  neither  is  love  witliout  hope, 

nor  hope  without  love,  nor  both  without  faith. 

ix.         3.  When  therefore  it  is  asked,  what  is  to  be  believed  as 

matter  relating  to  religion,  we  are  not  so  to  inquire  into  the 

nature  of  things,  as  is  done  by  those  whom  the  Greeks  call 

1  Vhysi- naturalists^ ;  nor  are  we  to  fear,  lest  the  Christian  be  ignorant 

^°^"        of  any  thing  concerning  the  force  and  number  of  the  elements; 

the  motion  and  order  and  eclipses  of  the  heavenly  bodies ; 

the  figure  of  the  heavens  ;  the  kinds  and  natures  of  animals, 

plants,  stones,  springs,  rivers,  mountains ;  intervals  of  places 

and    times ;    the    signs    of  coming    storms ;    and    other    six 

hundred  things  concerning  those  matters,  which  they  either 

have  discovered,  or  suppose  themselves  to  have  discovered; 

in   that  neither  have  they  themselves  found  out  all  things, 

excelling  (as  they  do)  in  so  great  ability,  burning  with  zeal, 

abounding  in  leisure,  and  prosecuting  their  enquiries,  some 

2histo-  by  human  conjecture,  others   again  by  experience  of  fact^ 

'"'^^'       and  in  those  things  which  they  boast  to  have  discovered,  on 

most  subjects  holding  opinions  rather  than  knowing.     It  is 

enough  for  the  Christian  to  believe,  that  the  cause  of  created 

things,    whether    heavenly    or   earthly,    whether   visible    or 

invisible,  is  none  other  than  the   goodness  of  his  Creator, 

Who  is  God,  One  and  True  ;    and  that  there  is  no  natui'e 

which  is  not  either  Himself  or  from  Himself:  and  that  He 

Himself  is    a  Trinity ;    the    Father,  that   is,  and    the    Son 

begotten   by   the   Father,  and  the   Holy   Spirit   proceeding 

from  the  same  Father  ^,  but  one  and  the  same  Spirit  of  the 

X.     Father  and   of  the   Son.     By  this  Trinity,  supremely  and 

equally  and  unchangeably  good,  all  things  were  created,  and 

that  neither  snpremely,  nor  equally,  nor  unchangeably  good, 

S  A  few  Mss.  add  '  and  the  Son,'  eeed  from  the  Son :  for  it  is  not  without 

but  this  is  more  likely  to  have  been  meaning  that  He  is  called  at  once  the 

added  than   omitted.     He  affirms  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.' 

doctrine,  De  Trin.  iv,  29.  '  We  cannot  See  also  xv.  45,  &c. 
say  that  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  pro- 


Evil  is  not  in  naturet  but  in  privation  of  good.         91 

but  yet  good  even  each  one:  but  the  whole  together  veryoEFivE 
good ;  in  that  out  of  all  these  is  made  an  admirable  beauty  cari- 
of  the  whole.     In  which  even  that  which  is  called  evil,  being  tate. 
rightly    set    and    jnit   in    its    own    place,    commends    more^j^"'^' 
strikingly  things   that  are   good,  so   as  that  they  are  more     xi. 
pleasing   and   more  praiseworthy   through   comparison   with 
things  that  are  evil.     For  neither  would  Almighty  God,  as 
even  heathens  confess,  '  Ruler  supreme  of  things','  being,  as'  Virg. 
He  is,  supremely  good,  in  any  way  suffer  anj'  evil  to  be  in  ^qq  ' 
His  works,  were  He  not  Almighty  and  good  even  to  this, 
out  of  any  evil  to  work  what  is  o^ood.     But  what  else  is  that 
which  is  called  evil,  but  a  privation  of  good  ?     For  like  as  in 
the  bodies  of  animals,  to  be  affected  by  diseases  and  wounds 
is  nothing  else  than  to  be  deprived  of  health,  (for  the  object 
is  not,  when  a  remedial  system  is  applied,  that  those  evils 
which  were  in  the  body,  that  is,  diseases  and  wounds,  may 
depart  hence  and  be  in  some  other  place ;  but  that  they  may 
not  be  at  all.      For  wound  or  disease  is  not  any  substance, 
but  the  fault  of  a  carnal  substance;  the  substance  itself  being 
the  flesh,  certainly  some  good  thing,  to  which  those  evils  are 
accidents,  that  is,  the  privations  of  that  good  wliich  is  called 
health,)  so  also,  whatsoever  are  the  faults  of  minds,  are  pri- 
vations of  natural  good  things;  which  when  they  are  healed 
are  not  transferred  to  any  place,  but  those  thino^s  which  were 
there,  will  be  no  where,  seeing  that  in  that  health  they  will 
not  be. 

4.  Therefore  all  natures,  in  that  the  Author  of  all  natures    xii. 
whatsoever  is  supremely  good,  are  good :   but  because  they 
are  not,  as  their  Author,  vsupremely  and  unchangeably  good, 
therefore  in  them  good  may  be  both  increased  and  diminished. 
But  for  good  to  be  diuiinished  is  evil ;    although  however 
much  it  be  diminished,  there  must  necessarily  remain  some- 
thing (if  it  is  still  nature)  whence  it  may  be  nature.     For 
neither,  if  it  be  nature  of  what  kind  and  how  little  soever, 
can  the  good  be  destroyed,  by  which  it  is^  nature,  imless  thesal. 
nature   also  itself  be  destroyed.     Deservedly  indeed  is  an  !^^^'^'_'^'^ 
uncorrupted  nature  praised :  still  further  if  it  be  uncorruptible  ture.' 
also,  such  as  cannot  altogether  be  corrupted,  without  doubt 
it  is  much  more  deserving  of  praise.     When,  however,  it  is 
corrupted,    its    corruption    is    therefore    an    evil,   in    that  it 


92       No  evil  can  eaisl  hut  in  something  of  itself  good. 

ENCHi-  deprives  it  of  good  of  some  kind  or  other;  for  if  it  deprive  it  | 

^of  no  good,  it  harms  it  not:  but  it  does  harm  it,  therefore  it 

takes  away  a  good.     As  long  therefore  as  a  nature  is  under-  | 
going  corruption,  there  exists  in  it  a  good  of  which  it  may 
be  deprived  :  and  on  this  account  if  any  thing  of  the  nature  i 
shall   remain    such    as    cannot   be    any    further    corrupted,  I 
certainly  the  nature  will   be   uncorruptible,  and  to  this  so  \ 
great  good  it  will  arrive  through  corruption.     But  if  it  shall 
not  cease  to  be  corrupted,  neither  will  it  assuredly  cease  to  j 
possess  good,  such  as  corruption  may  be  able  to  deprive  it 
of.     Which   (nature)  if  it  shall  have  consumed  utterly  and 
altogether,  there  will    therefore  be  no  good  in   it,  because  I 
there  will  be  no  nature  in  it.     Wherefore  corruption  cannot 
destroy   what   is    good,    except   by    destroying   the    nature. 
Every  nature  therefore  is  a  good ;    a  great,  if  it  cannot  be 
corrupted ;    a  small,  if  it  can :    yet  can  it  in  no  sen-se  be  | 
denied  to  be  a  good,  except  foolishly  and  ignorantly.    Which 
if  it  be  destroyed  by  corruption,  neither  will  the  corruption 
itself  remain,  there  existing  no  nature  in  which  it  may  be. 
xiii.       And  for  this  reason   that  which   is  called  evil  is  not,  if 
good  be  not.     But  good  free  from  all  evil  is  perfect  good  ; 
1  vitia-  that  however  in  which  evil   is,  is  good  marred   or  faulty'.  I 
^^qT  Nor  can  evil  ever  be  where  good  is  not.    Whence  a  wonderful  i 
sum.      thing  is  brought  to  pass,  that,  whereas  every  nature,  as  far 
as  it  is  nature,  is  a  good,  nothing  else  would  seem  to  be  said, 
when  a  fault}'  nature  is  called  an  evil  nature,  but  this,  that 
that  is  an  evil  which  is  a  good ;  and  that  neither  is  there  any 
evil,  but  what  is   a  good ;    since    every  nature  is  a   good, 
nor  would  any  thing  be  evil,  if  the  thing  itself  that  is  evil 
were  not  a  nature.     There  cannot  therefore  be  evil,  except 
it  be  some    good.     Which    however   it   appear   an   absurd 
thing  to  say,  yet  the  connection  of  this  reasoning,  as  it  were 
unavoidably,  compels  us  to  say  it.     And  care  is  to  be  taken 
that  we  fall  not  under  that  saying  of  the  Prophet,  wherein   ! 
Is.  5,20.  we  read,  Woe  unto  them  who  call  that  which  is  good  evily 
and  that  which  is  evil  good;  who  call  darkness  light,  and 
light  darkness ;  who  call  sweet  bitter,  and  bitter  sweet.    And 
Mat.  12,  yet  the  Lord  says.  An  evil  man  out  of  the  evil  treasure  of  j 
^^'        his  heart,  bringeth  forth  evil  things.     But  what  is  an  evil   j 
man,  but  an  evil  nature ;  because  man  is  a  nature  ?  Fiuther, 


Good  and  evil  in  one  subject^  though  contraries.         93 

if  a  man  is  some  good,  because  he  is  a  nature,  what  is  a  bad  defide 
man,  but  an  evil  good  ?  Yet  when  we  distinguish  between  ^^^^i- 
these  two  things,  we  find  that  neither  is  he  therefore  an  evil  tate. 
because  a  man,  nor  therefore  a  good  because  unrighteous ; 
but  a  good,  because  a  man ;  an  evil,  because  unrighteous. 
Whosoever  therefore  says,  it  is  evil  to  be  a  man ;  or,  it  is 
good  to  be  unrighteous ;  falls  himself  under  that  sentence  of 
the  Prophet,  Woe  luito  them  ivho  call  that  which  is  good 
evil,  and  that  which  is  evil  good.  For  he  blames  the  work 
of  God,  which  is  man,  and  praises  the  fault  of  man,  which  is 
unrighteousness.  Every  nature  therefore,  although  it  be 
faulty,  so  far  as  it  is  nature,  is  good  ;  so  far  as  it  is  faulty,  is 
evil.  Wherefore  in  those  contraries  which  are  called  evils  xiv. 
and  goods,  that  rule  of  logicians  ceases  to  hold,  by  which 
they  say  that  nothing  has  in  it  two  contraries  at  the  same 
time.  For  no  air  is  at  the  same  time  both  dark  and  bright; 
no  meat  or  drink  at  the  same  time  sweet  and  bitter;  no 
body  at  the  same  time,  in  parts  where  it  is  white,  is  there 
black  also ;  none  at  the  same  time,  in  parts  where  it  is 
deformed,  is  there  beautiful  also.  And  this  property  is 
found  in  many,  and  nearly  in  all,  contraries,  that  they  cannot 
be  at  the  same  time  in  one  thing.  Yet,  no  one  doubting 
that  goods  and  evils  are  contraries,  not  only  can  they  be  at 
the  same  time,  but  evils  cannot  absolutely  be  without  goods, 
and  except  in  goods :  although  goods  can  without  evils. 
For  it  is  possible  that  a  man  or  an  angel  may  not  be  unjust ; 
but  except  a  man  or  an  angel  there  cannot  be  that  is  unjust. 
And  that  he  is  a  man  is  a  good,  that  he  is  an  angel  is  a  good, 
that  he  is  unjust  is  an  evil.  And  these  two  contraries  are  so 
at  the  same  time,  that,  were  there  not  the  good  in  which 
the  evil  might  be,  neither  would  the  evil  at  all  be,  in  that 
not  only  would  the  corruption  not  have  where  to  exist, 
but  not  even  whence  to  arise,  were  there  not  something 
that  should  be  corrupted,  and  neither  could  this  be  corrupted, 
unless  it  were  a  good ;  .since  corruption  is  nothing  else  than 
the  banishing  a  good.  Out  of  goods  therefore  have  evils 
arisen,  and  except  in  certain  goods  they  are  not.  Nor  was 
there  any  other  source  whence  any  nature  of  evil  could 
arise.  For  if  it  were,  so  far  as  it  w-as  nature,  it  would 
assuredly  be  good  :  and  either  an  incorruptible  nature  would 


94  Caitses  of  good  and  evil,  Man's  proper  stud//. 

ExcHi-  be  a  great  good,  or  even  a  corrujDtible  nature  could  no  way 
^I^I^  be  otherwise  than  somewhat  good,  by  corruj)ting  which  very 
XV.    good  corruption  might  be  able  to  injui'e  it.     But  in  asserting 
that  evils  have  their  origin  from  goods,  let  us  not  be  thought 
Matt.  7,  to  oppose  the  saying  of  the  Lord,  wherein   He  said,  A  good 
tree  cannot  produce  evil  fruit.     For,  as  the  Truth  saith,  '  the 
grape  cannot  be  gathered  of  thorns,'  because  the  grape  can- 
not grow  of  thorns ;  but  we  see  that  both  vines  and  thorns 
can  grow  of  the  good  ground.     And  in  the  same  manner, 
as  it  were,  an  evil  tree  cannot  produce  good  fruit,  that  is, 
an  evil  will  good  works ;  but  out  of  the  good  nature  of  man, 
will,  both  good  and  evil,  can  arise  ;  nor  was  there  absolutely 
any  source  whence  originally  evil  will  should  arise,  except 
from  the  good  nature  of  Angel  and  Man.     Which  the  Lord 
Himself  most  clearly  shews  in  the  same  place,  where  He 
Mat.12,  was  speaking  of  the  tree  and  its  fruits  :   for  He  says,  Either 
make  the  tree  good,  and  its  fruit  good,  or  make  the  tree  evil, 
and  its  fruit  evil:   sufficiently  admonishing  us,  that  indeed 
of  a  good  tree  evil  fruits  cannot  grow,  nor  good  of  an  evil 
tree  ;  yet  that  from  the  earth  itself,  to  which  He  was  speaking, 
either  tree  may. 
xvi.        5.  These  things  being  so,  when  we  are  pleased  with  that 
Georg.   verse  of  Maro,  "  Happy,  who  hath  been  able  to  learn  the 
11.  490.   causes  of  things ;"  let  us  not  imagine  that  it  hath  an  influence 
on  the  obtaining   of  happiness,  if  we  know  the  causes   of 
great  movements  of  bodies  in   the   world,  which   are  con- 
Georg.  cealed  in   the  most  hidden  recesses  of  nature  ;   "  Whence 
80^'      trembling  to  the  lands,  by  what  force  the  deep  seas  swell, 
having  burst  their  barriers,  and  again  sink  back  into  them- 
selves," and  all  other  things  of  this   sort:    but  the   causes 
of  things  good  and  evil  we  ought  to  know,  and  these  so  far 
as,  in  this  life  most  full  of  eri'ors  and  anxieties,  it  is  granted 
to  man  to  know  them,  in  order  to  escape  these  same  errors 
and  miseries.     That  happiness  assui'edly  is  to  be  the  end  of 
our  course,  wherein    we   are  to   be   shaken  by  no  misery^ 
deceived  by  no  error.     For  if  the  causes  of  the  motions  of 
bodies  were  necessary  for  us  to  know,  it  would  be  right  for 
us  to  know  none  rather  than  the  causes  of  our  own  state  of 
health.      But   inasmuch    as,   being   ignorant    of  them,    we 
betake  ourselves  to  Physicians,  who  but  must  see  with  how 


Mrror,  ivhat,  and  in  what  canes  a  real  evil.  95 

great  patience  ue  must  be  ignorant  of  what  is  hidden  fromDEFiDE 
us  of  the  secrets  of  heaven  and  earth  ?  For  although  error  be   c^ri^ 
to  be  avoided  «ith  all  the  care  in   our  power,  not  only  in   tate. 
greater,   but   also    in    lesser    things,    and,    although    except  xvii. 
through  ignorance  of  things,  error  cannot  take  place;  yet  it 
does  not  follow  that  he  straightway  errs  whosoever  is  ignorant 
of  any  thing,  but  whosoever   thinks  himself  to  know  what 
he  knows  not;  seeing  that  he  approves  what  is  false  as  true, 
which  properly  belongs  to  error.     Nevertheless  it  makes  a 
great    difference,  in  what  each  man  errs.     For  in  one  and 
the   same   thing  both   he   who  knows   is  with  good  reason 
preferred  to    him    who    knows    not,   and    he    who    errs    not 
to  him  who  errs.     In  different  things  however,  that  is,  when 
this  man  knows  certain  things,  and  tliat  others ;    and  this 
man  the  more  useful,  that  man  the  less  so,  or  even  hurtful ; 
who  will  not  in  those  things  which  that  man  knows,  prefer 
before  him  the  man  who  knows  them  not  ?    For  there  are 
certain  things  which  it  is  better  not  to  know  than  to  know. 
And  also  it  hath  been  good  to  some  at  some  time  to  err,  but 
that  in  the  way  of  the  feet,  not  in  the  way  of  the  life.     For 
it  happened  to  ourselves  that  we  were  deceived  in  a  certain 
cross-way,  and  went  not  by  that  spot  where  an  armed  band 
of  Donatists''  lay  in  ambush  waiting  for  us  to  pass;    and 
so  the  result  was  that  we  came  whither  we  were  bound,  by  a 
circuit  out  of  the  way  ;  and  having  learnt  of  them  lying  in 
wait,   congratulated    ourselves    on    our   error,   and    returned 
tlianks  to  God   on   occasion   of   it.      Who   therefore   would 
hesitate  to  prefer  a  traveller  erring  thus,  to  a  robber  not 
erring  thus?    And  it  may  be  for  this  reason,  that  a  certain 
wretched  lover,  speaking  in  the  writings  of  our  great  poet, 
says,  "  When  I  saw,  when  I  was  lost,  when  evil  error  carried  Virg. 
me  away;"  seeing  that  there  is  good  error  also,  such  as  not4i  ' 
only  is  no  injury,  but  even  some  profit.     But  if  the  truth  be 
carefully  considered,  when  as  to  err  is  nothing  else  than  to 
think  that  true  which  is  false,  and  that  false  which  is  true  ; 
or  to  esteem  as  certain  instead  of  uncertain,  or  as  uncertain 


I'  Possidius  states  that  the  '  Circum-     tine,  and  mentions  this  instance  of  his 
celliones'    more    than   once   beset    the     being  in  danger  from  them.     Life,  e. 

jr_ 1 '  ' .  c       o  L     A  -- TiT*       7r> 


V^*>>v^UN^^  4.L1U1    ^  l.»it*l_l  VHV-V/  U^.^y^fJ  bl-AV  tJ^^M-t^  .  »» 

road  in  arms,  laying  wait  for  St.  Angus-      12.  Be}i, 


96  The  deceiver  deceived.     Every  lie  a  sin. 

ENCHi-  instead  of  certain,  whether  it  be  false,  or  whether  it  be  true : 
^"^"^.  and  this  be  in  the  mind  as  unsliapely  and  unbecoming,  as 
Matt. 5, we  esteem  'yea,  yea;   nay,  nay;'    to  be  beautiful  and  be- 
^^*         coming,  cither  in  spealiing,  or  in  assenting :  assuredly  even 
on    this  very  account   is    that   life,   wherein   we   now  live, 
miserable,  because  that  to  it  at  times,  in  order  that  it  be  not 
lost,  error  is  necessary.     Far  be  it  that  such  be  that  life, 
where  the  Truth  itself  is  the  life  of  our  soul ;  where  no  one 
deceives,  no  one  is  deceived.    But  here  men  deceive  and  are 
deceived ;   and  are  more  miserable  when   they  deceive  by 
lying,  than  when  they  are  deceived  by  believing  them  who 
lie.    Yet  so  greatly  does  reasonable  nature  shrink  from  what  is 
untrue,  and,  as  much  as  it  can,  avoid  error,  that  even  they 
who  love  to  deceive  are  unwilling  to  be  deceived.     For  he 
who  lies  seems  not  to  himself  to  err,  but  to  send  another 
man   into   error   who   believes    him.      And    in    that   matter 
indeed  which  he  cloaks  by  a  lie,  he  errs  not,  if  he  himself 
know  what  is  true  :  but  in  this  he  is  deceived,  that  he  thinks 
that  his  own  lie  does  him  no  injury :  whereas  every  sin  is 
more  injury  to  him  who  does,  than  to  him  who  suffers  it. 
xviii.       6.  But  here  arises  a  very  difficult  and  obscure  question, 
on  which  we  have  already  concluded  a  large  book,  having 
had  the  necessity  of  reply  laid  upon  us :  whether  it  belong- 
to  the  duty  of  a  righteous  man  at  times  to  lie.      For  certain ' 
go  so  far,  as  to  contend  that  it  is  at  times  a  good  and  pious 
work,  both  to  perjure  themselves,  and  to  speak  what  is  false, 
on  subjects  relating  to  the  worship  of  God,  and  on  the  very 
nature  of  God.    But  to  me  it  seems  that  every  lie  is  certainly 
a  sin,  but  that  it  makes  great  difference,  with  what  intention 
and  on  what  subjects  a  man  lie.     For  he  does  not  so  sin  who 
lies  with  the  wish  to  benefit,  as  he  who  lies  with  the  wish  to 
injure ;  neither  again  does  he  so  greatly  injure  who  by  lying 
sends  a  traveller  to  a  wrong  road,  as  he  who  by  a  deceitful 
lie   perverts   the   way   of  life.      No    one    indeed   is    to    be 
esteemed    as   lying,    who   speaks    a    falsehood,   thinking   it 
truth ;    since,  as  far  as  is  in  his  power,  he   deceives  not, 
but  is  deceived.     Such  an  one  then  is  not  to  be  convicted 
of  falsehood,  but  at  times  of  rashness,  who  esteems  as  true, 

'  The  Piisoillianists.  Ben.    The  work  appears  to  be  that '  Contra  Mendacium 
ad  Consentium.' 


To  lie  worse  than  to  he  deceived,  except  in  Faith.       J)7 

tilings  false  whicli  he  has  incautiously  believed.     And,  on  the  defide 

contrary,  rather  is  he,  as  far  as  is  in  his  power,  guilty  of  lyingj^^^^^^J 

who  speaks  the  truth,  thinking  it  a  lie.     For  as  far  as  relates  tate. 

to  his  intention,  in  that  he  says  not  what  he  thinks,  he  speaks 

not  the  truth,  although  that  which  he  speaks  be  found  to  be 

the  truth :  nor  is  he  any  way  exempt  from  falsehood,  who 

miwittingly  speaks  truth  with  the  mouth,  but  knowingly  lies 

with  the  mind.     Not  taking  into  account   then  the    things 

themselves,  concerning  which    any  thing  is  said,  but  only 

the  intention  of  the  speaker,  he  is  better  who  unwittingly 

says  what  is  false,  in  that  he  thinks  it  true,  than  he  who 

knowingly  has  the  intention  to  deceive,  not   knowing  that 

what  he  says  is  true.     For  the  former  has  not  one  thing  in 

his  mind,  and  another  in  his  speech ;  but  the  latter,  whatever 

in  fact  that  which  is  said  by  him  may  be  of  itself,  yet  has  one 

thing  shut  up  within  his  breast,  and  another  ready  on  his 

tongue  ;  which  is  the  especial  evil  of  lying.     But  taking  into 

account  the  things  themselves  which  are  said,  it  makes  so 

great  difference,  what  that  is  in  which  each  man  is  either 

deceived  or  lies,  that  whereas  to  be  deceived  is  a  less  evil 

than  to  lie,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  person's  will ;  yet  is  it  far 

more  tolerable  to  lie  in  those  things  which  are  separate  from 

religion,  than  to  be  deceived  in  those  things,  without  the 

faith  or  knowledge  of  which  God  cannot  be  worshipped.    To 

illustrate  this  by  instances,  let  us  consider  what  the  case  will 

be,  if  one  man,  speaking  falsely,  report  that  some  man  is 

alive  who  is  dead  ;  and  another,  being  deceived,  believe  that 

Christ  will  again  die  after  an  interval  however  long;  is  it  not 

beyond  all  comparison  better  to  lie  in  the  one  way,  than  to 

be  deceived  in  the  other?  and  is  it  not  a  much  less  evil  to 

lead  any  one  into  the  one  error,  than  to  be  led  by  any  one 

into  the  other  ?     Therefore  in  certain  things  we  are  deceived    xix. 

with  gi"eat  evil,  in  certain  with  little,  in  certain  with  no  evil 

at  all,  nay  in  certain  even  with  some  good.     For  a  man  is 

deceived  with  great  evil,  when  he  believes  not  this  which 

leads  to  eternal  life,  or  believes  this  w^hich  leads  to  eternal 

death.    But  a  man  is  deceived  with  little  evil,  who  by  affirming 

as  true  what  is  false  falls  into  any  temporal  inconveniences, 

which  yet,  b}^  the  increase  in  them  of  faithful  patience,  he 

turns  to  good  account.     As  if  one  by  thinking  a  bad  man 

H 


98       All  error  in  iiseJf  evil,  though  good  may  come  of  it.       I 

ENCHi-  good  should   suffer   any   evil    from   him.     But  he  who  be-l 

lieves  a  bad  man  good,  in  such  a  way  as  to  suffer  no  evil 

from  him,  is  deceived  with  no  evil :  nor  does  that  denunci- 
ls.5,20.  ation  of  the  Prophet  fall  on  him,  Woe  nnio  them  who  call\ 
uhat  is  evil  good.     For  this  must  be  understood  as  said  of 
the    things    themselves  wherein    men    are    evil,  not    of  the 
persons.     Whence    he  who  calls    adultery  good,  is  rightly 
convicted  by  that  word  of  the  Prophet.     But  he  who  calls 
the  person  good,  whom  he  thinks  to  be  chaste,  and  knows] 
not  that  he  is  an  adulterer,  is  deceived  not  in  the  doctrinei 
of  things  good  and  evil,  but  in  the  secrets  of  human  character  ;| 
calling  a  man  good,  in  whom  he  thinks  is  that  which  hei 
doubts  not   is  good ;    and  calling  an    adulterer  evil,  and  a; 
chaste  man  good ;    but  calling  the  particular  person  good,! 
from  not  knowing  that  he  is  an  adulterer,  not  a  chaste  man.l 
Still  further,  it'  through  error  any  one  escape  destruction,  asi 
1  stated  above  happened  to  us  on  our  journey,  a  man  receives 
even  some  good  from  error.     But  w'hen  I  say  that  in  certain" 
things  a  man  may  be  deceived  without  any  evil,  and  even 
with  some  good ;    I  say  not  that  the  error  itself  is  no  evil  or 
some  good,  but  that  that  is  evil  at  which  a  man  comes  not,  or 
that  good  at  which  he  comes  through  erring,  that  is,  either 
what  comes  not  to  pass,  or  what  does  result  from  the  error 
itself     For  the  error  of  itself,  being  either  in  a  great  thing  a.\ 
great  evil,  or  in  a  small  a  small,  is  yet  always  an  evil.     For 
who  except  in  error  will  deny  that  it  is  an  evil,  to  approve  of! 
things  false  as  true,  or  condemn  things  true  as  false,  or  to| 
esteem  things  uncertain  as  certain,  or  things  certain  as  un- 
certain .?    But  it  is  one  thing  to  think  a  man  good  who  is 
evil,  which  comes  of  error;    and  another  thing  not  to  suffer 
from  this  evil  aiiother  evil,  if  the  evil  man,  who  was  thought 
good,  do  us  no  harm.     Also  it  is  one  thing  to  think  that  the 
way  which  is  not ;  and  another  thing  for  this  evil  of  error  toi 
obtain  some  good,  as  it  is  to  be  delivered  from  the  lying-in- 
wait  of  evil  men. 
XX.         7.  In  truth,  I  know  not  whether  errors  of  this  kind  also, 
when  one  thinks  well  of  an  evil  man,  not  knowing  what  kind 
of  man  he  is  ;    or  when,  in  place  of  those  things  which  we 
are  sensible  of  through  the  bodily  senses,  like  things  meet  us, 
which  are  discerned  by  the  spirit  as  if  by  the  body,  or  by  i 


Some  would  shitu  the  fault  of  error  by  doubting  alL      99 
the  body   as  if  by  the  spirit;    such   as   the  Apostle  Peter oefide 

S  P  E   K  T 

thought  it  to  be,  when  he   supposed  tJiat  he  saw  a  vision,  cari- 
being  on  a  sudden  freed  by  the  Angel  from  his  bolts  and  t^te. 
chains;    or  when  in  actual  bodily  things,  what  is  rough  iSg*^**^^' 
thought  smooth,  or  what  is  bitter  is  thought  sweet,  or  what 
is  rank  is  thought  fragrant,  or  that  it  thunders  when  a  cart 
passes,  or  that  a  certain  one  is  the  man  when  he  is  another, 
where  two  are  very  like  each  other,  as  is  often  the  case  in 
twins;    whence  he  says,  '  and  a  pleasing  mistake  to   their 
parents' :'    I  know  not,  I  say,  whether  these  and  such  other'  Virg. 
are  to  have  the  name  of  faults-  likewise.     Nor  have  I  now 392.'^* 
undertaken  to  solve  that  most  knotty  question,  which  has^peccata 
racked  those  most  acute  men,  the  Academicians;    whether 
the  wise  man  ought  to  approve  any  thing,  that  he  fall  not 
into  error,  if  he  shall  approve  as  true  what  is  false,  in  that  all 
things,  as  they  affirm,  are  either  hidden  or  uncertain.     Upon 
which  at  the  beginning  of  my  conversion  I  finished  three 
volumes^,  that  I  might  not  be  hindered  by  a  question,  which  ^Contra 
opposed,  as  it  were,  at  the  very  entrance.    And  certainly  there  micos. 
had  been  need. to  put  away  the  despair  of  discovering  truth, 
which  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  these  arguments.     In  their 
school  then  every  eiTor  is  thought  a  sin,  which  they  maintain 
cannot  be  avoided,  unless  by  suspending  all  assent.     That 
is,  they  say  that  whosoever  assents  to  things  which  are  un- 
certain is  in  error ;    and  that  nothing  is  certain  in  the  things 
which  men  see,  by  reason  of  the  imdistinguishable  likeness 
of  falsehood,  although  what  seems,  may  perhaps  be,  true ; 
this  they  discourse  of  in  controversies  most  acute  but  most 
shameless.     But  with  us  the  just  liveth   of  faith.     But  if(Hab.2, 
assent  be  taken  away,  faith  is  taken  away;    because  without jjom.  1, 
assent  nothing  is  believed.    And  there  are  truths,  seen  though  ^ '^• 
they  may  not  be,  failing  the  belief  of  which,  it  is  not  possible 
to  arrive  at  a  life  of  blessedness,  which  is  no  other  than  life 
eternal.     But  I  know  not  whether  we  ought  to  speak  with 
those,  who  are  ignorant,  not  that  they  shall  live  for  ever,  but 
that  they  are  alive  at  the  present  moment;  yea,  who  say  that 
they  are  ignorant  of  that  which  they  cannot  be  ignorant  of. 
For  no  one  is  suffered  to  be  ignorant  that  he  is  alive  ;    since 
if  he  be  not  alive,  he  cannot  even  be  ignorant  of  any  thing; 
since  not  only  to  know,  but  also  to  be  ignorant  of,  belongs 

h2 


100   Errors  not  in  faith  or  duty,  not  more  than  slight  faults. 

fiNCHi-  to  one  who  is  alive.     But  it  would  seem  by  not  assenting*] 

— ^—  that  they  are  alive,  they  seem  to  themselves  to  guard  against | 
error;  when  even  by  erring  they  are  proved  to  be  alive;] 
seeing  that  he  who  is  not  alive  cannot  err.  As  therefore  thatJ 
we  are  alive  is  not  only  true,  but  also  certain  ;  so  there  are ; 
many  things  true  and  certain,  to  refuse  assent  to  which,  farl 
xxi.  be  it  that  it  be  called  wisdom,  and  not  rather  madness.  But 
in  things,  in  which  it  matters  not  at  all  to  the  obtaining  of 
the  kingdom  of  God  whether  they  be  believed  or  not,  or 
whether  they  either  be,  or  be  thought  to  be,  true  or  false  ; 
in  these  to  err,  that  is,  to  think  one  thing  instead  of  another, 

J  pecca-  ig  iiot  to  be  judged  to  be  a  fault';  or  if  it  be,  a  very  little  and! 
very  light  fault.  In  fine,  let  it  be  of  what  kind,  and  how 
great  soever,  it  belongs  not  to  that  way  by  which  we  go  to 

Gal.5,6.  (j;q(J  .    which  way  is  the  faith  of  Christ,  which  worketh  by 

love.     For  neither  did  that  '  error  pleasing  to  their  parents' 

in  the  case  of  the  twin  sons,  wander  from  this  way  ;  nor  did 

the  Apostle  Peter  wander  from    this  way,  when    supposing! 

that  he   saw  a   vision,  he  so   thought  one  thing  instead  of; 

another,  as  not  to  distinguish  the  real  bodies,,  in  the  midst  of 

which    he  was,  from  the  images  of  bodies  in  the  midst  of| 

which  he  supposed  himself  to  be,  until  after  that  the  Angel, 

by  whom  he  had  been  freed,  was  departed  from  him.     Nor 

did   the  Patriarch  Jacob    wander  from   this    way,  when   hei 

believed  his  son,  who  was  yet  alive,  to  have  been  slain  by  a' 

wild  beast.    In  these  and  such-like  untruths,  we  are  deceived 

without  injury  to  the  faith  which  we  have  towards  God,  and 

err  without  leaving  the   way  Avhich   leads  to  Him  :    which' 

errors,  although  they  are  not  faults,  are  yet  to  be  judged  to  bej 

among  the  evils  of  this  life,  which  has  been  so  made  subject 

to  vanity,  that  here  things  false  are  approved  as  true,  things 

true    are    rejected    as   false,    things    uncertain    are    held   as 

certain.     For  although  these  things  are  separate  from  that! 

faith,  through  which  being  true  and  certain  we  are  on  our  way! 

to  eternal  blessedness;    yet  are  they  not  separate  from  that 

misery  in  which  we  yet  are.     For  in  no  way  should  we  bei 

deceived  in  any  mental  or  bodily  sense,  if  we  were  already 

in  the  enjoyment  of  that  true  and  perfect  happiness.  I 

xxii.       But,  moreover,  every  lie  is  therefore  to  be  called  a  fault,  in 

that  a  man,  not  only  when  he  himself  knows  what  is  true,  butj 


Lying  for  ollters^  good  excusable,  hut  wrong.         101 

also  if  at  any  time  he  err  and  is  deceived  as  a  man,  ought  tooEFiDE 
speak  that  wliich  he  has  in  his  mind  ;  whether  it  be  true,  or^^fa^^ 
whether  it  be  thought  to  be  so,  and  be  not.  For  ever}-  one  tate. 
who  hes,  speaks  contrary  to  what  he  thinks  in  his  mind, 
with  the  will  to  deceive.  And  surely  words  have  therefore 
been  appointed,  not  as  means  whereby  men  may  deceive 
one  another,  but  as  means  whereby  each  one  may  convev 
his  own  thoughts  to  another's  knowledge.  Tlierefore  to  use 
words  for  the  purpose  of  deceit,  not  for  what  they  were 
appointed,  is  a  fault.  Nor  must  we  therefore  think  that  any 
lie  is  not  a  fault,  because  we  can  at  times  benefit  any  one  by 
lying.  For  this  we  can  do  also  by  stealing,  if  the  poor  man, 
to  whom  it  is  given  openly,  feel  the  benefit,  and  the  rich 
man  from  whom  it  is  taken  secretly,  does  not  feel  the  loss  ; 
yet  no  one  on  this  account  will  say  that  such  a  theft  is  not  a 
fault.  And  this  we  can  do  again  by  adultery,  if  it  appear 
that  any,  unless  we  consent  to  her  in  this,  will  die  through 
love,  and,  in  case  she  live,  will  be  cleansed  through  re- 
pentance ;  yet  will  not  such  an  adultery  be  on  this  account 
denied  to  be  a  fault.  But  if  chastity  be  deservingly  pleasing 
to  us,  how  does  truth  offend  us,  so  that,  in  order  to  benefit 
another,  the  one  may  not  be  violated  by  adultery,  while  the 
other  may  be  violated  by  lying  ?  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that 
men  have  made  very  great  progress  towards  what  is  good, 
who  lie  not  except  for  another's  safety,  but  in  such  their 
progress,  it  is  their  good-will  which  is  praised,  or  even 
receives  temporal  rewards,  not  their  deceit,  which  that  it  be 
pardoned  is  enough,  not  that  it  be  published  abroad,  espe- 
cially in  heirs  of  the  New  Testament,  to  whom  it  is  said,  Let  Matt.  5, 
it  he  in  your  mouth,  yea,  yea  ;  nay,  nay ;  for  what  is  '' 
heyond  is  of  evil.  On  account  of  which  evil,  because  it 
ceases  not  in  this  mortal  state  to  steal  upon  us,  even  the 
very  co-heirs  of  Christ  say,  Forgive  us  our  debts.  Matt.  6, 

8.  These  things  therefore  having  been  treated  of  as  this  *  ••• 
present  brevity  reqmred,  seemg  that  the  causes  of  things 
good  and  evil  are  to  be  known,  as  far  as  it  is  sufficient  for 
the  way  which  leads  us  to  that  kingdom,  where  will  be  life 
without  death,  truth  without  error,  happiness  without  disquiet; 
we  ought  not  at  all  to  doubt,  that  of  such  good  things  as 
relate  to  us  there  is  none  other  cause  than  the  goodness  of 


102       Error  and  pain  came  into  ihe  world  with  sin. 

ENCHi-  God  ;    but  (the  cause)  of  things  evil  is  the  will  of  a  being 
^^^^^/  mutably  goocP  falling  away  from  immutable  good,  first  that  ! 
mutabi-  of  an  angel,  then  of  man.     This  is  the  first  evil  of  a  rational 
^'^"  .      creature,  that  is,  the  first  withdrawing  of  good :  then  after 
this  there  found  way,  now  even  against  their  will,  ignorance 
of  things  necessary  to  be  done,  and  desire  of  things  hurtful ; 
in  company  with   which   are   brought  in    error   and   pain  :  , 
which  two  evils  when  they  are  perceived  to  be  hanging  over ' 
us,  the  emotion  of  the  mind  endeavouring  to  flee  from  them 
is  called  fear.     Further,  the  mind  when   it  obtains  things 
desired,  although  hurtful  or  empty,  in  that  through  error  it 
perceives  it  not,  is  either  overpowered  by  morbid  delight,  or  ^ 
'  venti-  fanned-  it  may  be  with  vain  joy.     From  these  as  it  were  the 
^^^^^'     fountains  of  diseases,  fountains  not  of  plenty,  but  of  want,' 
XXV.   all  the  miser}'  of  a  rational  natm*e  issues.     Which  nature, 
however,  in  the  midst  of  its  evils  could  not  lose  the  desire  of  j 
blessedness.     But  these  are  the  common  evils,  both  of  men,| 
and  of  angels  condemned  by  the  justice  of  the  Lord  forj 
their  wickedness.     But  man  has  beside  his  own  punishment, 
whereby  he  was  punished  by  the  death  also  of  the  body. 
Forasmuch  as  God  had  threatened  him  with  the  punishment! 
of  death  if  he  sinned ;  thus  gifting  him  with  free  will,  as  yet! 
to  rule  him  by  His  control,  and  affright  him  with  destruction; 
and  placed  him  in  the  happiness  of  Paradise  as  in  the  shadowj 
of  a  life,  from  whence  by  observing  righteousness  he  migh^ 
xxvi.  ascend  to  better  tilings.     Hence  after  his  sin  being  made  ail 
exile,  his  own  race  also,  which  by  sinning  he  had  corrupted 
in   himself  as  in  its  root,  he  bound  by  the  punishment  of 
death  and  condemnation  :  so  that  whatever  progeny  should 
be  born  of  him  and  of  his  wife,  through  whom  he  had  sinned, 
condemned  together  with  him,  through  carnal  lust,  wherein 
was  repaid  a  punishment  similar  to  the  disobedience,  should 
draw  along  with  it  original  sin,  whereby  it  should  be  drawn 
through  various  errors  and  pains,  to  that  last  never-euding 
punishment  with  the  apostate  angels,  its  corrupters,  masters. 
Rom.  5,  and  partners.    Thus,  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world, 
^^'        and  by  sin  death :  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  in  thai 
all  sinned.     By  the  world  in  that  place  the  Apostle  meaning 
xxvii.  the  whole  human  race.     This  therefore  was  the  case;   thf 
mass   of  the  whole   human   race   under   condemnation   was 


God  causes  good  even  to  the  fallen.  Angels  each  by  himself.  103 

lying  in  evils,  or  even  was  rolling  on  and  going  headlong defide 
from  evils  into  evils:  and  ioined  to  the  side  of  those  anjrels  '^Jfr.^^ 
who  had  sinned,  was  paying  the  deserved  penalty  of  impious  tate. 
apostacy.  Forasmuch  as  it  pertainetli  to  the  just  anger  of 
God,  whatsoever  the  wicked  willingly  commit  through  blind 
and  unsubdued  lust,  and  whatsoever  they  unwillingly  suffer 
by  manifest  and  secret °  punishments  :  the  goodness  of  the 
Creator  ceasing  not  to  minister  even  to  evil  angels  life  and 
vital  power,  which  ministration  being  withdrawn,  they  would 
straightway  perish ;  and  as  for  men,  although  they  be  born 
from  a  corrupted  and  condemned  stock,  ceasing  not  to  give 
form  and  life  to  their  seeds,  to  dispose  their  members,  through 
periods  of  time  and  distances  of  place  to  quicken  their 
senses,  to  bestow  on  them  nutriment.  For  He  judged  it  better 
to  work  good  out  of  things  evil,  than  to  allow  no  things  evil 
to  exist.     And  truly  had  He  willed  that  thei-e  should  be  no  , 

renewing'  at  all  of  man  for  the  better,  even  as  there  is  none ireforma-  ' 
of  impious  angels,  would  it  not  be  deservedly  done,  that  the  '°°^°^* 
nature  which  deserted  God,  which,  using  evilly  its  own  power, 
trampled  upon  and  transgressed  the  command  of  its  Creator, 
which  it  might  most  easily  have  kept,  which  corrupted  in 
itself  the  image  of  its  Creator,  frowardly  turning  away  from 
His  light,  which  evilly  broke  off",  by  its  free-will,  its  salutary 
subjection  to  His  laws,  should  be  all  of  it  eternally  deserted 
by  Him,  and  suffer  everlasting  punishment  according  to  its 
desert  ?  Certainly  He  would  thus  act,  were  He  only  just, 
and  not  merciful  also,  and  shewed  not  much  more  clearly 
His  own  free  mercy  rather  in  setting  free  the  unworthy. 

9.  Certain  angels  therefore  through  impious  pride  deserting  xxviii. 
God,  and  being  cast  down  from  their  high  heavenly  habitation 
into  the  lowest  darkness  of  this  air,  that  number  of  angels  | 

which  was  left  continued  in  eternal  blessedness  with  God, 
and  in  holiness.     For  the  rest  of  the  angels  were  not  de-  I 

scended  from  one  who  fell  and  was  condemned,  that  so 
original  evil  should  bind  them,  as  in  the  case  of  man,  with 
the  chains  of  succession  subject  to  it,  and  draw  down  all  to 
deserved  punishments ;  but  when  he,  who  became  the  devil, 
had  become  lifted  up  together  with  the  partners  in  his 
impiety,  and,  by  being  thus  lifted  up,  with  them  overthrown,  \ 

"  '  opertig.'  Bened.  '  apertis,'  '  open,'  most  Mss. 


104  Heaven  repeopled  hy  RedenipHon.    Freeuill  lost  by  sin.  \ 

ENCHi-  the  rest  with  pious  obedience  clave  to  the  Lord,  receiving  j 
RiDioN  ^Yso,  what  the  others  had  not,  a  certain  knowledge,  to  assure  I 
xxix.  them  of  their  eternal  and  unfailing  stedfastness.     It  there- 
fore pleased  God,  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  universe,  | 
that,   seeing    that   not  the    whole   multitude  of  angels  had 
perished  by  deserting  God,  the   part   which   had   perished 
should  remain  in  eternal  perdition  ;   whilst  the  part  which 
had  continued  firm  with  God,  when  the  other  forsook  Him, 
should   rejoice   in   the   full    and    certain    knowledge   of  the 
eternity  of  its  future  happiness :  but  that,  in  that  the  other 
rational    creature   which  was    in    man,  had    perished  entire 
through  sins  and  punishments  both  original  and  actual,  out  j 
of  the  renewal  of  a  part  of  it  should  be  supplied  whatever 
loss  that    fall    of   the    devil  had  brought  on  the  fellowship 
of  the  Angels.     For  this  has  been  promised  to  the  Saints  at 
Luke20,  their  resurrection,  that  '  they  shall  be  equal  to  the  Angels  of 
God.'     Thus  Jerusalem  which  is  above,  our  mother,  the  city 
of  God,  shall  suffer  no  robbery  of  the  multitude  of  her  sons, 
or,  it  may  be,  shall  reign  with  a  yet  fuller  abundance ".     For  j 
we  know  not  the  number  eithev  of  holy  men,  or  of  unclean 
devils,  into  whose  place  the  sons  of  our  holy  Mother  suc- 
ceeding, of  her  who  appeared  barren  upon  earth,  shall  abide  j 
without  any  limit  of  time  in  that  peace  from  which  they  fell. 
But  the  number  of  those  citizens,  whether  it  be  that  which  is 
now,  or  that  which  shall  be,  is  contemplated  by  that  Artificer 
Eoin.  4,  Who  calls  the  things  which  are  not  as  the  things  ivhich  are, 
"w'isd.     ^^^^  orders  all  things  in  measure  and  number  and  weight,  j 
11,20.   ]3ut  this  portion   of  the   human  race,  to  whom  God  hath' 
■^^^'  promised  deliverance  and  an  eternal  kingdom,  whether  canj 
it  at  all  be  restored  by  the  merits  of  its  own  works  ?     Far 
be  it.     For  what  good  does  one  who  is  lost  work,  except 
so  far  as  he  hath  been  delivered"  from  destruction  ?     Can  itj 
by  the  free  choice  of  its  will  ?     Far  be  this  also  :  for  man  j 
using   evilly   his   free   will   hath    lost    both  himself  and  it. 
For  in  like  manner  as  he  who  kills  himself,  assuredly  by 
living  kills  himself,  but  lives  not  by  killing  himself,  nor  will 
be  able  to  raise  himself  up  again  after  he  has  killed  himself  rj 
so   when    through    free-will    sin  was    committed,  sin   being; 

''  Cf.  de  Civ.  Dei,  1.  xxii.  c.  1.  he  hath  been  restored.' 

"  al.  '  quando'  — '  reparatus,'  *  whei\ 


Freedom  to  good  restored  tu  God's  servants  hij  grace.     105 

conqueror,  free-will  was  lost.     For  of  uhom  a  man  is  ore;-- de fide 

conie^  to  him  is  he  made  over  as  a  slave  also.    This  is  at  any  "(Tf^jJ 

rate  the  judgment  of  Peter  the  Apostle:  seeing  then  that  this  tate. 

is  true,  what  kind  of  liberty  can  that  be  of  the  slave  who  has?^^'''-^' 

ly. 
been  made  over,  except  when  it  pleases  him  to  sin  ?     For 

he  serves  freely,  who  willingly  does  the  will  of  his  master. 

And  thus  he  is  free  to  commit  sin,  who  is  the  slave  of  sin. 

Whence  he  will  not  be  free  to  work  righteousness,  unless 

being  set  free  from   sin  he   shall  begin  to  be  the  slave  of 

righteousness.     This  is  true  liberty  by  reason  of  the  joy  in'^aL'the 

doing  right,  and  at  the  same  time  godly  slavery  by  reason  of  gll"^;^ 

the  obedience  to  the  command.     But  this  liberty  to  do  well, 

when  shall  it  be  to  man,  made   over  and   sold,  unless  He 

redeem  him  Whose  is  that  saying,  If  the  Son  hath  set  goiiJohnS, 

free,  then  shall  ye  be  iruhj  free.     But  before  this  begin  to^^* 

have  place  in  man,  how  doth  any  one  of  free-will  glory  in 

any  good  work,  who  is  not  yet  free  to  work  what  is  good, 

unless  he  exalt  himself,  being  puffed  up  with  vain  pride .? 

Whom  the  Apostle  restrains,  saying.  By  grace  are  ye  saved'E^h.'2, 

through  faith.     And  lest  they  should  so  take  to  themselves ^"~^*': 

XXXI. 

at  any  rate  the  faith  itself,  as  not  to  understand  that  it  was 
given  of  God ;   (like  as  in  another  place  the  same  Apostle 
says,  that  '  he  had  obtained  mercy  to  be  faithful;')  here  also!  Cor. 7, 
he  hath  added,  and  says,  And  this  not  of  yourselves,  but  it  is 
the  gift  of  God;  not  of  works,  lest  haply  any  one  be  exalted. 
And  lest   it    should    be   thought  that   good  works   will    be 
wanting  to  believers,  again  he  adds  ;  For  u-e  are  His  work- 
manship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  in  good  works,  trhich  God 
hath  before  prepared,  that  in  them  ice  may  walk.    Therefore 
then  are  we  made  truly  free,  when  God  fashions  us,  that  is, 
forms  and  creates  us,  not  that  we  may  be  men,  which  thing 
He  hath  already  done;  but  that  we  may  be  good  men,  which 
thing  His  grace  now  does;  that  we  may  be  in  Christ  Jesus  a  Gal.  6, 
new  creature,  according  to  that  which  is  said,  A  clean  heart  if'  ^, 
create  m  me,  O  God.     For  his  heart,  as  far  as  respects  the  lo. 
nature  of  the  human  heart,  God  hath  not  failed  already  to 
create.    Also,  that  no  one,  although  not  of  works,  yet  should  xxxii. 
glory  of  the  very  free   choice  of  his   will,  as  if  the  desert 
began  of  himself,  which  received  the  very  liberty  of  working 
what  is  right,  as  a  reward  due ;  let  him  hear  the  same  herald 


/ 


106  Some  gifis  follow  man^s  will,  hut  grace  ever  prevents  it. 
ENCHi-  of  grace  saying,  For  it  is  God  who  worketh  in  you  both  to 


RIDION 


will  and  to  do,  according  to  His  good  pleasure.     And  in 
]3.  "    '  another  place:   Therefore  is  it,  not  of  him  who  willeth,  nor 
Rom.  9,  Qjjiiffi  loko  runneth,  hut  of  God  who  sheweth  mercy.     Seeing 
that  without  doubt,  if  man  be   of  such  age,  as  already  to 
exei'cise  his  reason,  he  cannot  believe,  hope,  love,  unless  he 
Phil.  3,  be  willing,  or  arrive  at  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God, 
^^*         unless  he  have  run  with  his  will.     How  then  is  it  not  of  him 
that  tvilleth,  nor   of  him   that   runneth,  hut  of  God  who 
sheweth  mercy,  except  in  that  the  will  itself,  as  it  is  written, 
Prov.  8,  is  prepared  hefore  of  the  Lord.    Otherwise,  if  it  was  therefore 
^^•^^^'said,  it  is  not  of  him  who  willeth,  nor  of  him  who  runneth, 
hut  of  God  who  sheweth  mercy,  because  it  is  brought  to  pass 
of  both,  both  the  will  of  man,  and  the  mercy  of  God;  and 
we  understand  it  to  be  so  said,  it  is  not  of  him  who  ivilleth, 
nor  of  him  who  runneth,  hut  of  God  who  sheweth  mercy,  as 
if  it  were  said,  the  will  alone  of  man  is  not  sufficient,  unless 
there  be  also  the  mercy  of  God  :  therefore  also  the  mercy 
alone  of  God  is  not  sufficient,  unless  there  be  also  the  will  of 
man ;  and  thus  if  it  be  rightly  said,  it  is  not  of  man  who 
willeth,  hut  of  God  who  sheweth  mercy,  because  the  will 
alone  of  man  does  not  fulfil  it;  why  is  it  not  also  on  the 
other  side  rightly  said,  '  it  is  not  of  God  who  sheweth  mercy, 
but  of  man  who  willeth,  because  the  mercy  alone  of  God 
does  not  fulfil  it  ?'    So  then  if  no  Christian  will  dare  to  say, 
*  it  is  not  of  God  who  sheweth  mercy,  but  of  man  who  willeth,' 
that  he  contradict  not  most  openly  the  Apostle ;  it  remains 
that  it  be  understood  therefore  rightly  to  have  been  said,^7  is 
not  of  him  who  willeth,  nor  of  him  tvho  runneth,  but  of  God 
who  sheweth  mercy,  that  the  whole  may  be  given  to  God, 
who   both   prepares   the  good  will  of  man    hereafter  to  be 
assisted,  and  assists  it  when  prepared.     For  the  good  will  of 
man  goes  before  many  gifts  of  God,  but  not  all'':  but  those 
which  it  goes  not  before,  among  them  is  itself.     For  both  are 
Ps.  69,  read  in  the  sacred  writings,  both,  His  mercy  shall  prevent 
Pg23  6.wi<?,  and,  His  mercy  shall  follow  me.     It  prevents  him  who 

^  See  S.  Greg.   Mor.  xvi.  30.  and  Christian    notion    of    the    relation    of 

xviii.  62.  Tr.  p.  363.  and  note  c.  where,  works  to   reward,  and    as  '  mereri'  is 

in  the  passage  cited,  '  promeruit'  is  of  repeatedly   used    in    the    present    vo- 

course  to   be   taken  according  tn   tlie  lumc. 


All  men  born  under  urath.     Need  of  a  Mediator.     107 

has  not  the  will,  that  he  may  have  the  will;  it  follows  after defide 
him  who  hath,  that  he  may  not  have  the  will  in  vain.     For  ^cLI^ 
why  are  w-e  charged  to  pray  for  our  enemies,  who  assuredly  tate. 
have  no  will  to  live  godly,  except  that  God  may  work  in^^J'^"'^'' 
them  the  will  also  ?     And,  again,  why  are  we  charged  to  ask  Matt.  7, 
that  we  may  receive,  except  that  He,  by  Whom  it  was  brought '' 
to  pass  that  we  have  the  will,  may  bring  to  pass  that  which 
we  will  ?     We    pray,  therefore,   for  our    enemies,  that  the 
grace   of  God  may  prevent  them,  as  it  has   prevented  us 
also:  but  we  pray  for  ourselves  that  His  mercy  may  follow 
after  us. 

10.  Therefore  the  human  race  was  holden  under  just  con-xxxiii 
demnation,    and    all    were    children    of  wrath.     Concerning 
which  wrath  it  is  written,  Since  all  our  days  have  failed,  andVs.20,9. 
in  Thy  wrath  have  ive  failed;  our  years  shall  he  thought  on 
as  a  spider.     Concerning  which  anger  Job  also  says,  JbrJobH, 
man  born  of  a   woman,  is  short  of  life  and  full  of  urath}' 
Concerning  which  wrath  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  also   says, 
He  who  helieveth  on  the  Son,  hath  eternal  life  ;  but  he  who  Johns, 
believetk  not  on  the  Son,  hath  not  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God^^' 
remaineth  vpon   him.     He   says  not,  shall   come;    but  re- 
maineth.       Forasmuch    as    with     this    every    man    is   bom. 
"W  herefore  the  Apostle  says.  For  we  too  were  by  nature  ^owsEph.  2, 
of  wrath,  as  the  rest  also.     In  this  wrath  when  men  were^* 
through  original  sin,  and  in  so  much  the  more  grievous  and 
deadly  wise,  as  they  had  added  greater  or  more  sins  besides, 
a  Mediator  was  required,  that  is,  a  reconciler,  to  appease 
this  wrath  by  the  offering  of  a  singular  Sacrifice,  whereof  all 
the  sacrifices  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  were  shadows. 
Whence  the  Apostle  says.  For  if  when  ice  were  enemies,  zf^enom.  6, 
were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son,  much  more,  ^'  ^^' 
being  reconciled  now  in  His  blood,  shall  we  be  saved  from 
wrath  through  Him.     But  when  God  is  said  to  be  angry, 
there  is  not  implied  of  Him  emotion,  such  as  is  in  the  mind 
of  man  when  angry  ;  but  by  a  word  transferred  from  human 
feelings,  His  vengeance,  which  is  none  other  than  just,  hath 
received    tlie    name    of  Wrath.     Therefore  that  through    a 
Mediator  we  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  receive  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  of  enemies  we  may  be  made  sons  ;    For  as  many  Rom.  8, 
as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  these  are  sons  of  God  ;^*' 


lOS       Human  nature  of  Cltrist  came  into  Icing  pure, 

ENCHi-  this    is  the  grace  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ   our  Lord. 
-; — —  Concerning  which  Mediator  it  were  long  to  speak  so  great 
things  as  are  worth}^  to  be  spoken,  although  by  man  they 
cannot  worthily  be    spoken.     For  who    can    set    forth    this 
John  1,  alone  in  suitable  words,  that  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and 
dnelt  among  us,  that  we  should  believe  in  the  only  Son  of 
God  the  Father  Almighty,  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the 
Virgin  Mary  ?    Thus,  that  is,  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  the 
flesh   being   assumed    by   the  Godhead,   not    the  Godhead 
changed    into    flesh.     Further   in    this    place  we    ought   to 
understand   by    '  flesh'    man,    the    expression    from    a    part 
Rom.  3,  signifying  the  whole  ;  as  it  is  said.  Since  hy  the  works  of  the 
Law  no  flesh  shall  he  justifled ;   that  is,  no  man.     For  it  is 
unlawful  to  say  that  any  thing  of  human  nature  was  wanting 
in  that  assumption;  but  of  nature  every  way  free  from  every 
tie  of  sin  :  not  such  nature  as  is  born  of  both  sexes  through 
'  reatus  the  lust  of  the  flesh  with  the  bond  of  sin,  the  guilt'  whereof 
is  washed  away  by  regeneration  ;    but  such  as  it  vvas  fitting 
that  He  should  be  born  of  a  virgin,  whom  the  faith  of  His 
mother,  not  her  lust,  had  conceived ;    by  whose  very  birth 
even  were  her  virginity  impaired,  now  no  longer  would  He 
Sqaod    be  born  of  a  virgin;    and  falsely,  which  God  forbid^,  would 
the  whole  Church   confess  Flim  born   of  the  Virgin  Mary  ; 
she  who  following  His  Mother  daily  brings  forth  His  mem- 
bers, and  is  a  virgin  still.    Read,  if  you  will,  on  the  virginity 
of  holy  Mary  my  letters  to  an  illustrious  man  whose  name  I 
3Ep.l37. mention  with  honour  and  affection,  Volusianus^     Wherefore 
XXXV.  Christ  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  is  both  God  and  Man.     God 
4  ssecula before   all  worlds^,  Man  in   our  world.     God,  because   the 
John  1,  Word  of  God;    for  the  JVord  uas  God:    but  Man,  because 
unto    unity    of  Person    there    was   added    to    the    Word    a 
reasonable  soul  and  flesh  ^     Wherefore  inasmuch  as  He  is 
Johnio,  God,  '  He    and  the  Father  are  one;'    inasmuch    as   He  is 
John  14  Man,  '  The  Father  is  greater  than  He.'     For  being  the  only 
28.         Son  of  God,  not  by  grace,  but  by  nature,  that  He  might  be 
full  of  grace  also.  He  vvas  made  the  Son  of  Man  likewise  ; 
and  Himself  the  Same  Both,  of  Both  One  Christ,     For  being 

"^  In  this,  and  some  other  expressions,     rather  collected    than   invented  by  its 
we  have  the  very  language  of  the  Atha-     author, 
nasian    Creed,    which    was    evidently 


Manhood  even  of  Christ  meriied  notluiKj  till  in  God.     100 

in  the  form  of  God,  He  thought  it  not  rohhery,  what  He  was  de  fide 
by  nature,  to  he  equal  with  God.     Yet  He  emptied  Himself,  ^J^u^^ 
receiving  the  form  of  a  servant, uot  losing  or  diminishing  the  tate. 
form  of  God.     And  so  He  was  both  made  less,  and  remained  ?*^'^-  ^' 
equal,  Both  in  One*,  as  has  been  said:    but  one  thing  by'utrum- 
reason  of  the  Word,  the  other  by  reason  of  His  Manhood  ;'i"^"'^''^ 
by  reason  of  the  Word,  equal  with  the  Father,  by  reason  of 
His  Manhood,  less.     One  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  same  the 
Son  of  Man  ;  One  the  Son  of  Man,  and  the  same  the  Son  of 
God  :    not  two  sons   of  God,  God  and  Man,  but  One  Son 
of  God ;   God  without  beginning,  Man  from  a  certain  begin- 
ning, one  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

11.  Here  altogether  greatly  and  evidently  is  God's  grace  xxxvi, 
commended.  For  what  merit  had  human  nature  in  the  Man 
Christ,  that  it  should  be  singularly  assumed  into  the  unity  of 
Person  of  the  only  Son  of  God  ?  What  good  will,  what  good 
and  zealous  purpose,  what  good  works  went  before,  such  as 
that  by  them  That  Man  should  deserve  to  be  made  one  Person 
with  God  ^  Whether  at  all  was  He  Man  before,  and  was  this 
singular  benefit  afforded  Him,  in  that  He  deserved  singularly 
of  God?  Truly  from  the  time  that  He  began  to  be  Man,  He^^al.'ihe 
began  not  to  be  any  thing  other  than  the  Son  of  God;  and^^"^' 
this  the  only  Son,  and  by  reason  of  God  the  Word,  Who  by 
assuming  Him  was  made  flesh,  assuredly  God  :  so  that,  in 
like  manner  as  any  man  whatever  is  one  Person,  that  is,  a 
reasonable  soul  and  flesh,  so  Christ  also  may  be  one  Person, 
the  Word  and  Man.  Whence  to  human  nature  so  great 
glory,  freely  given  undoubtedly  with  no  merits  going  before, 
unless  because  in  this  the  great  and  alone  grace  of  God  is 
evidently  shewn  to  them  who  contemplate  it  faithfully  and 
sobei'ly,  that  men  may  understand  that  they  are  themselves 
justified  from  their  sins  through  the  same  grace,  through 
which  it  was  brought  to  pass  that  the  Man  Christ  might  have 
no  sin  ?  Thus  also  the  Angel  saluted  His  mother,  when  he 
announced  to  her  her  future  bringing-forth  ;  Hail,  said  he, 
full  of  grace/  And  a  little  after,  Thou  hast  found,  says  he,  L"kei, 
grace  with  God.  And  she  indeed  is  said  to  he  full  ofgrace,^^'  ^^' 
and  to  have  found  grace  witli  God,  that  she  might  be  the 
mother  of  her  Lord,  yea,  of  the  Lord  of  all.  But  of  Christ 
Himself  the  Evangehst  John,  after  having    said.  And   ///^Johni, 

14. 


110  ChrisVs  coming  itself  a  grace.  Holy  Spirit  not  His  Father, 

ENCHi-  Word  uas  made  flesh,  and  dtvelt  among  us,  says,  And  we 

saw  His  glory,  as  of  the  Only-heyotten  of  the  Father,  full  of 

grace  and  truth.  That  which. he  says,  The  Word  was  made 
flesh ;  the  same  is,  full  of  grace :  that  which  he  says,  The 
glory  of  the  Only-hegotten  of  the  Father ;  the  same  is,  full  of 
truth.  For  the  Truth  Itself,  the  Only-begotten  Son  of  God, 
not  by  grace,  but  by  nature,  by  grace  took  unto  Him  Man 
with  so  great  unity  of  Person,  that  Himself  the  Same  was 
xxxvii.  also  the  Son  of  Man.  For  the  same  Jesus  Christ  the  Only- 
begotten,  that  is,  the  only,  Son  of  God,  our  Lord,  was  born 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Virgin  Mary.  And  certainly  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  gift  of  God,  which  indeed  Itself  also  is 
equal  to  the  Giver  :  and  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  also  is 
God,  not  inferior  to  the  Father  and  the  Son.  From  this 
therefore,  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  birth  of  Christ  ac- 

1  homi-  cording  to  His  Manhood',  what  else  than  very  grace  is  shewn  ? 

For  when  the  Virgin  had  enquired  of  the  Angel,  how  that 
should  be  brought  to  pass  which  he  announced  to  her,  seeing 

Luke  1, that  she  knew  not  a  man;  the  Angel  answered.  The  Holy 
Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest 
shall  overshadow  thee ;  and  therefore  that  Holy  Thing  ivhich 
shall  be  horn  of  thee  shall  he  called  the  Son  of  God.  And 
Joseph  when  he  wished  to  put  her  away,  suspecting  her  to  be 
an  adulteress,  whom  he  knew  to  be  with  child  not  of  him- 

Matt. ],self,  received  such  an  answer  from  the  Angel,  Fear  not  to 

2  natum  Idke  Mary  thy  iiife;  for  that  ichich  in  her  is  conceived'^,  is 

of  the  Holy  Ghost :  that  is,  What  you  suspect  to  be  of 
another  man,  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
xxxviii  12,  Yet  do  we  therefore  at  all  intend  to  say,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  Father  of  the  Man  Christ,  so  that  God  the 
Father  begot  the  Word,  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Man,  of  both 
which  Substances  should  be  one  Christ,  both  the  Son  of  God 
the  Father  as  touching  the  Word,  and  the  Son  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  touching  the  Man  ;  in  that  the  Holy  Ghost  as  His 
Father  had  begotten  Him  of  His  virgin  Mother  ?  Who  will 
dare  to  say  this  ?  Nor  is  there  need  to  shew  by  discussion 
what  other  great  absurdities  follow;  when  now  this  very  thing 
is  of  itself  so  absurd,  that  no  faithful  ears  are  able  to  bear  it. 
Wherefore,  as  we  confess,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who  is 
God  of  God,  but  as  Man  was  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and 


but  the  Creator  of  His  Hinnanity.  Ill 

the  Virgin  Mary,  in  both  Substances,  the  divine,  that  is,  andnEFiDE 

•      •«  SPE   F T 

the  human,  is  the  only  Son  of  God   the  Father  Ahnighty,  cari- 
from  Whom  proceedeth  the  Holy  Ghost.     In  what  manner  tate. 
then  do  we  say,  that  Christ  was  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  if 
the  Holy  Ghost  begat  Him  not  ?     Was  it  because  He  made 
Him  ?     Seeing  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  far  as  He  is 
God,  all  tilings  uere  made  by  Him:  so  far  however  as  He  is  John  i, 
Man,  Himself  also  was  made,  as  the  Apostle  says:  He  «£'<74' Rom.  i 
made  of  the  seed  of  David  accordincj   to   the  Jiesh.      But^- 
whereas    that   Creature    which    the    Virgin    conceived    and 
brought  forth,  although  It  belong  to  the  Person  of  the  Son 
alone,  yet  the  whole  Trinity  made;  for  neither  do  the  works 
of  the  Trinity  admit  of  beiug  separated ;  why  in  the  making 
of  It  was  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  named  ?     Whether  is  it  that 
even  as  often  as  one  of  the  Three  is  named  in  any  work,  the 
whole  Trinity  is  understood  to  work  1     It  is  so  indeed,  and 
may  be  shewn  to  be  so  by  examples.    But  we  must  not  delay 
any  longer  on  this.     For  that  moves  us,  how  it  is  said,  Born 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  He  is  in  no  way  the  Son  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     For  neither,  because  God  created  this  world, 
may  it  lawfully  be  said  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  or  born  of  God; 
but  made,  or  created,  or  built,  or  founded  by  Him,  or  what- 
ever other  such  expression  we  may  rightly  use.     He,  there- 
fore, when  we  confess  Him  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the 
Virgin  Mary,  how  He  be  not  the  Son  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
yet  be  the  Son  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  is  difficult  to  explain. 
Without  any  doubt,  forasmuch  as  He  was  not  so  born  of  Him 
as  of  a  father,  and  was  so  born  of  her  as  of  a  mother.     Itxxxix. 
must  not  therefore  be  granted,  that  whatsoever  is  born  of  any 
thing,  is  straightway  to  be  called  the  son  of  that  same  thing. 
For  not  to  notice  that  a  son  is  born  of  a  man  in  one  sense, 
and  in  another  sense  a  hair,  a  louse,  a  stomach-worm,  no  one 
of  which  is  a  son  :  not  to  notice  then  these,  seeing  that  they 
are  with  ill  grace'  compared  to  so  great  a  thing;  surely  they '  defor- 
who  are  born  of  water  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  no  one  would™'  ^^' 
properly  say  that  they  are  sons  of  the  water;  but  they  are 
expressly   called    sons    of  God    their  Father,  and   of  their 
mother  the  Church.     Thus,  therefore,  One  born  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  Son  of  God  the  Father,  not  of  the  Holv  Ghost. 
For  what  we  said  of  hair  and  the  rest,  is  only  of  use  so  far, 


112    Mauliood  deified  through  '  77/6^  Gift''  because  freely.       ' 

t;NCHi-  that  we  be  put  in  mind,  that  not  every  thing  which  is  born  of 

any  one,  can  also  be  called  the  son  of  that  of  which  it  is 

born  ;    in  like  manner,  as  it  follows  not,  that  all,  who   are  1 

called  sons  of  any  one,  be  said  to  be  also  boi'n  of  him :  as 

there  are  who  are  adopted.    Tliere  are  also  named  sons  of  hell,  i 

not  as  born  of  it,  but  prepared  for  it,  as  sons  of  the  Kingdom,  ! 

xl.    who  are  being  prepared  for  the  Kingdom.     Therefore  seeing  I 

that  one  thing  may  be  born  of  another  thing,  and  yet  not  in 

such  a  manner  as  to  be  a  son,  and  again,  tliat  not  every  one,  I 

who  is  called  a  son,  is  born  of  him  whose  son  he  is  said  to  be ;  i 

doubtless  the  manner  in  which  Christ  was  born  of  the  Holy 

Ghost  not  as  a  Son,  and  of  the  Virgin  Mary  as  a  Son,  suggests 

to  us  the  grace  of  God,  whereby  Man,  without  any  merits 

going  before,  in  the  very  beginning  of  his  nature  in  which  he  I 

began  to  exist,  was  joined  to  God  the  Word  unto  so  great ' 

unity  of  Person,  that  Himself  the  Same  should  be  the  Son  of 

God,  Who  was  the  Son  of  Man,  and  the  Son  of  Man,  Who 

was  the  Son  of  God:  and  that  thus  in  the  taking  upon  Him 

human  nature,  in  a  certain  way  the  very  grace   should  be 

made  natural  to  that  Man,  which'  should  not  be  capable  of 

admitting  any  sin.     Which  grace  it  was  therefore  necessary 

should  be  indicated  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  He  properly  ] 

Acts  8,  is  thus  God,  as  to  be  called  also  the  Gift  of  God.     Whereof ' 
20.  . 

to  speak  sufficiently,  even  if  it  may  be  done,  is  matter  for  a 

very  lengthened  discussion. 

x'l;         13.  Thus  begotten-  or  conceived  through  no  pleasure  of 

natus.  carnal  lust,  and  therefore  deriving  no  sin  by  way  of  descent ; 
also  by  the  grace  of  God  in  a  wonderful  and  unspeakable  ! 
manner  joined,  and  grown  together,  in  unity  of  Person,  with 
the  Word  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  not  by 
grace,  but  by  nature,  and  so  Himself  also  committing  no 
sin ;    yet,  by  reason  of  the  '  likeness  of  the  flesh  of  sin'  in 

Rom.  8,  which  He  had  come,  was  He  Himself  also  called  sin,  being  i 
to  be  sacrificed  to  wash  away  sins.     Forasmuch  as  in  the 
old  Law  sacrifices  for  sins  were  called  '  sins;'   which  He  truly  ! 

Hos.4,8.  was  made,  whereof  they  vvere  shadows.     Hence  the  Apostle, 

2  Cor.  5,  g^j^g^.  jjg  jjg^(j  g,j^(]    jYq  beseech  you  for  Christ  to  be  reconciled 

20.21.  .  V       J 

to  God;  straightway  adds  and  says,  Hirn  who  knew  no  sin, 
He  made  sin  for  us,  that  ice  may  be  the  righteousness  of  God  i 
in  Him.     He  says  not,  as  in  certain  faulty  copies  is  read, 


1.  e 


1 

'  which 
arrace.' 


Christ  how  ^  made  sw.'    All  die  to  sin  in  Baptism.     113 

"  He  Who  knew  no  sin,  for  us  wrought  sin;"  as  if  Christ defide 
Himself  had  sinned  for  us;  but  he  says,  '  Him  who  had  not  ^car^^ 
known  sin,'  that  is,  Christ,  '  God,  to  Whom  we  are  to  be  t^te. 
reconciled,  made  sin  for  us,'  that  is,  a  Sacrifice   for  sins, 
through  "Wliicli  we  might   be  able  to   be  reconciled.      He 
therefore  sin,  as  we  righteousness ;  nor  that  our  own,  but  of 
God ;  nor  in  us,  but  in  Him :  as  He  sin,  not  His  own,  but 
ours;  which  that  it  had  place  not  in  Him,  but  in  us,  He 
shewed  by  the  likeness  of  the  flesh  of  sin,  in  which  He  was 
crucified :  that,  whereas  sin  was  not  in  Him,  so  in  a  certain 
way  He  might  die  to  sin,  in  dying  to  the  flesh,  wherein  was 
the  likeness  of  sin;  and  whereas  He  had  never  Himself  lived 
according  to  the  oldness  of  sin,  He  might  by  His  own  resur- 
rection signify  our  new  life  springing  to  life  again,  from  the 
old  death,  whereby  we  had  been  dead  in  sin.     This  is  that   xlii. 
very  thing  which  is  solemnized  among  us,  the  great  Sacra- 
ment ^  of  Baptism,  that  whosoever  pertain  to  that  grace,  may 
die  unto  sin,  as  He  is  said  to  have  died  unto  sin,  who  died 
unto  the  flesh,  that  is,  the  likeness  of  sin  :  and  may  live,  by 
being  born  again  from  the  laver,  as  He  also  by  rising  again 
from  the  grave,  of  whatever  age  their  bodies  be.     For  from  xliii. 
the  little  child  but  lately  born  even  to  the  decrepit  old  man, 
as  no  one  is  to  be  prohibited  from  Baptism,  so  is  there  no  one 
who  in  Baptism  dies  not  unto  sin:  but  little  children  only 
unto  original  sin,  elder  persons  however  die  unto  all  those 
sins  also  whatsoever  by  ill   living   they  had  added  to  that 
which  they  derived  by  birth.     But  therefore  are  they  also  xliv. 
generally  said  to  die  unto  sin,  when  without  any  doubt  they 
die  not  to  one,  but  to  many  and  all  sins,  whatsoever  now  of 
their  own  they  have  committed,  either  by  thought,  or  word, 
or  deed;    since  also  by  the  singular  number  the  plural  is 
wont  to  be  signified  :  as  the  poet  says  «,  "  And  fill  his  belly 
with  the  warrior  armed ;"  although  they  did  this  with  many 
warriors.     And  in  our  own  writings  we  read,  Pray  therefore  Numb. 
to  the  Lord  that  He  may  take  an:  ay  from  us  the  serpent;  itLXX. 
says  not,  the  serpents,  from  which  the  people  were  suffering, 
so  as  thus  to  speak :  and  numberless  other  such.     Whereas, 
however,  also  that  original  (sin,  which  is)  one,  is  signified  by 

f    '  Sacramentum,'    perhaps     here         g  Of  the  Trojan  Horse.    Virg.  ^n. 
mystery.'  ii.  20. 


114  What  si7is  may  he  remitted  to  iiifatits. 

ENcHi-the  plural  number,  when  we  say  that  little  children  are  bap- 

tized  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  say  not  for  the  remission 

of  sin ;  that  is  an  opposite  form  of  speech,  whereby  by  the 
plural  the  singular  number  is  signified.     As  in  the  Gospel, 

Mat.  2,  Herod  being  dead,  it  is  said,  For  they  are  dead  who  sought 
the  child''s  life:  it  is  not  said,  he  is  dead:  and  in  Exodus, 

Ex.32,  They  have  made,  says  he,  unto    themselves   gods  of  gold i 

whereas  they  had  made  one  calf,  of  which  they  said.  These 

are  thy  Gods,  O  Israel,  icho  led  thee  forth  out  of  the  land 

of  Egypt :    here    also    putting  the  plural  for   the  singular. 

xlv.    Although  in  that  one  sin  also,  which  by  one  man  entered 

Rom.  5,  into  the  world,  and  passed  upon  all  men,  by  reason  of  which 
young  children  also  are  baptized,  more  sins  than  one  may  be 
understood,  if  that  one  be  divided,  as  it  were,  into  its  separate 
parts.  For  therein  is  both  pride,  in  that  man  chose  rathei 
to  be  in  his  own  power,  than  in  that  of  God  ;  and  sacrilege, 
in  that  he  believed  not  God  ;  and  murder,  in  that  he  cast 
himself  headlong  into  death  ;  and  spiritual  fornication,  in 
that  the  purity  of  the  human  mind  was  corrupted  by  the 
persuasion  of  the  serpent ;  and  theft,  in  that  forbidden  food 
was  taken  ;  and  covetousness,  in  that  he  desired  more  than 
what  ought  to  have  satisfied  him  ;  and  whatever  else  in  thef 
commission  of  this  one  sin  may  by  careful  thought  be 
xlvi.  discovered.  Also  that  little  children  are  bound  by  the 
sins  of  their  parents,  not  merely  of  the  first  human  beings, 
but  of  their  own  parents,  from  whom  they  are  themselves 
borrj,  is  said  not  without  show  of  reason.     Forasmuch  as  that 

Deut.  5,  divine  saying,  I  will  repay  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the, 
sons;  certainly  is  of  force  in  them,  before  that  by  spiritual 
regeneration  they  begin  to  belong  to  the  New  Testament.' 
Which  Testament  was  prophesied  of,  when  it  was  said  by 
Ezekiel,  that  the  sons  should  not  receive  the  sins  of  their 
fathers  ;  and  that  that  parable  should  be  no  longer  in  Israel, 

Ez.  18,   The  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  grape,  and  the  teeth  of  the 

^'  children  have  become  numbed^\     For  therefore  is  each  one 

born  again,  that  in  him  may  be  loosened  whatever  of  sin; 
there  be,  with  which  he  is  born.  For  the  sins  which  areS 
afterwards  committed  by  evil  conduct,  may  also  by  repent- 
ance be  healed,  as  also  we  see  takes  place  after  BaptismJ 

■'  obstupuerunt,  al.  obstipuerunt. 


Many  sins  in  one.     Sin  of  fathers  rests  on  children.     115 

And  therefore  regeneration  was  not  appointed,  except  only  de  fide 
because  our  generation  is  corrupted;  so  much  so  that  even  "cari- 
one  begotten  of  lawful  wedlock  says,  In   iniquities  I  was  tate. 
conceived,  and  in  sins  my  mother  nourished  me  in  the  icomb.    ^'°  ' 
Neither  said  he  here,  in  iniquity,  or,  in  sin,  although  this 
also    might  rightly    be   said ;    but   he  chose   rather   to  say 
iniquities   and   sins.     Because  in  that  one   sin   also,  which 
passed  upon    all    men,   and  is  so   great,  that   by  it  human 
natui'e  was    changed    and   turned  unto  necessity  of  death, 
there  are  found,  as  I  have  shewn  above,  more  sins  than  one ; 
and  other  sins  of  our  parents,  which,  although  they  cannot 
so   change    our   nature,  yet  bind    sons   by  a  state   of  con- 
demnation, unless  the  free  grace  and  mercy  of  God  come 
to   their   help.      But  not  without    good    reason   may  it   be  xlvii. 
questioned,  concerning  the  sins  of  onr  other  parents,  whom 
each  of  us  succeed  to  as  ancestors  from  Adam  down  to  his 
own  parent;  whether  he  who  is  born  be  involved  in  the  evil 
actions  of  all,  and  multiplied  original  transgressions,  so  that 
each  one  is  born  in  so  much  the  worse  estate,  the  later  it 
is ;  or  whether  it  be  for  this  reason  that  God  threatens  the 
posterity  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  concerning 
the  sins  of  their  parents,  because  He  extends  not  His  anger, 
as  far  as  relates  to  the  offences  of  their  ancestors,  further, 
through  the  tempering  of  His  merciful  kindness ;  lest  they, 
on  whom  the  grace  of  regeneration  is  not  bestowed,  might 
be  weighed  down  with   too   heavy  a  burthen   in   their  very 
eternal  damnation,  if  they  were  obliged  from  the  beginning 
of  the  human  race  to  draw  together  by  way  of  descent  the 
sins  of  all  their  parents  who  went  before  them,  and  to  suffer 
the  punishments  due  to  them :  or  whether  any  thing  else  in 
so  great  a  matter,  by  more  careful  examination  and  handling 
of  holy  Scripture,  may  or  may  not  be  discovered,  I  do  not 
venture  to  affirm  unadvisedly. 

14.  That  one  sin,  however,  which  was  so  great,  andxlviii. 
committed  in  a  place  and  state  of  so  great  happiness,  that 
in  one  man,  by  way  of  origin,  and  so  to  say,  by  way  of  root, 
the  whole  human  race  was  condemned,  is  not  loosed  and 
washed  away,  but  only  through  one  Mediator  between  God 
and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  Who  alone  could  so  beiTim.2, 
born,  as  that  to  Him  there  were  no  need  to  be  born  again. 

I  2 


116        Baptism  of  Christ.     Our  Redemption  Inj  Him. 

ENCHi-  For  they  were  not  born  again,  who  were  baptized  by  the 
^^^^^ baptism  of  John,  by  whom  He  also  was  baptized  :  but  by 
Mat.^  a  certain  ministry  of  him,  as  of  a  forerunner,  who  said, 
6. 13.  Prepare  a  way  for  the  Lord,  were  prepared  for  that  One  in 
Luke's*  Whom  alone  they  could  be  born  again.  For  His  baptism  is, 
*•  not  in  water  only,  as  was  that  of  John,  but  also  in  the  Holy 

Ghost ;  according  as  of  That  Spirit,  whosoever  believeth 
in  Christ,  is  regenerate,  of  Which  Christ  being  generated, 
Luke  3,  needed  not  to  be  regenerate.  Whence  that  voice  of  the 
p^g  2  7  Father  which  came  over  Him  when  baptized,  /  to-day  have 
Heb.  5,  begotten  Thee;  pointed  not  out  that  one  day  of  time  in  which 
Heb.  1  He  was  baptized,  but  that  of  unchangeable  eternity,  to  shew 
®*  that  That  Man  pertained  to  the  Person  of  the  Only -begotten. 

For  wherein  the  day  is  neither  begun  by  yesterday's  ending, 
nor  ended  by  to-morrow's  beginning,  it  is  ever  to-day. 
Therefore  He  willed  to  be  baptized  by  John  in  water,  not 
that  any  iniquity  in  Him  might  be  washed  away,  but  that 
His  great  humility  might  be  commended.  For  in  like 
manner  in  Him  Baptism  found  nothing  to  wash  away,  even 
as  death  found  nothing  to  punish ;  that  the  devil,  being  over- 
come and  vanquished  by  truth  of  justice,  not  by  violence  of 
power,  in  that  he  had  most  unjustly  slain  Him  without  any 
desert  of  sin,  might  through  Him  most  justly  lose  them 
whom  through  desert  of  sin  he  had  gotten  in  hold.  Therefore 
He  took  upon  Him  both,  both  baptism  and  death,  by  reason 
of  a  determinate  dispensation,  not  of  pitiable  necessity,  but 
rather  of  pitying  will ;  that  One  might  take  away  the  sin 
of  the  world,  as  one  sent  sin  into  the  world,  that  is,  upon  the 
1.  whole  human  race.  Except  only  that  that  one  sent  one  sin 
into  the  world,  this  One  however  took  away  not  only  that  one 
sin,  but  at  the  same  time  all,  which  He  found  added  to  it. 
Kom.  5,  "Whence  the  Apostle  says,  Not  as  by  one  man  sinning,  so  is 
~  '  the  gift  also :  for  the  judgment  indeed  was  of  one  unto 
condemnation,  but  the  grace,  of  many  offences  unto  justi- 
fication. Because  assuredly  that  one  sin  which  is  derived 
by  way  of  descent,  even  if  it  be  alone,  makes  men  liable 
to  condemnation  :  but  the  grace  justifies  from  many  offences 
the  man,  who,  beside  that  one  which  in  common  with  all  he 
hath  derived  by  way  of  descent,  hath  added  many  of  his 
li-     own  likewise.     However,  that  which  he  says  a  little  after, 


Baplimn  in  the  death  of  Christ,  death  unto  aiu.       117 

As  by  the  offence  of  one  upon  all  men  unto  condemnation,  *odefide 
aha  by  the  righteousness  of  one  upon  all  men  unto  justifi-  ^car^J 
cation  of  life;  sufficiently  shews,  that  no  one  born  of  Adam  .tate. 
is  otherwise  than  held  under  condemnation,  and  that  no  one 
is  freed  from  condemnation  otherwise  than  by  being  born 
again  in  Christ.     Of  which  punishment  through  one  man,     lij. 
and  grace  through  one  Man,  having  spoken  as  much  as  he 
judged  sufficient  for  that  place  of  his  Epistle,  next  he  com- 
mended the  great  mystery   of  holy  Baptism  in  the  Cross 
of  Christ,  in  such  manner  as  that  we  understand  that  Baptism 
in  Christ  is  none  other  than  the  likeness  of  the  death  of 
Christ;  and  that  the  death  of  Christ  crucified  is  none  other 
than  the  likeness  of  the  remission  of  sin:   that,  as  in  Him 
true  death  had  place,  so  in  us  true  remission  of  sin ;  and  as 
in  Him  true  resurrection,  so  in  us  true  justification.     For  he 
says.  What  shall  we  say  then?  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that Uom.  6, 
grace  may  abound?     For  he  had  said  above,  For  where  sin  ^^*  5 
abounded,  grace  abounded  more.    And  therefore  he  proposed  20. 
to  himself  the  question,  whether  one  be  to  continue  in  sin,  in 
order  to  obtain  abundance  of  grace.     But  he  answered.  Far 
be  it:  and  added.  If  we  are  dead  to  sin,  how  shall  we  live 
therein?     Then,  in  order  to  shew  that  we  are  dead  to  sin: 
What,  know  ye  not,  says  he,  how  that  we  whosoever  have 
been  baptized  in  Jesus  Christ,  have  been  baptized  in  His 
death  ?     If  therefore  we  are  hence  shewn  to  be  dead  to  sin, 
in  that  we    have   been    baptized    in    the   death   of  Christ ; 
assuredly  little  children  also  who  are  baptized  in  Christ,  die 
unto  sin,  because  they  are  baptized  in  His  death.    For  with- 
out any  exception  it  is  said,  We  whosoever  have  been  baptized 
in  Christ  Jesus,  have  been  baptized  in  His  death.     And 
therefore  is  it  said,  that  it  may  be  shewn  that  we  are  dead  to 
sin.     But  to  what  sin  do  little  children  die  by  being  bom 
again,  except   to   that,   which,   by  being   born,    they   have 
derived  ?     And   thus    to    them    also    pertains  what  follows, 
wherein  he  says,   Therefore  we  have  been  buried  together  Rom.  6, 
with  Him  through  baptism  unto  death,  that,  in  like  manner ^~^^' 
as  Christ  rose  from  the  dead  through  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
80  we  also  may  walk  in  newness  of  life.     For  if  we  have 
become  planted  together  with  the  likeness  of  His  death,  so 
shall  we  be  also  of  His  resurrection :  knowifig  this,  that  our 


118     Christ  died  to  the  flesh,  they  that  are  His  to  its  sin. 

ENCHi-  old  man  hath  been  crucified  together,  that  the  body  of  sin 

^ 7nay  be  made  empty,  that  we  serve  not  sin  any  longer.     For 

he  that  hath  died,  hath  been  justified  from  sin.     But  if  we 
have  died  with  Christ,  ice  believe  that  ive  shall  also  together 
live  ivith  Him :  knowing  that  Christ  rising  from  the  dead, 
now  dieth  not,  death  shall  no  more  have  dominion  over  Him. 
For  in  that  He  hath  died  unto  sin.  He  hath  died  once ;  but 
in  that  He  liveth.  He  liveth  unto  God.     Thus  do  ye  also 
judge  yourselves  to  have  died  indeed  unto  sin,  but  to  live 
unto  God  in  Christ  Jesus.    For  hence  he  had  begun  to  prove 
that  we  must  not  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound ; 
and  had  said,  If  we  have  died  to  sin,  how  shall  we  live  in  it? 
Rom.  6,  and,  to  shew  that  we  had  died  to  sin,  had  added,  What,  know 
ye  not  that  ice  wJiosoever  have  been  baptized  in  Christ  Jesus, 
have  been  baptized  in  His  death  ?    Thus  then  he  closed  that 
whole  passage  as  he  began.     Seeing  that  he  so  introduced 
the  death  of  Christ,  as  to  say  that  even  He  died  to  sin.     To 
what  sin,  except  to  the  flesh,  in  which  was,  not  sin,  but  the 
likeness  of  sin;  and  therefore  it  is  called  by  the  name  of  sin? 
Therefore  to  them  who  have  been  baptized  in  the  death  of 
Christ,  in  which  not  only  older  persons,  but  little  children 
also  are  ba])tized,  he  says,  So  do  ye  also,  that  is,  in  like 
manner  as  Christ,  So  do  ye  also  judge  yourselves  to  have 
liii.    died  unto  sbi,  but  to  live  unto  God  in  Christ  Jesus.     What- 
ever therefore  was  done  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  in  His  Burial, 
in  His  Resurrection  on  the  third  day,  in  His  Ascension  into 
Heaven,  in  Plis  Sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  ;  was 
done  in  such  sort,  as  that  to  these  things,  not  only  as  spoken 
after  a  mystical  manner,  but  also  as  done,  the  Christian  life 
which  is  here  lived  might  be  conformed.     For  by  reason  of 
Gal.  5,   His  Cross  it  is  said ;  But  they  that  are  Jesus  Christ's,  have 
'^^'        crucified  their  flesh  with  its  passions  and  lusts.     By  reason 
Eom.  6,  of  His   Burial :    We  have  been  buried  together  ivith  Christ 
^'  through  Baptism  unto  death.    By  reason  of  His  Resurrection : 

That  like  as  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead  through  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  so  ive  also  may  walk  in  neivness  of  life. 
By  reason  of  His  Ascension  into  Heaven,  and  Sitting  at  the 
Col. 3,  right  hand  of  the  Father:  But  if  ye  have  risen  again  ivith 
~  '  Christ,  seek  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  is 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  mind  the  things  which  are 


All,  righteous  and  unrighteous,  shall  be  judged.         119 

above,  not  the  things  which  are  upon  earth:  for  ye  have  died,  vefibb 
a}id  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.     Plowever,  that  cari- 
wliich  Ave  confess  concerning  Christ  as  future;  how  that  He  tate. 
is  to  come  from  Heaven,  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead,  relates    li^'- 
not  to  that  hfe  of  ours  which  is  lived  here;  in  that  neither  is 
it  among  the  things  which  He  hath  done,  but  among  those 
which  He  is  to  do,  at  the  end  of  the  world.     To  this  belongs 
what  the  Apostle  goes  on  to  add:    When  Christ  our  life  shall 
have  appeared,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory. 
But  that  He   will  judge   the   quick  and  the  dead  may  be     Iv. 
tniderstood  in  two  ways :  either  to  understand  by  the  quick 
them  whom  His  coming  shall   find  not  yet  dead,  but  still 
living  in  this  flesh ;  but  by  the  dead,  them  who,  before  His 
coming,  have  departed,  or  are  to    depart,  from    the    body : 
or  whether  by  the  living  the  just,  by  the  dead  the  unjust: 
since  the  just  also  shall  be  judged.     For  at  times  the  judg- 
ment of  God  is  used  in  an  evil  sense;  whence  is  that  saying, 
But  they  who  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  (if  judg- 
ment^:   at   times   also  in  a  good   sense,  according   to   that'^oGr. 
which  is  said,  O  God,  in  TJiy  Name  save  me,  and  in  ThyFs.dA,!. 
might  judge  me.     Forasmuch  as    by  the  judgment  of  God 
takes  place  that  very  separation  of  the  good  and  bad,  that 
the  good,  being  to  be  freed  from  evil,  not  to  be  destroyed 
with  the  evil  persons,  may  be  set  apart  at  the  right  hand.  Mat.25, 

32   33 

By  reason  of  which  he  cried  out.  Judge  me,  O  God:  and  as 

if  setting  forth  what  he  had  said,  And  separate,  says  he,  my  Ps.43,i. 

cause  from  a  nation  not  holy. 

15.  But  now  when  we  have  spoken  concerning  Jesus  Christ    Ivi. 
the  only  Son  of  God,  our  Lord,  what  pertains  to  the  brevity 
of  confession,  we  thereunto  add  that  we  believe  also  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  that  Trinity  may  be  complete.  Which  is 
God:  then  next  the  Holy  Church  is  mentioned.     Whereby 
it  is  given  to  understand,  that,  after  mention  made  of  the 
Creator,  that  is,  of  the  supreme  Trinity,  it  were  fitting  to 
subjoin  the  reasonable  creation  pertaining  to  that  Jerusalem  Gal.  4, 
which   is  free.     Seeing  that  whatsoever  hath   been  spoken^  * 
concerning   the    man  Christ,  pertaineth   unto    the    unity  of 
Person  of  the  Only-begotten.     Therefore  the  right  order  of 
confession  demanded,  that  to  the  Trinity  the  Church  should 
be  subjoined,  as  to  Him  that  dwelleth  therein  His  own  house, 


120       The  Church  in  Heaven  and  Earth  God's  Temple. 

ENCHi-  to  God  His  own  Temple,  to  the  Founder  His  own  city. 
"^"'^^'^  Which  is  here  to  be  understood  as  a  whole,  not  only  in  respect 
•  al.       of  that  part  wherein  she  soiourneth'  upon  earth,  from  the 

'  which      .    .  ^     ,  .  •  •    •  .1  f 

sojourn-  nsing  of  the  sun  even  unto  its  setting,  praising  the  name  oi 

p'^'iis  ^^^^  Lord,  and  after  its  captivity  of  the  old  estate  singing  a 

3.        '  new  song ;  but  also  of  that  which  in  Heaven  ever,  from  the 

time  that  it  was  created,  hath  cleaved  unto  God,  neither  hath 

experienced  in  itself  any  evil  of  falling.     This  in  the  holy 

Angels  continueth   blessed,  and,  as  is  fitting,  helpeth  that 

part  of  itself  which  is  a  sojourner:  because  both  will  be  one 

by  partaking  in  common  of  eternity,  and  are  now  one  by  the 

bond  of  charity,  being  that  it  was  wholly  instituted  for  the 

worship  of  the  One  God.    Wherefore  neither  doth  the  whole, 

nor  any  part  of  it,  will  that  it  be  worshipped  in  the  place  of 

God,  nor  that  it  be  a  God  to  any  one  who  belongs  to  the 

Temple  of  God,  which  is  built  out  of  gods  whom  the  uncreated 

God  creates.     And  so  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  He  were  creature, 

not  Creator,  would  assuredly  be  a  reasonable  creature ;  for 

that  is  the  highest  creature.     And  therefore  in  the  Rule  of 

Faith  He  would  not  be  placed  before  the  Church,  in  that  He 

Himself  also  would  pertain  unto  the  Church  in  respect  of 

that  part  of  it  which  is  in  Heaven.     Nor  would  He  have  a 

temple,  but  Himself  also  would  be  a  temple.     But  a  temple 

iCor.  6,  He  hath,  concerning  Whom  the  Apostle  says.  Know  ye  not, 

that  your  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is 

in  you,  which  ye  have  of  God^    Concerning  whom  in  another 

1  Cor. 6,  place  he  says.  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  members 

of  Christ?     How  then  is  not  He  God,  Who  hath  a  temple? 

or  less  than  Christ,  Whose  members  He  hath  as  a  temple  ? 

For  neither  is  His  temple  other  than  the  temple  of  God,  in 

ICor. 3, that  the  same  Apostle  says.  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the 

temple  of  God?  in  order  to  prove  which  He  Q.i\.di^,  and  that 

the  Spirit  of  Ood  dwelleth  in  you.     God  therefore  dwelleth 

in  His  temple,  not  only  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  also  the  Father 

and  the  Son,  Who  also  concerning  His  own  Body,  (whereby 

He  was  made  the  Head  of  the  Church,  which  is  among  men, 

Col.  1,   that  He  may  be  in  all  things  holding  the  preeminence,)  says, 

John  2,  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up. 

^^'        The  temple  therefore  of  God,  that  is,  of  the  whole  supreme 

Trinity,  is  the  Holy  Church,  [the  Church,]  that  is,  universal 


What  ue  know  0/  Angels,  and  what  not.  121 

in  Heaven  and  on  earth.     But  concerning  that  which  is  inoEFiDB 

Heaven,  what  can  we  affirm,  but  only  that  there  is  in  it  no  cari- 

one  that  is  evil,  nor  halh  any  one   since   fallen  thence,  or  tate. 

is  about  to  fall,  from  the  time  that  God  spared  not  the  Angels   Ivii. 
.  .  2  Pet  2 

sinning,iiswYiteH  the  Apostle  VeieY,but  tltrustiiig  them  forth  "^^     '  ' 

delivered  them  unto  prisons  0/  darkness  of  hell,  to  be  reserved 

nnto  punishment  in  judgment.    But  of  what  nature  that  most  Iviii. 

blessed  and  lofty  society  is,  what  differences  there  are  there 

of  preeminencies  in  them,  so  that,  all  being  named,  as  it 

were,  by  a  general  name  Angels,  (as  in  the  Epistle  to  the 

Hebrews  we  read:  For  to  which  of  the  Anqels  said  He  a^Heb.  1, 

.  .  13. 

any  time.  Sit  on  My  right  hand,  seeing  that  in  this  manner 
he  shewed  universally  that  all  are  called  Angels,)  there  yet 
are  there  Archangels,  and  whether  these  same  Archangels 
are  called  Powers ;  and  so  it  was  said.  Praise  Him,  all  His  Ps.  148, 
Angels;  Praise  Him,  all  His  Powers^;  as  if  it  were  said, rj^/^-^^^es 
'  Praise  Him  all  His  Angels,  Praise  Him  all  His  Archangels;'  ^  ^• 
and  how  those  four  words  differ  one  from  another,  wherein 
the    Apostle    seems   to   have    embraced    the   whole  of  that 
heavenly   society,    saying,    Whether    they   be    Thrones,   or  Col.  1, 
Dominions,  or  Principalities,  or  Powers^,  let  them  speak  2  Po^^^. 
who  are  able,  yet  so  that  they  be  able  to  prove  what  they  *^*^^'- 
say :    I   confess  that  I  am  ignorant  of  these  things.     But 
neither  am   I  assured  of  that  other,  whether  the  sun  and 
moon  and  all  stars  belong  to  that  same  society  ;  although  to 
some  they  seem  to  be  shining  bodies,  not  bodies  possessing 
sense  and  understanding.     And   also    of  Angels,  who   can    lix. 
explain,  with  what  kind    of  bodies  they  have   appeared  to 
men,  so  as  not  only  to  be  seen,  but  also  to  be  touched ;  and, 
again,  not  by  bodily  bulk,  but  by  spiritual  power,  they  bring 
certain  visions,  not  to  the  bodily  eyes,  but  to  the  spiritual, 
i.  e.   to  minds ;    or   speak  something  not  to   the  ear  from 
without,  but  within    to  the   soul '  of  man,  themselves  also 
having  their  place  there  :  as  is  written  in  the  Book  of  the 
Prophets,  And  the  Angel  who  was  speaking  in  me  said  untoZech.  1, 
me ;  for  he  says  not,  who  was  speaking  to  me,  but  in  me,  or  ' 
also  appear  in  dreams,  and  converse  after  the   manner  of 
dreams;    we  have  for  example  in  the  Gospel,  Behold,  /AeMat.  1, 
Angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  dreams,  saying? 
'  Ben.  '  in  animo,'  '  in  the  mind.'    Mss.  animae. 


122     Hard  questions.     What  deceits  of  Satan  dangerous. 

ENCHi-  For  in  this  manner  tlio  Angels  as  it  were  point  out  that  they 

— have  not  bodies  which  may  be  handled:  and  cause  it  to  be  a 

Gen.  18,  difficult  question,  how  the  Fathers  washed  their  feet,  how 

19  2.     Jacob  wrestled  with  the  Angel  with  handling  so  palpable'. 

vj™    When  these  inquiries  are  made,  and  each  one,  as  he  can, 

Gen, 32,  conjectures  concerning  them,  the  abilities  are  exercised  not 

without  profit,  if  only  the  disputation  be  moderate,  and  there 

be  not  there  the  error  of  them  who  think  that  they  know  what 

they  know  not.     For  what  need  is  there,  that  these  and  such 

2  'cum  liiie  things  be  affirmed,  or  denied,  or  defined  with  contention-, 

Qiscri* 

mine.'    when  without  reprehension^  one  may  be  ignorant  of  them? 
'sine        YQ,  It  is  more  necessary  to  distinguish  and  discern  when 

crimine.  .  ,  . 

Ix.  Satan  transforms  himself  as  an  angel  of  light,  lest  deceiving 
2  Cor.    us,  he  lead  us  astray  unto  some  hurtful  things.    For  when  he 

'  ■  deceives  the  bodily  senses,  and  yet  moves  not  the  mind  from 
that  true  and  right  thinking,  whereby  each  one  lives  the  life 
of  faith,  there  is  no  danger  in  religion  :  or  when  feigning 
himself  to  be  good,  he  says  or  does  those  things  which  are 
suitable  with  good  angels,  even  if  he  be  believed  to  be  good, 
it  is  not  an  error  which  endangers  or  infects  Christian  faith. 
When,  howevei',  by  means  of  these  things  which  are  not  his, 
he  begins  to  lead  us  unto  his  own,  then  to  discern  him,  and 
not  to  follow  after  him,  is  matter  of  great  and  necessary 
watchfulness.  But  how  few  of  men  are  able  to  escape  his 
deadly  guiles,  unless  God  do  guide  and  protect  them  !  And 
the  very  difficulty  in  this  matter  is  hereunto  useful,  that  each 
man  be  not  a  hope  unto  himself,  neither  one  man  unto 
another,  but  God  unto  all  that  are  His.  For  that  this  is 
rather  expedient  for  us,  no  pious  person  at  all  can  doubt. 

Ixi.  This  Church  then  which  standeth  in  the  holy  Angels  and 
Powers  of  God,  will  then  at  length  become  known  to  us  as  it 
is,  when  at  the  last  we  shall  have  been  joined  with  it,  to 
possess  together  with  it  eternal  blessedness.  That  part  how- 
ever which  is  separate  from  it  and  sojourning  upon  earth,  is 
thereby  the  more  kuown  to  us,  in  that  we  are  in  it,  and  in 
that  it  is  of  men,  which  we  also  are.  This,  by  the  Blood  of 
a  Mediator  Who  had  no  sin,  hath  been  redeemed  from  all 
Horn.  8,  sin,  and  her  words  are,  If  God  for  us,  tcho  against  us?  Who 
'  hath  not  spared  His  oivn  Son,  hut  hath  delivered  Him  up 
for  us  all.     For  not  for  the  Angels  hath  Christ  died.     But 


Peace  in  Heaven  and  Earth  through  ChrisVs  Sacrifice.  123 

therefore  is  it  done  even  for  Angels,  whosoever  of  men  are  bynEFiDE 
His  death  redeemed  and  freed  from  evil,  in  that  they  in  some  ^^ ar^-^ 
sort  return  into  favour  with  them,  after  the  enmities  which  tate. 
their  sins  have  caused  between  men  and  the  holy  Angels, 
and  from  the  very  redemption  of  men  the  losses  of  the  fall  of 
the  Angels  are  repaired.      And  assuredly  the  holy  x^ngels   Ixii. 
know,  being  taught  of  God,  in  the  eternal  contemplation  of 
Whose  truth  they  are  blessed,  what  number  from  among  the 
human  race  to  fill  it  up,  that  City  waiteth  for  ere  it  be  com- 
plete.    Wherefore  the  Apostle    says.   That   all   things   are 'E^h.i, 
restored  in  Christ,  tvhich  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  in     ' 
earth,  in  Him.     Inasmuch  as  they  are  restored  which  are  in 
heaven,  when  that  which  in  the  Angels  hath  fallen  thence,  is 
given  back  from  among  men :    but  they  are  restored  which 
are  in  earth,  when  the  very  men  who  have  been  predestinated 
to  eternal  life,  are  renewed  from  their  old  state  of  corruption. 
And  so  bv  that  single  Sacrifice  wherein  a  Mediator  hath  been 
slain,  of  which  one  Sacrifice  many  victims  in  the  Law  were 
figures,  things  heavenly  are  set  at  peace  with  things  earthly, 
and    things    earthly  with    things    heavenly.      Since,  as   the 
same  Apostle  says,  In  Him  it  hath  pleased  Him  that  <7//Col.  i, 
fldness  should  dicell,  and  that  by  Him  all  tilings  should  he 
reconciled  unto  Himself,  making  peace  by  the  Blood  of  His 
Cross,  ivhether  they  that  he  in  earth  or  that  be  in  heave?!. 
That  peace  surpasseth,  as  it  is  written,  all  understanding,  Ixiii. 
nor  can  it  be  known  by  us,  save  only  when  we  shall  haveF  '*   ' 
come  xinto  those  things.     For  how  are  heavenly  things  made 
at  peace,  except  with  ns,  that  is,  by  agreeing  with  ns?    For 
there  is  peace  there  ever,  to  the  whole  of  the  reasonable  crea- 
tures, both  one  with  another,  and  with  their  Creator.  Which 
peace    surpasseth,    as    has    been    said,    all    understanding ; 
surely,  hovvever,  ours,  not  that  of  them  who  see  the  face  of  the 
Father.     But  we,  however  great  human  understanding  there 
be  in  us,  know  in  part,  and  see  now  as  by  a  glass  in  a  riddle:  i  Cor. 
but  when  we  shall  be  equal  with  the  Angels  of  God,  then,  in  Lu'ke20 
like  manner  as  they,  we  shall  see  face  to  face  :  and  shall  havens, 
as  great  peace  towards  them,  as  they  also  towards  us,  in  that 
we  shall   love  them    as  greatly  as  we  are  loved    by  them. 
And  so  their  peace  will  be  known  to  us,  in  that  ours  also 
will  be  such  and  so  great,  nor  will  it  then  surpass  our  under- 


1'24  Peace  toward  Man  in  Baptism,  and  in  after  Remission. 

ENCHi-  standing;  but  the  peace  of  God,  which  is  then  towards  them, 

will  without  doubt  surpass  both  our  and  their  understanding. 

Forasmuch  as  every  rational  creature  whatsoever  which  is 
blessed,  is  blessed  of  Him,  not  He  of  it.     Wherefore  in  this 
sense  that  is  better  taken  which  is  written.  The  ^jeace  of  God, 
which  surpasseth  all   understanding.      So  that,  in  that  he 
said  all,  not  even  the  understanding  of  the  holy  Angels  may 
be  excei3ted,but  of  God  alone  :  for  His  peace  surpasseth  not 
His  own  understanding. 
Ixiv.       17.  But  the  holy  Angels  are  at  one  with  us  even   now, 
when  our  sins  are  remitted.     Wherefore,  after  mention  made 
of  the  holy  Church,  is  placed  in  the  order  of  confession  the 
remission  of  sins.     For  by  this  the  Church  which  is  in  earth 
Lukeis,  standeth :  by  this  that  is  not  lost,  which  had  been  lost  and 
has  been  found.     Forasmuch  as  the  gift  of  Baptism  being 
excepted,  which  hath  been  granted  against  original  sin,  in 
order  that  what  by  our  generation  hath  been  di'awn  to  us,  by 
our  regeneration  may  be  taken  away  from  us  ;  and  yet  actual 
sins  also  it  taketh  away,  whatsoever  it  hath  found  committed 
'  indui-  in  heart,  mouth,  or  deed:  this  great  remission'  then  being 
^^^^^'■^    excepted,  whence  man's  renewal  begins,  therein  all   guilt 
both  inborn  and  added  is  done  away ;  the  very  rest  of  life  of 
such  an  age  as  already  useth  reason,  however  strong  it  be  in 
fruitfulness  of  righteousness,  is  not  past  without  remission  of 
sins.     Seeing  that  the  sons  of  God,  so  long  as  they  live  a 
mortal   life,  have  a  conflict  with  death.     And    although  of 
Rom.  8,  them  it  may  have  been  truly  said.  As  many  as  are  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God ;    yet  are  they  so 
animated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  as  sons  of  God  make 
progress  towards  God,  that  even  in  their  own  spirit,  especially 
Wisd.9,  as  their  corruptible  body  weighs  them  down,  as  sons  of  men 
af^onii-they  in^  certain  human  feelings  fall  away  unto  themselves, 
nis  in,'  and   SO    siu.     It   matters,  indeed,  how  much ;    for   neither 
Ben.  ^because    every  crime ^   is   sin,  therefore  also  is  every  sin  a 
3  crimen  cnuje.     Therefore  the  life  of  holy  men,  as  long  as  they  con- 
tinue in  this  mortal  life,  we  say  may  be  found  without  crime: 
1  John  But  if  we  shall  say  that  we   have  no  sin,  as  so   great   an 
^'  '^'      Apostle  saith,  we  lead  ourselves  astray,  and  the  truth  is  not 
Ixv.    in  us.     But    neither  in  the  matter  of  remission  of  crimes 
themselves  in  the  holy  Church,  must  they  despair    of  the 


Remission  does  nof  prevent  chastisement  here.         125 

mercy  of  God  who  exercise  repentance,  each  accordmg  tooEFiDE 
the  measure  of  his  own  sin.     But  in  the  act  of  repentance,  ^c^riJ 
when  any  thing  liath  been  committed  of  such  sort,  as  that  he  tate. 
who  committed  it  is  even  separated  from  the  body  of  Christ, 
the  measure  of  time  is  not  to  be  taken  into  account  so  much 
as  of  sorrow:  for  God  despiseth  not  a  contrite  and  humbled  Ps.  51, 
heart.     But  forasmuch  as  the  sorrow  of  one  man's  heart  is   '' 
usually  hidden  from  another,  and  cometh  not  forth  for  others 
to  know  it  by  words  or  any  other  signs  whatever ;    whereas 
it  is  open  before  Him,  to  Whom  it  is  said.  My  groaning  is  'C»-  38, 
not  hid  from  Thee  :  times  of  penitence  are  rightly  appointed 
by  those  who  are  set  over  the  Churches,  that  satisfaction  may 
be  made  also  to  the  Church,  wherein  the  sins  themselves  are 
remitted  ;    forasmuch  as  without  her  they  are  not  remitted. 
For  she  hath  specially  received  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  pledge, 
without  Whom  no  sins  ai*e  remitted,  so  that  they  to  whom 
they  are  remitted  may  obtain  eternal  life.     For  remission  of  Ixvi. 
sins  takes  place  rather  with  reference  to  future  judgment. 
But  in  this   life  so  entirely  does  that  hold  good  which  is 
written,  A  heavy  yoke  upon  the  sons  of  Adam,  from  the  dayEcdn?. 
that  they  go  forth  f-om  the  womb  of  their  mother  even  unto'^^'  ^' 
the  day  that  they  are  buried  in  the  mother  of  all,  that  we 
see  even  little  ones  after  the  washing  of  regeneration  tortured 
with  afflictions  of  various  pains;  in  order  that  we  may  under- 
stand, that  the  whole  of  that  which  is  wrought  by  the  saving 
Sacraments,  pertaineth  rather  unto  the  hope  of  good  things 
to  come,  than  unto  the  retaining  or  receiving  of  things  pre- 
sent.    Many  things  even    seem  here   to  be  pardoned,  and 
visited  by  no  punishments  ;    but  their  penalties  are  reserved 
lor  hereafter.     For  not  in  vain  is  that  especially  called  the 
Day  of  Judgment,  when  the  Judge  of  the  living  and  of  the 
dead  shall  come.     As,  on  the  other  hand,  some  things  are 
here  visited,  and  yet  if  they  be  remitted,  they  shall  assuredly 
not  injure  in  the  world   to    come.     Wherefore    concerning 
certain  temporal   punishments,  which  are    inflicted    in  this 
life  on  those  sinners  whose  sins  are  blotted  out,  that  they  be 
not  kept  unto  the  end,  the  Apostle  says.  For  if  we  would  i  Cor. 
judge  our  own  selves,  ice  should  not  be  judged  of  the  Lord ;  ^'  '^^' 
but  when  we  are  judged  ue  are  chastened  by  the  Lord,  that 
we  be  not  condemned  with  the  world. 


12()     Impenitent  sinners  in  the  Chinch  not  'saved  byjire.'' 

FNCHi-  18,  It  is,  however,  believed  by  certain,  that  even  those 
-. — r^  who  depart  not  from  the  name  of  Christ,  and  are  baptized  in 
His  laver  in  the  Church,  and  ai'e  not  cut  off  from  it  by  any 
schism  or  heresy,  in  what  sins  soever  they  may  live,  neither 
washing  them  away  by  repentance,  nor  redeeming  them  by 
alms,  but  continuing  in  them  most  obstinately  even  up  to  the 
last  clay  of  this  life,  being  about  to  be  saved  by  fire,  are 
punished  by  a  fire,  lasting  indeed  in  proportion  to  the  great- 
ness of  their  sins  and  offences,  yet  not  eternal.  But  they 
who  hold  this  belief  and  yet  are  Catholics,  seem  to  me  to  be 
deceived  by  a  certain  human  feeling  of  kindness,  for  divine 
Scripture  when  consulted  answers  otherwise.  I  have,  how- 
ever, composed  a  book  on  this  subject,  the  title  of  which  is, 
Of  Faith  and  JVorks^:  wherein  according  to  the  holy  Scrip- 
tures, as  far  as  by  the  help  of  God  I  have  been  enabled,  that 
that  faith  maketh  us  to  be  saved,  which  the  Apostle  Paul 
Gal.5,6.  hath  sufficiently  clearly  set  forth,  saying.  For  in  Christ  Jesus 
neither  circtimcisioii  araileth  any  thing,  nor  wwircuincision, 
but  faith  which  icorketh  by  love.  But  if  it  worketh  ill  and 
James  not  well,  without  doubt,  according  to  the  Apostle  James,  it  is 
ver.  14.  dead  in  itself.  Who  again  saith,  If  any  one  say  that  he 
have  faith,  and  have  not  works,  shall  his  faith  be  able  in  any 
wise  to  save  him?  But  further,  if  a  wicked  man  on  account 
of  his  faith  alone  shall  be  saved  by  fire,  and  that  is  so  to  be 
understood  which  blessed  Paul  saith.  But  he  himself  shall  be 
saved,  but  so  as  by  fire ;  then  will  faith  without  works  be 
able  to  save,  and  that  will  be  false  which  his  fellow  Apostle 
James  hath  said ;  moreover,  that  also  will  be  false  which  the 

1  Cor. 6, same  Paul  himself  hath   said;    Be  not,  he  says,  deceived; 
9. 10.  .  .  .  . 

neither  fornicators,  nor  idol-worshippers,  nor   adulterers, 

nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor 
thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor  extor- 
tioners, shall  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God.  For  if,  even 
though  they  continue  in  these  crimes,  they  shall  yet  be  saved 
by  reason  of  their  faith  in  Christ,  how  shall  they  not  be  '  in 

Ixviii.  the  Kingdom  of  God?'  But  because  these  most  clear  and 
open  testimonies  of  the  Apostles  cannot  be  false,  that  which 

1  Cor. 3, hath  been  spoken  obscurely  concerning  those  who  build  upon 
the   foundation,  which  is  Christ,  not   gold,  silver,  precious 

''  See  the  Notice  at  the  head  of  that  "Work  in  the  present  Volume. 


Pire  of  trial  pains  those  who  have  earthly  attachments.  1*27 


stones,  but  wood,  hay,  stubble,  (for  of  these  it  is  said  that  de  fide 

KPT*"    'P'T' 

thc}^  shall  be  '  saved  by  fire,'  seeing  that  for  the  merit  of  the  cari- 
foundation  they  shall  not  perish,)  is  so  to  be  understood,  as  tate. 
that  it  be  not  found  to  contradict  these  manifest  truths. 
Forasmuch  as  wood  and  hay  and  stubble  may  not  unreason- 
ably be  understood  of  such  desires  of  things  that  are  of  this 
life,  although  lawful  and  conceded,  that  they  cannot  be  lost 
without  pain  of  mind.  But  when  that  pain  inflames,  if 
Christ  have  in  the  heart  the  place  of  a  foundation,  that  is,  so 
that  nothing  be  preferred  to  him,  and  the  man  who  is  burned 
with  such  pain,  had  rather  lose  those  things  which  he  so 
loves  than  Christ ;  he  is  saved  by  fire.  But  if  in  time  of 
trial  he  had  rather  retain  temporal  and  worldly  things  of  this 
kind  than  Christ,  he  hath  not  had  Him  as  a  foundation ; 
because  he  hath  had  these  things  placed  before  Him, 
whereas  in  a  building  nothing  is  before  the  foundation. 
For  the  fire,  whereof  in  that  place  the  Apostle  spake,  ought 
to  be  understood  to  be  such,  as  that  both  pass  through  it; 
that  is,  both  he  who  builds  upon  this  foundation  gold, 
silver,  precious  stones ;  and  he  who  builds  wood,  hay, 
stubble.  For,  after  having  thus  said,  he  adds,  The  Jire  shall^^^'^-^^ 
try  every  man^s  uork,  of  what  sort  it  is.  Tf  any  ina7i's  work 
shall  abide  which  he  hath  built  thereiipon,  he  shall  receive  a 
reward.  But  if  any  man^s  uork  shall  be  burned,  he  shall 
suffer  loss:  but  he  himself  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  Jire. 
The  fire  therefore  shall  prove,  not  the  work  of  one  of  them, 
but  of  both.  One  sort  of  fire  is  the  trial  of  afiliction,  con- 
cerning which  it  is  in  another  place  plainly  written,  TheEcdm. 
furnace  proveth  the  potter'' s  vessels,  and  just  men  the  trial  of  ' 
affiiclion.  This  fire  in  the  mean  time  in  this  life  does  what 
the  Apostle  said,  if  it  happen  to  two  believers,  the  one  '  having 
in  mind  the  things  of  God,  how  he  may  please  God,'  that  is,  i  Cor.  7, 
building  upon  Christ  the  foundation,  gold,  silver,  precious  ^^' ^^" 
stones;  the  other  '  having  in  mind  the  things  of  the  world, 
how  he  may  please  his  wife,'  that  is,  building  upon  the  same 
foundation  wood,  hay,  stubble :  for  the  work  of  the  one  is 
not  burned  up,  because  he  hath  not  loved  those  things  by 
the  loss  of  which  to  suffer  pain  ;  but  the  work  of  the  other  is 
burned  up,  seeing  that  those  things  are  not  lost  without  pain, 
which  have  been  possessed  with  love.     But  since,  upon  the 


128      Alms  redeem  from  sin,  htit  not  unthout  repentance. 

ENCHi-  one  of  two  conditions  being  proposed,  he  would  prefer  rather 
^i^^l^  to  lose  them  than  Christ,  nor  from  fear  of  losing  such  things 
deserts  Christ,  although  he  be  pained  when  he  loses  them, 
he  is  however  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire  :  because  the  pain  of 
the  loss  of  those  things  which  he  had  loved  burns  him ;  but 
overthrows  not,  nor  consumes  him,  fortified  by  the  stability 
Ixix.  and  incorruption  of  the  foundation.     That  some  such  thing 
takes  place  after  this  life  also,  is  not  incredible,  and  it  may 
be  a  matter  of  inquiry,  whether  it  be  so  or  not,  and  it  may 
either  be  discovered,  or  remain  hidden,  that  some  believers 
through  a  certain  fire  of  cleansing',  in  proportion  as  they 
have  more  or  less  loved  perishing  goods,  are  so  much  the 
more  slowly  or  speedily  saved:  not  however  such,  concerning 
whom  it  is  said,  that  they  shall  not  inherit  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  unless  these  same  crimes  be  remitted  to  them,  repenting 
after  a  suitable  manner.    But  I  said,  '  after  a  suitable  manner,' 
that  they  be  not  barren  in  alms,  to  which  divine  Scripture 
assigns  so  much,  that  the   Lord  declares   beforehand  that 
fruit  of  them  alone  will  be  imputed  to  those    at   the  right 
hand,  and   barrenness    of  them   alone  to  those  at  His  left 
Mat.  25,  hand;  when  to  the  one  He  will  say,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My 
41Z43."  Father,  receive  the  Kingdom,  and  to  the  other,  Go  ye  into 
eternal  Jire. 
Ixx.        19.  Indeed  it  is  to  be  shunned  that  any  one  think  that 
those  heinous  crimes,  the  doers  of  which  shall  not  inherit 
the  Kingdom  of  God,  are  daily  to  be  done,  and   daily  to 
be    redeemed    by   alms.      Forasmuch    as   the  life   is  to   be 
changed  for  the  belter,  and  God  is  to  be  propitiated  through 
alms  for  sins  past,  not  in  a  manner  to  be  bought  for  this  end, 
that  it  may  be  lawful   to   commit  them  at  all  times  with 
Ecclus.  impunity,  for  To   no   man    hath  He  given  license  to  sin : 
*^'  ^^^'   albeit  by  shewing  mercy  He  blot  out  sins  already  done,  if 
Ixxi.  suitable  satisfaction   be  not  neglected.     But  for  our  daily 
brevi-  momentary'  and  light  sins,  from  which  we  pass  not  this  life 
free,  the  daily  prayer  of  believers  is  sufficient-.     For  it  is 
facit.      theirs  to  say.  Our  Father,  Who  art  in  Heaven,  who  have 
John :?,  been  already  begotten  again,  unto  such  a  Father,  of  water 
^'  and  of  the   Spirit.     This  prayer  altogether  blots  out  very 

little  and  daily  sins.     It  blots  out  those  also  from  which  the 
'  '  ignem  quendam  purgatorium.'  see  p.  84. 


bus. 


Foryiooiess^  and  loci  tig  correct  ion,  are  real  ahnsgiiunj.    \'2^ 

lite  of  believers,  spent  even  wickedly,  but  changed  for  theorFiDE 
better  by  repentance,  departs :  if,  as  it  is  truly  said.  Forgive  caui- 
ns  oar  debts,  seeing  that  there  are  not  wanting  to  be  forgiven;  '^'-'^^e- 
so  it  be  truly  said,  As  ice  also  forgive  our  debtors:   that  is,  ifg  ^^^'   ' 
that  which  is  said  be  done ;  seeing  it  is  very  alms,  to  forgive 
a  man  who  asks  pardon.    And  so  with  reference  to  all  things  Ixxii. 
uhich  are  done  with  profitable  pity,  that  holds  good  which 
the  Lord  savs,  Give  alms,  and  behold  all  thinqs  are  c/^firw  Lukeli, 

41. 

unto  you.     Therefore  not  only  he  who  ministers  food  to  the 
hungry,  drink  to  the  thirsty,  clothing  to  the  naked,  lodging 
to  the  stranger,  a  hiding-place  to  the  fugitive,  who  visits  the 
sick  or  the  prisoner,  redeems  the  captive,  bears  the  weak, 
leads  the  blind,  consoles  the  sorrowful,  heals  the  diseased, 
leads  the  wanderer  into  the  way,  ministers  counsel  to  him 
that   doubts,  and  to    each    man   who    is    in    want   what   is 
necessary ;    but  he   also   gives  alms  who  pardons  one  who 
sins;    and  he   who   chastens  witli   a  stripe   one  over  whom 
power  is  given  him,  or  who  restrains  him  by  any  discipline, 
and  yet  forgives  from  his  heart  that  sin  of  his,  whereby  he 
hath  been  injured  or  offended  by  him,  or  prays  that  it  may 
be  forgiven  him,  not  only  in  that  he  forgives  and  prays,  but 
also  in  that  he  chastens,  and  visits  him  with  some  punishment 
in  the  way  of  correction,  he  also  gives  alms ;  for  he  shews 
mercy.     For  many   benefits   are   bestowed   on   men  against 
their    will,   when    their   advantage    is    consulted,    not    their 
wishes,  in  that  they  are  found   to  be   their  own    enemies, 
but    those    rather    their    friends  whoin  they  think  enemies; 
and  they  mistaking  return  evil  for  good,  whereas  a  Christian 
ought  not  to  return  evil,  even  for  evil.     Thus  there  are  many 
kinds  of  alms,  which  when  we  do,  w^e  obtain  help  that  our 
sins  be  forgiven  us. 

But  there  is  nothing  greater  than  that,  whereby  we  from  Ixxiii. 
the  heart  forgive  that  which  each  man  hath  committed 
against  us.  For  it  is  less  a  great  act  to  be  kindly  disjjosed, 
or  even  to  do  kind  actions,  towards  that  man,  who  has  done 
you  no  evil:  that  is  much  greater,  and  an  act  of  most  exalted 
goodness,  that  you  love  your  enemy  also,  and  that  you  always 
wish,  and,  when  you  can,  do,  good  to  him  who  wishes  you 
evil,  and,  when  he  can,  does  it:  hearing  God  saying,  Zor^'Mat.  5, 
your  enemies,  do  good  to  them  uho  hate  you,  and  pray  for  '^^• 

K 


130       3Ien  must  forgive,  if  they  cannot  love,  enemies. 
ENCHi-  iJiem  who  persecute  you.     But  forasmuch  as  these  things 

RIDION  ■,      ,  \ 

— —  belong  to  the  perfect  sons  of  God,  whereunto  indeed  every 
behever  ought  to  press  forward  to  attain,  and  to  bring  his 
human  mind  unto  this  disposition,  by  praying  unto  God,  and 
by  pleading  and  striving  witli  himself:  yet  because  this  so 
great  good  belongs  not  to  so  great  a  multitude,  as  we  believe 
are  heard,  when  it  is  said  in  prayer,  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as 
we  also  forgive  our  debtors;  without  doubt,  the  words  of  this 
pledge  are  fulfilled,  if  a  man  who  hath  not  yet  advanced  so 
far  as  already  to  love  his  enemy,  yet,  when  he  is  entreated  by 
one  who  hath  sinned  against  him,  to  forgive  him,  forgives 
him  from  his  heart :  seeing  that  he  also  himself  seeks  to  be 
forgiven  upon  his  entreaty,  in  that  he  prays  and  says.  As  we 
also  forgive  our  debtors,  that  is,  so  forgive  us  our  debts  when 
we  entreat  it,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors  when  they  entreat  it. 

Ixxiv.  Now  he  who  entreats  the  man,  against  whom  he  hath  sinned, 
if  he  is  moved  by  his  sin  to  entreat  him,  is  no  longer  to  be 
esteemed  an  enemy,  so  that  it  should  be  a  hard  thing  to  love 
him,  as  it  was  a  hard  thing  at  the  time  when  he  was  exercising 
enmity.  But  whosoever  forgives  not  from  his  heart  one  who 
entreats  for  pardon,  and  who  repents  him  of  his  sin,  let  him 
no  way  think  that  his  sins  are  forgiven  him  of  the  Lord ; 
inasmuch  as  the  Truth  cannot  lie.  But  what  hearer  and 
reader  of  the  Gospel  can  be  ignorant,  Who  it  is  that  said, 

JolmH,  /  f^jj^  fj^g  Tridli.   Who,  after  He  had  taught  a  prayer,  greatly 

Mat.  6,  recommended  this  sentence  which  He  set  in  it,  saying,  For 

14.  ]o.  ijyQ  shall  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your  Heavenly  Father 
will  also  forgive  you  your  trespasses.  But  if  ye  shall  not 
forgive  men,  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your  trespasses. 
Whoso  at  such  a  thunder  ariseth  not,  is  not  sleeping,  but 
is  dead :  and  yet  He  is  able  to  raise  uj)  even  the  dead. 
Ixxv.  20.  Certainly  they,  who  live  very  wickedly,  and  take  no 
heed  to  amend  a  life  and  manners  of  this  kind,  and  in  the 
very  midst  of  their  sins  and  ofi'ences,  intermit  not  the  frequency 
of  their  alms,  in  vain  therefore  flatter  themselves,  because  the 

LukeiijLord  hath  said.  Give  alms,  and  behold  all  things  are  clean 
unto  you.  For  they  understand  not  how  wide  a  meaning 
this  has.     But,  that  they  may  understand,  let  them  note  to 

Liilvei],whom  He  said  it.     Now  in  the  Gospel  it  is  thus  written:  As 
'  He  was  speaking,  a  certain  Pharisee  asked  Him   to  dine 


Man's  first  alms,  pity  for  his  oun  soul.  131 

faith  him,  and  He  we?it  in  and  sate  down.    But  the  Pharisee dkvive 
began,  thinking  within   himself,  to  sag,  why  had  He  not^J,^^^^ 
washed  before  dinner?     And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Now  tate.^ 
do  ye  Pharisees  make  clean  thai  tvhich  is  without  the  cup 
and  platter ;  but  your  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and 
wickedness.      Fools,  did   not  He  who  made  that  which  is 
without,  make  also  that  which  is  within  ?     Hoivever,  as  to 
what  remains,  give  alms,  and   behold  all  things  are  clean 
unto  you.     Are   we   so  to  understand   this,   as  that  to  the 
Pharisees  not  having  faith  in  Christ,  albeit  they  have  not 
believed  in  Him,  nor  been  born  again  of  water  and  of  the 
Spirit,  all  things  are  clean,  if  only  they  shall  have  given 
alms,  according  as  they  themselves  think  that  they  ought  to 
be  given  ?  whereas  they  all  are  unclean  whom  the  faith  of 
Christ  cleanseth  not,  concerning  which  it  is  written,  cleansing  Acts  \5, 
their  hearts  by  faith;  and  whereas  the  Apostle  says.  But  tor^^^  j 
them  that  are  unclean  and  unbelieving  nothing  is  clean,  but  15. 
both  their  mind  and  conscience  are  polluted.     How  then  to 
the  Pharisees  should  all  things  be  clean,  if  they  gave  alms, 
and  were  not  believers  ?  or  how  should  they  be  believers,  if 
they  were  unwilUng  to  believe  in  Christ,  and   to  be   born 
again  in  His  Grace?     And  yet  that  is  true  which  they  heard. 
Give  alms,  and  behold  all  things  are  clean  unto  you.     Forlxxvi. 
he  who  wishes  to  give  alms  in  due  order,  ought  to  begin 
with  himself,  and  to  give  alms  first  to  himself     For  alms  is  a 
work  of  mercy ;  and  most  truly  is  it  said.  Have  mercy  upon  Ecelus. 
thine  own  soul,  pleasing  God.     For  this  cause  are  we  born  ,^^  y  '■. 
again,  that  we  may  please  God,  unto  Whom  that  is  deservedly 
displeasing  which  by  our  birth  we  have  contracted.     This  is 
the  first  alms,  which  we  have  given  ourselves,  in  that  ourselves, 
miserable  as  we  were,  we  by  the  mercy  of  God  having  pity 
on  us  have   sought   again,   confessing  His  just  judgment, 
whereby  we  have  been  made  miserable,  concerning  which  the 
Apostle  says,  the  judgment  indeed  of  one  unto  condemnation  ;  Rom.  6, 
and  returning  thanks  unto  His  great  love,  concerning  which  the 
same  preacher  of  grace  says,  But  God  commendeth  His  love^om.  5, 
in  us,  in  that  whilst  ive  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us; 
that  we  also  judging  truly  of  our  own  misery,  and  loving  God 
with  that  love  which  Himself  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  may 
live  piously  and  rightly.     Which  judgment  and  love  of  God 

K  2 


132       By  itJiat  alms  '  all  tilings'  are  made  '  clean''  io  us. 

ENCHi-  the  Pliarisees  passing  by,  they  yet,  on  account  of  the  alms 

^  wliich  they  used  to  make,  gave  tithes  even  of  the  very  least 

of  their  fruits  ;    and  so  they  gave  not  their  alms  beginning 

with  themselves,  and  having  mercy  first  on  themselves.     On 

Matt,     account  of  which  order  in  love  it  is  said,  Thoit  slialt  love  thy 

22   37 

Lu'keio  neighbour  as  iliyself.    When  therefore  He  had  rebuked  those 

2"-  who  wei'e  washing  themselves  without,  but  within  were  full 
of  ravening  and  wickedness,  admonishing  them  that  their 
inner  parts  be  cleansed  by  a  kind  of  alms,  that  which  a  man 
bestows  first  of  all  upon  himself;  However.,  He  says,  as  to 

^  quod  ivJiat  remains^,  gire  alms,  and  behold  all  things  are  clean 
unto  you.  Then,  in  order  to  shew  what  He  had  advised,  and 
what  they  cared  not  to  do,  that  they  might  not  think,  that  He 
was  ignorant  of  their  alms;  But  uoe  unto  you,  Pharisees, 
He  says  ;  as  if  He  should  say,  I  indeed  have  admonished 
you  that  alms  are  to  be  given,  whereby  all  things  may  be 
clean  unto  you  ;  But  ivoe  unto  you,  who  give  tithes  of  mint 
and  rue  and  all  herbs  ;  for  these  alms  of  yours  I  know,  that 
ye  may  not  think  that  1  have  now  admonished  you  concern- 
ing them;  and  pass  over  judgment  and  the  love  God;  by 
which  alms  ye  might  be  cleansed  from  all  defilement  within, 
that  so  your  bodies  also,  which  ye  wash,  might  be  clean:  for 
this  is  the  meaning  of  all,  that  is,  both  things  within,  and 

Mat.23,  things  without;    as  we  read  in  another  ])lace.  Cleanse  those 

26. 

things  ivhich  are  within,  and  those  which  are  irithout  will 
he  clean.     But  lest  He  should  seem  to  have  rejected  those 

Lukeli,alms  which  are  done  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth;   These  things, 

^^'         says  He,  ye  ought  to  do,  that  is,  judgment  and  the  love  of 
God,  and  those  others  not  to  leave  undone,  that  is,  alms  of 

Ixxvii.  the  earth's  fruits.  Let  not  those  therefore  deceive  them- 
selves, who  by  alms,  be  they  as  large  as  they  will,  of  their 
fruits  or  of  wealth  of  any  kind,  think  that  they  purchase  im- 
punity of  remaining  in  their  excess  of  crime  and  heinous- 
ness  of  sins :  for  they  not  only  do  these  things,  but  so  love 
them,  as  to  desire  to  continue  in  them  ever,  if  only  they  may 

Ps.i  1,5.  with  impunity.  For  he  who  loveth  iniquity,  hateth  his  own 
soul,  and  he  who  hatelh  his  own  soul  is  not  merciful  unto  it, 
but  cruel :  seeing  that  by  loving  it  after  the  world,  he  hateth 
it  after  God.  If  therefore  he  should  wish  to  give  alms  unto 
it,  whereby  all  things  might  be  clean  unto  him,  he  would 


Sins  greater  or  less.    Some  made  venial  in  Holy  IVrit.    133 

hate  it  after  the  world,  and  love  it  after  God.     No  one  how- de  fide 
ever  gives  any  alms  whatever,  unless  he  receive  whence  he   cari- 
raay  give  from  Him  Who  wants  not ;  therefore  it  is  said.  His  '^'^te. 
mercy  shall  prevent  me.  ^'i''  ^^' 

•21.  But  it  is  not  human,  but  the  Divine  judgment,  which  Ixxviii 
must  weigh  what  sins  are  light  and  what  heavy.     For  we  see 
that  the  very  Apostles  themselves  have,  by  pardoning,  con- 
ceded some  :    of  which  character  is  that  which    venerable 
Paul  says  to  married  persons,  Defraud  ye  not  one  the  other,  ^  Cor.  7, 
except  it  be  tvith  consent  for  a  time,  that  ye  may  have  time 
for  prayer,  and  come  together  again,  that  Satan  tempt  you 
not  for   your   incontinence.     Which   very  thing   might   be 
thought  not  to  be  sin,  to  have  intercourse,  that  is,  not  for  the 
sake  of  the  begetting  of  children,  which  is  the  good  thing  in 
marriage,  but  also  for  the  sake  of  carnal  pleasure  :    that  the 
weakness  of  them  who  cannot  contain  may  avoid  the  deadly 
evil  of  fornication,  or  of  adulter}',  or  of  any  other  impurity, 
which  it  is  shameful  even  to  speak  of,  unto  which  through 
the  temptation    of  Satan  lust   may  carry  them.     It   might 
therefore,  as  I  have  said,  be  thought  that  this  was  not  sin, 
unless  he  had  added.  But  this  I  speak  by  way  of  pardon  \]^-  ^• 
and  not  of  commandment.     But  who  can  any  longer  deny  mission' 
that  to  be  sin,  when  he  confesses  that  pardon  is  granted  to  it 
by  Apostolic  authority.     Some  such  also  is  it,  when  he  says. 
Dare  any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against  another, go  to  law  l  Cor.  6, 
before  the  unjust,  and,  not  b(fore  the  Saints?     And  a  little   ~ 
after,  If  ye  then  have  judgments  of  things  pertaining  to  this  life, 
says  he,  set  them  that  are  contemned  in  the  Church.    I  speak 
to  you  to  put  yon  to  shame ;  is  it  so  that  there  is  among  yoti  no 
u-ise  man  uho  is  able  to  judge  between  his  brother  ?     But 
brother   goelh    to    law    with    brother,  and  that  before    un- 
believers.    For  here  also  it  might  be  thought,  that  to  have  a 
suit   against    another  was    not    sin,  but  to  wish  to  have   it 
decided  without  the  Church,  did  he  not  go  on  to  add.  Now 
truly   it    is  utterly  a  fault,  that   ye    have   suits   one  with 
another.     And  lest  any  one  should  endeavour  to  excuse  this 
by  saying  that  he  had  a  just  matter,  but  that  he  was  suffering 
injustice,  which  he  wished  removed  by  the  sentence  of  the 
judges,  he  straightway  meets  such  thoughts  and  excuses,  and 
says,  Wherefore  do  ye  not  rather  suffer  wrong?    Whercfore^ 


134     Scripture  makes  much  of  sins  xve  might  count  small. 
ENCHi-  are  ye  not  rather  defrauded  ?    In  order  to  return  to  that 


RIDION 


which  the  Lord  said,  If  any  one  will  take  away  thy  coat, and 

40.       '  sue  thee  at  the  law,  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also;  and  in  another 

Lute  6,  place  He  saith,  Of  him  that  hath  taken  away  thy  goods,  ask 
them  not  hack.  He  hath  therefore  forbidden  them  that  are 
His  from  going  to  law  with  other  men  in  matters  of  this  life: 
from  which  teaching  the  Apostle  says  that  it  is  a  fault.  Yet 
when  he  allows  such  suits  to  he  concluded  in  the  Church, 
brothers  judging  between  brothers^  but  awfully  forbids  their 
being  concluded  out  of  the  Church  ;    it  is  clear  also  here 

1  '  veni-what  concession  is   made  to  the  weak  by  way  of  pardon*. 

above"  ^J  reason  of  these  and  such-like  sins,  and  others,  although 
less  than  these,  which  take  place  by  offences  in  words  or 

JamesS,  thoughts,  as  the  Apostle  James  confesses  and  says, /or  in 
many  things  we  offend  all ;    it  behoveth  that  we  every  day 

Mutt.  6,  and  oft  pray  unto  the  Lord,  and  say,  Forgive  ns  our  debts, 
and  lie  not  in  that  which  follows,  as  ice  also  ourselves  forgive 

Ixxix.  our  dehtors.  But  there  are  certain  which  would  be  judged 
very  light,  were  they  not  in  the  Scriptures  shewn  to  be 
heavier  than  we  think.  For  who  would  think  one  who  said 
to  his  brother,  Thou  fool,  to  be  in  danger  of  hell,  unless  The 
Truth  said  so  ?  For  which  wound  however  He  straightway 
added  a  remedy,  connecting  with  it  a  precept  of  brotherly 

Matt.  5,  reconciliation  :  in  that  He  soon  after  says,  If  therefore  thou 

22   23  •  .  ■  •!  'I 

art  offering  thy  gift  at  the  altar,  and  there  remember  that 
thy  brother  hath,  ought  against  thee,  i<^c.     Or  who  judge  how 
great  a  sin  it  is,  to  observe  days  and  months,  and  years  and 
times,  as  they  observe  them  who  are  either  willing  or  un- 
willing to  begin  something  on  certain  days,  or  months,  or 
years,  because  that  according  to  the  false  doctrines  of  men 
they  think  them  lucky  or  unlucky  times ;    unless  we  were  to 
Gal.  4,  weigh  the  greatness  of  this  evil  from  the  fear  of  the  Apostle, 
}^'        who  says  to  such,  /  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  haply  I  may  have 
laboured  among  you  in  vain.     To  this  is  added,  that  sins, 
although  great  and  dreadful,  after  that  they  have    become 
habitual,  are  believed  to  be  either  small  sins  or  not  sins  at 
all,  so  as  to  appear  not  only  not  such  things  as  are  to  be 
cf.  Ps.    concealed,  but  even  to  be  proclaimed  and  spread  abroad, 
^^'^-     seeing  that,  as  it  is  written,   TJie  sinner  is  praised  in   the 
\     desires  of  his  soul,  and  he  who  carrieth  on  unrighteous  things 


Great  sins,  whenfreqaoit,  overhear  censure.  J 35 

is   blessed.     Such    unrighteousness  in    the    divine    books  is  de  fide 
called  '  a  cry,'  as  you  have  in  the  Prophet  Isaiah  concerning  "^f„^^ 
the   evil  vine,  /  looked,  says  He,  that  it  should  produce  tate. 
judgment,  hut  it  produced  unrighteousness,  and  not  righte-^^-^y  "i- 
ousness,  hut  a  cry.     Whence  also  is  that  in  Genesis,  77/eGen.  18, 
cry  of  Sodom  and  of  Gomorrah  hath  increased  manifold.     ' 
Because  not  only  were  those  crimes  by  this  time  not  punished 
among  them,  but  also  were  publicly,  as  if  by  law,  in  use.    So 
in  our  times,  so  many  evils,  although  not  of  the  same  cha- 
ractei',  have  by  this  time  come  into  open  use,  that  we  not  only 
dare  not  to  excommunicate  any  of  the  laity  for  them,  but  even 
dare  not  to  degrade  one  of  the  clergy.     Whence  when  a  few 
years  back  I  was  expounding  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians, 
on  that  very  place  where  the  Apostle  says,  I  fear  lest  haply  Gal.  4, 
I  may  Jiave  lahoured  among  you  in  vain  ;    I  was  compelled  ^^' 
to  exclaim,  "  Woe  mito  the  sins  of  men,  which  only  when  Ed.Ben. 
they  are  unusual  we  shudder  at ;    but  when  usual,  those  for      "'  ^' 
the  washing  away  of  which  the  Blood  of  the  Son  of  God  was 
shed,  although  they  be  so  great  as  that  they  cause  that  the 
Kingdom  of  God  be  altogether  shut  against  them,  yet  by 
seeing  them  oft,  we  are  forced  to  bear  with  them  all,  and  by 
often  bearing  with,  even  to  commit  some.    And  O  that,  O  Lord, 
we  may  not  be  doing  all,  which  we  have  proved  unable  to 
prohibit !"    But  I  will  consider  whether  or  not  immoderate 
grief  comjjelled  me  to  speak  any  thing  incautiously. 

22.  This  I  will  now  say,  which  indeed  I  have  already  Ixxxi. 
often  said  in  other  places  of  my  little  works.  We  sin  from 
two  causes ;  either  from  not  yet  seeing  what  we  ought  to  do, 
or  from  not  doing  what  we  ali-eady  see  ought  to  be  done.  Of 
which  two,  the  one  is  an  evil  of  ignorance,  the  other  of 
weakness.  Against  which  it  is  truly  fitting  that  we  strive; 
but  we  are  assuredly  overcome,  unless  we  obtain  Divine 
help,  that  we  may  not  only  see  what  ought  to  be  done,  but 
also,  soundness  of  mind'"  being  added,  the  delight  in  righte- 
ousness may  overcome  in  us  the  delights  in  those  things, 
through  the  desire  of  having,  or  fear  of  losing  which,  we  sin 
knowingly  and  with  our  eyes  open  :  now  no  longer  merely 
sinners,  which  we  were  even  when  we  were  sinning  through 
ignorance,  but  also  transgressors  of  the  law,  as  often  as  we 

"*  '  sanitate,'  al.  '  suavitate/  '  pleasantness.' 


136  Prayer  needed  against  Jinal  impenitence. 

ENCHi-  either  omit  to  do  what  we  now  know  ought  to  be  done,  or 

RIDION  ^  e 

do  wJiat  we  now  know  ought  not  to  be  done.     Wherefore 

not  only,  if  we  have  sinned,  that  He  may  pardon  us,  (for 
Matt.  6,  which  cause  we  say,  Forgive  iis  our  debts,  as  tee  also  forgive 
our  debtors ;)  but  also  that  He  may  so  rule  us  that  we  sin 
not,  (for  which  cause  we  say,  Lead  us  not  into  tejnplation,) 
must  we  pray  to  Him,  to  Whom  it  is  said  in  the  Psalms, 
Ps.27,1.  77jg  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation^,  that  light  may  take 
'  health'  away  ignorance,  and  salvatiou  weakness.    For  penance  itself, 
Ixxxu.  ^g  often  as  there  is  a  just  cause  why  it  should  be  undergone 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  Chiuxh,  is  generally  through 
weakness  not  undergone  ;  since  also  shame  is  a  fear  of  dis- 
pleasing, the  good  opinion  of  men  being  more  delighted  in  than 
righteousness,  wherein    each  man  humbles  himself  by   re- 
pentance.    Wherefore   is  the  mercy  of  God   necessary  not 
only  when  penance  is  being  undergone,  but  also  that  it  may 
be    undergone.     Otherwise    liic  Apostle  would   not    say  of 
2  Tim.  certain,  Lest''  haply  God  give  unto  them  repentance.     And 
'     ■     in  order  to  Peter's  weeping  bitterly,  the  Evangelist  premised 
Luke22,  and  said,  The  Lord  looked  upon  hint.     But  he  who  through 
Ixxxiii  clisbelicf  of  the  remission  of  sins  in  the  Church,  despises  so 
great  fulness  of  the  Divine  gift,  and  in  this  hardened  state  of 
mind  closes  his  last  day,  is  guilty  of  that  sin  which  may  not 
be  forgiven,  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  Whom  Christ  forgives. 
Concerning    which    difficult    question  I  have  discussed,  as 
clearly  as  I  could,  in  a  little  work"  written  on  this  one  subject. 
Ixxxiv.       23.  But  now  concerning  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  not 
as  some  have  returned  to  life,  and  again  died,  but  unto  eternal 
life,  like  as  the  flesh  of  Christ  Himself  rose  again,  how  to 
discuss  briefly,  and  to  answer  all  questions  which  are  usually 
named  in  this  matter,  I  know  not.     Yet  that  the  flesh  of  all 
men  whosoever  have  been,  and  shall  be,  born,  and  have  died, 
and  shall  die,  will  rise  again,  a  Christian  ought  no  way  to 
Ixxxv.  doubt.     Whence  there  first  meets  us  a  question  concerning 
abortions,  who  are  now  already  born  in  the  wombs  of  their 
mothers,  but  not   yet    so  as  that  they  might  now  be  born 
again.     For  if  we  shall  say  that  they  will  rise  again,  this 
assertion  may  be  borne  with  in  some  sort  as  regards  those 

"    Meaning    jn'rhapp,    '    if   /lap/i/,'         "  Scrm.  LXXl.  de  verbis  Domiin. 
^v.  p.  05.  Ben. 


Resurrcclion  of  the  hodij.    Ahorlions.    Monsters.       137 

who  are  already  formed;  but  unformed  abortions,  who  would  deftde 
not  be   more    inclined  to  think  that  they  perish,  as  seeds  '^^^'  ^^ 
which  have  not  been  quickened  ?    But  who  would  dare  to  tate. 
deny,  although  he  dare  not  affirm,  that  the  resurrection  will 
bring  it  to  pass,  that  whatsoever  hath  been  wanting  to  the 
form   be  supplied  ?    And  that  so  there  fail  not    that   per- 
fection which  time  would  have  brought,  in  like  manner  as 
those  faults  will  not  exist  which  time  had  brought ;    that  so 
neither  in  that  which,  being  suitable  and  congruous,  days 
were  to  bring  with  them,  nature  suffer   loss  ;    nor,  in  that 
which,  being  adverse  and  contrary,  days  had  brought  with 
them,  nature  suffer  deformity :    but  that  that  be  made  entire 
which  was  not  yet  entire,  just  as  that  will  be  renewed  which 
had  been  vitiated.     And  for  this  reason  it  may  be  made  alxxxvi. 
subject  of  most   nice    inquiry  and    discussion  among  very 
learned  men,  (which  whether  or  not  man  can   discover,  I 
know  not,)  when  a  man  begins  to  live  in  the  womb?  whether 
there  be  even  a  certain  hidden  life,  such  as  not  yet  to  appear 
by  the  motions  of  a  living  being?     For  to  deny  that  those 
births  have  lived,  who  are  cut  out  limb  by  limb  and  cast 
forth  from  the  wombs  of  pregnant  women,  for  this  reason, 
that  they  kill  not  their  mothers  also  if  they  are  left  there 
dead,  seems  excess  of  boldness.     But  from  the  time  that  a 
man  begins  to  live,  from  that  time  certainly  he  is  already 
capable  of  death.    But  for  one  dead,  wheresoever  death  hath 
been  able  to  happen  to  him,  how  he  pertain  not  unto  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  I  cannot  discover.     For  neither  inlxxxvii 
the  case  of  monsters  which  are  born  and  live,  how  quickly 
soever  they  die,  will  it  be  denied  that  they  will  rise  again, 
or  is  it  to  be  beheved  that  they  will  rise  again  so,  and  not 
rather  with  their  nature  corrected  and  freed  from  fault.     For 
far  be  it  that  concerning  that  double-shape  ',  who  was  lately  ibimem- 
born  in  the  East,  of  whom  both  very  trustworthy  brethren  p*"^" 
have  related,  and  Jerome,  of  sacred  memory,  the  Presbyter,  Vitaiim. 
hath  left  it  written,  that  they  saw  him  :  far  be  it,  I  say,  thatj^^  *^"'" 
we  think  that  there  will  rise  again  one  double  man,  and  not^- 
rather  two,  which  would  have  been  the  case,  had  they  been 
born  twins.     So  all  other  births  which  are  called  monsters, 
as  each  singly  possessing   something  more  or  less,  or  by  a 
certain  excessive  deformitv,  will  be  recalled  by  the  resur- 


-•eKxvi. 


138      Each  soul  will  have  Us  whole  body,  but  reformed. 

ENCHi-  rection  to  the  figure  of  human  nature,  so  that  each  soul  shall 

^"^""^ have  its  own  one  body;    none  being  joined  together,  even 

where  they  were  born  joined  together  :    but  each  separately 

bearing  its  own  members,  of  which  the  perfection    of  the 

human  body  is  made  up. 

Ixxxviii,  But  the  earthly  matter,  out  of  which  is  created  the  flesh  of 
mortals,  perishes  not  unto  God :  but  into  whatsoever  dust  or 
ashes  it  be  dissolved,  into  whatsoever  of  air  or  breath  it  flee 
away,  into  whatsoever  substance  of  other  bodies  it  be 
changed,  even  unto  the  very  elements  themselves,  the  food 
of  whatsoever  animals,  even  of  men,  it  become,  and  be 
changed  into  their  flesh,  in  an  instant  of  time  it  returns  to 
that  human   soul,  which   originally   animated  it,  so   that  it 

ixxxix.  became  man,  and  lived,  and  increased.  Thus  the  very 
earthly  matter,  which  by  the  departure  of  the  soul  becomes 
a  corpse,  will  not  be  so  restored  in  the  resurrection,  as 
that  of  necessity  those  things  which  melt  away,  and  are 
changed  into  various  forms  and  shapes  of  other  things, 
although  they  return  to  the  body  whence  they  have  melted 
away,  will  yet  return  to  the  same  parts  of  the  body  where 
they  were.  Otherwise  supposing  that  to  return  to  the  hair, 
which  clipping,  so  frequent  as  it  is,  has  taken  off,  to  the 
nails  what  cutting  hath  so  often  severed ;  there  occurs  an 
excessive  and  unbecoming  depravation  to  those  who  think  on 
it,  and  who  are  thus  led  to  disbelieve  in  the  resurrection  of 
the  flesh.  But  as,  if  a  statue  of  any  metal  capable  of  being 
melted  were  either  melted  by  fire,  or  pounded  into  dust,  or 
bruised  into  one  mass,  and  a  workman  wished  to  restore  it 

> quanti- again  from  the  mass'  of  the  same  material ;    it  would  not  in 

tate.  g^jjy  ^^y  affect  its  perfection,  what  particle  of  matter  was 
restored  to  what  member  of  the  statue  :  provided  only  that 
being  restored  it  received  again  the  whole  of  that  of  which 
it  had  been  originally  composed  ;  so  God,  Who  worketh 
after  a  wonderful  and  imspeakable  sort,  will  with  wonderful 
and  unspeakable  speed  restore  our  flesh  out  of  the  whole  of 
that  whereof  it  had  been  composed  ;  nor  will  it  have  any 
thing  to  do  with  its  perfect  restoration,  whether  hair  return 
to  hair,  and  nails  to  nails,  or  whether  whatsoever  of  them 
had  perished  be  changed  into  flesh,  and  be  recalled  into 
other  parts  of  the  body,  the  providence  of  the  Worker  taking 


The  body  still  body,  thougJt  not  called Jieali  and  blood.     139 

care    that    nothing    nnseemly    take    place.       Nor    is   it    anEFiDE 
necessary  consequence,  that  the  stature  of  each  when  they  cx^i- 
return  to  life  be  different,  because  it  had  been  different  when  tate. 
they  were  alive,  or  that  the  lean  return  to  life  with  the  same    xc. 
leanness,  the  fat  with  the  same  fatness.     But  if  this  be  in 
the  counsel  of  the  Creator,  that  in  each   one's  image  that 
which  is  proper  to  himself  and  a  likeness  such  as  may  be 
discerned  be  preserved,  but  that  in  all  other  goods  of  the 
body  all  things   be  granted  equal ;    thus  will    that  matter 
which  is  in  each  be  admeasured,  so  that  neither  any  thing  of 
it  perish,  and  that  what  is  wanting  to  any  He  supply,  Who 
even  out  of  nothing  was  able  to  work  what  He  would.     But 
if  in  the  bodies  of  those  who  rise  again,  there  shall  exist 
a   reasonable  inequality,  such    as  there   is  in  voices  which 
compose  a  full  chant ;  this  shall  be  done  for  each,  out  of  the 
matter  of  his  own  body,  which  may  at  once  place  him  a  man 
among  Angelic  assemblies,  and  bring  in  nothing  unsuitable 
to  their  perceptions.     Assuredly  there  will  be  there  nothing 
unseemly,   but    whatsoever  will   be  there  will  be    suitable, 
because   neither   will    it    be    there    except   it   be    suitable. 
Therefore    the   bodies  of  the  Saints  will  rise  without    any    xci. 
fault,    without    any    depravity,    as   without    any   corruption, 
burden,  difficulty  :  in  which  there  will  be  as  great  facility  of 
action   as  felicity.     For  which  reason  also  they  have  been 
called    spiritual,    when,    without    any    doubt,    they   will   be  i  Cor. 
hereafter  bodies,  not  spirits.     But  as  now  that  is  called  an     ' 
animate  body,  which  yet  is  body,  not  souP,  so  will  it  then  bei  anima. 
a  spiritual  body,  and  yet  body,  not  spirit.     Wherefore  as  far 
as  respects  corruption  which  now  weighs  down  the  soul,  andwisd.o, 
faults,  whereby  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  then  it  ^'^^^  5 
will  not  be  flesh,  but  body;  because  there  are  also  said  to^^. 
be  celestial  bodies.     For  which  reason  it  is  said.  Flesh  and\p°J- 

.    lo,  50. 

blood  shall  not  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God:  and,  as  if 
expounding  what  he  had  said,  he  says.  Neither  shall  cor- 
ruption inherit  incorruption.  Of  the  same  that  he  said 
before,^e,s//,  and  blood,  he  says  after,  corruption;  and  of  the 
same  as  before  the  kingdom  of  God,  he  says  after,  incor- 
ruption. But  as  far  as  respects  substance,  even  then  it  will 
be  flesh.  Wherefore  also  after  His  resurrection  the  Body  of  I.iike24, 
Ohnst  IS  called  flesh.     But  therefore  does  the  Apostle  say, 


140        All  perish  save  those  reconciled  through  Christ. 

EN  CHI-  It  is  sown,  an  animal  body,  it  will  rise  again  a  spiritual 

Yr — r^  bodn :  seeing  that  there  will  then  be  so  great  harmony  of  the 

44.         flesh  and  spirit,  the  spirit  quickening  without  need  of  any 

support,  the  flesh  subdued  to  it,  that  there  shall  be  nothing 

from  out  of  ourselves  to  strive  with  ourselves  ;  but  as  we 

shall  have  no  enemy  without,  so  neither  within  shall  we  have 

to  endure  our  own  selves  as  enemies. 

xcii.       But  whosoever  are  not  through  the  one  Mediator  between 

God  and  man  set  free  from  that  mass  of  perdition  which  was 

caused  through  the  first  man,  they  too  themselves  also  will 

rise  again  each  with  his  own  flesh,  but  only  that  they  may  be 

punished  together  with  the  devil  and  his  angels.     Whether 

they  indeed  rise  again  with  the  faults  and  deformities  of  their 

own  bodies,  whatsoever  in    them   they  may  have  borne   of 

faulty  and    deformed    members,  what   need  is  there  to  fret 

one's  self  in  inquiring.?     For  neither  ought  the  uncertainty 

concerning   their  form  or  beauty  to  weary   us,  seeing   that 

their  condemnation  will  be  certain  and  eternal.     Nor  let  it 

move  us,  how  there  will  be  in  them  an  incorruptible  body, 

seeing  it  will  be  capable  of  pain,  or  how  a  corruptible,  seeing 

it  will  be  incapable  of  death.     For  that  is  not  true  life,  save 

only  where  it  is  spent  happily,  nor  true  incorruption,  save 

only   where   a   sound    state  is  corrupted    by  no    pain.     But 

where  the  unhappy  being  is  not  suffered  to  die,  so  to  say, 

death  itself  dieth  not :    and  where  unceasing  pain  destroys 

not,  but  afflicts,  corruption  itself  is  not  ended.     This  in  the 

Rev.  2,  Holy  Scriptures  is  called  the  second  death.     And  yet  neither 

11  •  20  • 

6.14.  '  vvould  the  first,  whereby  the  soul  is  compelled  to  leave  its 
xciii.  own  body,  nor  the  second,  whereby  the  soul  is  not  allowed  to 
leave  the  body  under  punishment,  have  happened  to  man, 
if  no  one  had  sinned.  Most  lenient  of  all  will  be  their 
punishment,  who  beside  that  sin  which  they  have  derived  by 
descent,  have  added  no  further  sin;  and  in  the  rest  who  have 
so  added,  the  more  tolerable  will  be  the  condemnation  which 
each  man  will  there  undergo,  the  less  iniquity  he  has  com- 
mitted here. 
xciv.  24.  Thus,  whilst  Angels  and  men  being  reprobate  continue 
in  eternal  punishment,  then  will  the  Saints  know  more  fully 
what  of  good  grace  hath  conferred  upon  them.  Then  will 
the  facts  themselves  make  to  appear  more  clearly  what  is 


Justice  of  God  in  letting  some  perish  to  he  seen  at  last.    141 

written  in  the  Psalms,  Of  mercy  and  Judgment  ivill  I  sing  d^fioe 
vnio  Thee,  O  Lord,  seeing  that  no  one  is  set  free,  but  only  "l^^^H 
tlirough   undeserved   mercy;    no  one  condemned,  but  only   tate. 
through  due  judgment.     Then  will  that  be  no  longer  hidden,  ["'*•  ^"^^ 
which  is  now  hidden,  when  of  two  little  ones'",  one  was  to  be   xcv. 
taken  through  mercy,  the  other  to  be  left  through  judgment, 
so  that  he,  who  should  be  taken,  should  recognise  what  was 
through  judgment  due  to  him,  unless  mercy  should  interpose; 
why  he  rather  than  the  other  should  have  been  to  be  taken, 
when  the  case  of  both  was  one  and  the  same  :  why  mighty 
works  were  not  wrought  among  certain,  which  had  they  been 
wrought,  those  men  would  have  repented,  and  were  wrought 
among  those  v/ho  were  not  about  to  believe.    For  most  openly 
does  the  Lord  say,  JVoe  unto  thee,  Corozaini;  icoe  unto  thee,  Mat.  ii, 
Bethsaida;  for  if  in  Tyre  and  Sidon  had  been  ivrought  the"^^' 
mighty  works  which  have  been  wrought  in  you,  long  ago  in 
sackcloth  and  ashes  icoidd  they  have  repented.    Nor  assuredly 
hath  God  unjustly  been  unwilling  that  they  should  be  saved, 
when  they  might  be  saved,  if  He  would''.    Then  will  be  seen 
in  the  most  clear  light  of  wisdom,  what  now  the  faith  of  the 
pious    holds,  before   that    it    be    seen    by   open  knowledge. 
How  certain,  unchangeable,  all-effectual  is  the  will  of  God: 
how  many  things  It  may  do  and  wills  not,  yet  wills  nothing 
which  It  may  not  do ;  and  how  true  is  that  which  is  sung  in 
the  Psalm,  But  our  God  is  in  Heaven  above,  in  Heaven  and  Vs.  115, 
in  earth  all   things  whatsoever  He  woidd  He  hath  done.^' 
Which  certainly  is  not  true,  if  there  be  any  thing  which  He 
hath  willed  and  not  done ;  and  what  is  yet  more  derogatory, 
hath  therefore  not  done  them,  because  the  will  of  man  hin- 
dered that  being  done  which  the  Almighty  willed.     There  xcvi. 
is  no  thing  done,  then,  unless  the  Almighty  will  it  to  be 
done,  either  by  allowing  it  to  be  done,  or  Himself  doing  it. 
Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted  that  God  does  well,  even  in  suffering 
those  things  to  be  done  which  are  done  ill.     For  this  He 

P  S.  Greg.  Mor.  ix.  §.  32.  has  the  ferred  from  such  a  case,  as  may  be  seen 

same  doctrine  about  unbaptized  infants,  in    Forbes's    Instructiones    Historico- 

and  so  most  of  the  later  Fathers.     St.  Theologies,  Book  x.  5.  and  following 

Ambrose  on  the  death  of  Valentinian,  chapters.     See  also  S.  Greg.  Mor.  iv. 

§.  4".  IS  cited  on  the  other  baud   as  Pref.    §.   iii.    and    note,    in    Oxf.    Tr. 

saying  that  the  infant  of  David,  (who  p.  179. 

died    uncircumcised,)    was    known    by         q    So    most    Mss.     Ben.    '  vellent.' 

him  to  be  with  Christ.     Authors  difler  '  whereas  they  mia-ht  have  been  saved 

as  to  the  extent  of  what  may  be  in-  if  they  would.' 


14'2       Question  ;  How  God  '  lotUeth  all  men  to  he  saved.'' 

ENCHi- suffers  not,  but  only  by  just  judgment;  and  assuredly  what- 

^ever  is  just  is  good.    Wherefore,  although  those  things  which 

are  ill,  so  far  as  they  are  ill,  are  not  good,  yet  is  it  good  that 
there  be  not  only  things  good,  but  things  ill  also.  For 
unless  this  were  good,  that  things  ill  also  should  be,  this 
would  not  be  allowed  by  the  Almighty  Good,  unto  whom 
doubtless  it  is  as  easy  not  to  allow  that  which  He  wills  not 
to  be,  as  it  is  easy  to  do  what  He  wills.  Unless  we  believe 
this,  the  very  beginning  of  our  Confession  is  in  danger, 
wherein  we  confess  that  we  believe  in  '  God  the  Father 
Almighty.'  For  neither  is  He  for  any  other  reason  truly 
called  Almighty,  except  forasmuch  as  whatsoever  He  will 
He  can,  nor  does  the  wall  of  any  creature  whatsoever  hinder 
xcvii.  the  effectual  working  of  the  will  of  the  Almighty.  Wherefore 
we  must  see  in  what  sense  it  is  said  of  God,  seeing  that  the 
1  Tim.  Apostle  hath  this  also  most  truly  said.  Who  willeth  that  all 
^'  ■  7nen  be  saved.  For  whereas  not  all  are  saved,  nay,  by  far  the 
greater  part  are  not,  it  seems  certainly  that  that  is  not  done 
which  God  wills  to  bo  done,  the  will  of  man,  it  should  seem, 
hindering  the  will  of  God.  For  when  a  reason  is  asked  why 
all  are  not  saved,  the  answer  usually  is,  because  they  them- 
selves are  unwilling.  Which  yet  cannot  be  said  of  little  ones, 
to  whom  it  belongeth  not  yet  to  will  or  nill.  For  were  we  to 
judge  it  to  be  referable  to  their  will,  what  by  infantile  motions 
they  do,  at  the  time  of  being  baptized,  when  they  resist  as 
far  as  they  can,  we  should  say  that  they  were  saved  even 
against  their  will.  But  more  openly  does  the  Lord  speak  in 
Mat.23,  the  Gospel,  addressing  the  impious  city.  How  often  would  I 
^^'  have  gathered  together  thy  sons  as  a  hen  her  chickens,  and 
thou  wouldest  not  I  as  if  the  will  of  God  had  been  overcome 
by  the  will  of  man,  and  through  hindrance  of  their  unwilling- 
ness who  were  most  weak,  He,  Who  was  most  mighty,  were 
unable  to  effect  what  He  would.  And  where  is  that  Almighty 
power,  whereby  in  heaven  and  in  earth  all  things  whatsoever 
He  woidd,  He  did,  if  He  would  have  gathered  together  the 
sons  of  Jerusalem,  and  did  not }  Or  was  it  rather,  that  she 
indeed  would  not  that  her  sons  should  be  gathered  together 
by  Him,  yet  that,  although  she  was  unwilling,  those  sons  of 
hers  whom  He  would,  Himself  gathered  together  ?  Because 
it  is  not  that  in  Heaven  and  in  earth  He  hath  willed  and 


jA 


God  could  convert  all,  yel  chooses  only  some.         143 

done  certain  things,  and  other  things  He  liath  willed  and  de fide 
not  done,  but  all  things  ivhatsoever  He  would^  He  hath  ^^1^'^ 
done.  TATE. 

25.  Who  still  further  is  there  of  such  impious  folly,  as  toxcviii. 
assert  that  God  cannot  change  to  good  the  evil  wills  of  men, 
which,  when,  and  where  He  will  ?     But  when  He  does  it, 
through  pity  He  does  it:  when  He  does  it  not,  through  judg- 
ment He  does  it  not.     Seeing  that  tipon  whom  He  tcill,  He^om.9, 

I  ft 

hath  pity;    and  whom  He  uill.  He  pardoneth.     This  the     ' 
Apostle  was  led  to  say,  in  setting  forth  grace :  to  set  forth 
which  he  had  already  spoken  concerning  those  twins  in  the 
womb  of  Rebecca,  Who  not  yet  being  horn,  nor  doing  any  Rom.  9, 
thing  of  good  or  evil,  that  the  purpose  of  Qod  according  to  ^^~^^- 
election  might  stand,  not  of  ivorks,  but  of  Him  that  calleth^ '  Vuig. 
it  was  said  unto  her,  that  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger.  IiqJ^° 
For  which  cause  he  introduced  another  witness  of  prophecy, 
where  it  is  written,  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  I  hated.  Mai.  i, 
But  perceiving  how  this  saying  might  greatly  move  them,  '  ' 
who  are  unable  by  the  understanding  to  arrive  at  this  depth 
of  grace,  he  says,  What  then  shall  we  say?  is  there  unrighte-  Rom.  9, 
ousness  with  God?     For  it  seems  unrighteous  that  without     ~    * 
any  deserts  of  good  or  evil  works,  God  should  love  one  and 
hate  another.     In  which  matter,  if  he  wished  to  have  under- 
stood the  future  works,  whether  the  good  works  of  the  one,  or 
the  evil  works  of  the  other,  which  God  certainly  foreknew, 
he  would  by  no  means  say,  not  of  ivorks;  but  would  say,  of 
future  works,  and  thus  would  solve  that  question ;  nay  rather, 
would  leave  no  question  which  required  to  be  solved.     But 
now,  after  having  answered,  far  be  it,  that  is,  far  be  it  that 
there  be  unrighteousness  with  God ;    immediately  after,  in 
order  to  prove  that  this  was  done  through  no  unrighteousness 
of  God,  he  says.  For  He  says  to  3Ioses,  I  will  have  mercy  on 
whom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  I  vMl  shew  compassion  to 
whom  I  will  be  compassionate.     For  who,  except  a  fool, 
would  think  God  unrighteous,  whether  He  inflict  penal  judg- 
ment on  one  worthy,  or  shew  compassion  to  one  unworthy  } 
Finally,  he  concludes  and  says,  Therefore  it  is  not  of  Imn 
that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  hath 
tnercy.     For  the  twins  were  both  by  nature  born  children  o/'Eph.  2, 
wrath,  through  no  works  indeed  of  their  own,  but  by  their  ^' 


144        No  Injustice,  when  God  leaves  sinners  in  sin. 

ENCHi-  descent  from  Adam  bound  by  the  chain  of  condemnation. 

But  He  who  said,  /  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have 

mercy,  loved  Jacob  thvonnh  free  mercy,  and  hated  Esau 
through  just  judgment.  Which  being  due  to  both,  the  one 
recognised  in  the  other  that  he  was  not  to  glory  in  his  own 
merits  differing  from  the  other's,  because  that  being  in  the 
same  case  he  incurs  not  the  same  punishment ;  but  of  the 
bounty  of  the  Divine  Grace,  because  it  is  not  of  him  that 
icilleth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  That  hath  mercy. 
In  fact,  by  a  most  deep  and  most  wholesome  mystery,  the 
whole  face,  and,  so  to  say,  countenance  of  Holy  Scripture,  is 
found  to  convey  this  admonition  to  them  that  look  well  unto 

]  Cor.  1,  it.  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord.  But  after 
*  •  having  set  forth  the  mercy  of  God,  in  that  he  said,  Therefore 
it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of 
God  that  sheweth  mercy,  next,  in  order  that  he  may  set  forth 
His  judgment  also,  (since  where  mercy  taketh  not  place,  there 
taketh  place  not  unrighteousness,  but  judgment;  in  that  there 
is  not  unrighteousness  with  God,)  he  straightway  subjoins  and 

Eom.  9,  says,  i^or  the  Scripture  saiili  unto  Pharaoh,  that  for  this  end 
~  '  have  I  raised  thee  up,  that  I  may  shetv  in  thee  My  po/ver, 
and  that  My  Name  may  he  declared  tltrouyliout  all  the  earth. 
After  having  said  which,  concluding  as  respects  both,  that 
is,  both  as  respects  mercy,  and  as  respects  judgment; 
Therefore,  says  he,  on  whom  He  uill  He  hath  mercy,  and 
tchom  He  tcill  He  hardeneth.  That  is  to  say.  He  hath 
mercy  through  His  great  goodness.  He  hardens  by  no 
unrighteousness :  that  neither  he  who  is  set  free  may  glory 
of  his  own  deserts,  nor  he  who  is  condemned  complain  of 
aught  save  his  own  deserts.  For  grace  alone  separates  the 
redeemed  from  the  lost,  w^hom  a  common  cause  derived  from 
their  first  origin  had  made  to  grow  together  into  one  mass  of 
perdition.  But  this  whoso  so  hears,  as  to  say,  Why  doth 
He  yet  complain?  for  His  ivill  who  hath  resisted?  As  if 
on  that  account  he  who  is  evil  seem  not  to  be  deserving  of 
blame,  because  God  on  tchom  He  uill  lialh  mercy,  and 
wJiom  He  will  hardeneth  :  far  be  it  that  we  be  ashamed 
to  make  answer  what  we  see  that  the  Apostle  made  answ^er, 
O  man,  tlien,  ulio  art  thou  to  make  answer  to  God?  Doth 
the  thing  formed  say  to  Him  who  formed  if,  JVhy  hast  Thou 


God's  Will  wrought  on  those  who  disobey  His  Will.     145 

made  me  thus?    Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay,  o/defide 
the  same  lump  to  viake  one  vessel  unto  honour,  another  unto  ^cI-rx- 
disgrace  ?    For  in  this  place  certain  foolish  ones  tliinlc  that  tate. 
the  Apostle  hath  failed  in  making  answer,  and  through  the 
want  of  a  reason  to  give  hath  reproved  the  boldness  of  the 
gainsayer.     But  that  hath  much  weight  which  is  said,  O  man, 
then,  7cho  art  thou  ?    And  in  such    questions  he    recals  a 
man  to  the  consideration  of  his  own  capacity    by   a  short 
w'ord,  yet  in  reality  there  is  a  great  reason  assigned.     For  if 
he    comprehend   not    these    things,   who    is    he,    to    make 
answer   to  God  ?     But  if  he   comprehend  them,  the   more 
doth  he  fail  to  find   what  to   make   answer.     For  he   sees, 
if  he   comprehend,  the  v/hole   human    race   condemned  in 
their  apostatising  by  so  just  judgment   of  God,    as    that, 
although  none  were  thence  set  free,  yet  no  one  could  justly 
blame  the  justice  of  God;  and  that  it  was  fitting  that  they 
who  are  set  free,  should  be  so  set  free,  as  that  of  more  not 
set  free,  and  left  under  most  just  condemnation,  might  be 
shewn  what  the  whole  mass  had  deserved,  and  whither  the 
just  judgment  of  God  would  lead  tliem  also,  but  that  His 
free  mei'cy  came  to  their  aid,  that  of  them,  who  would  boast 
of  their   own    deserts,  every    mouth    may   he  stopped,  and  Rom.  3, 
that  he  that  glorieih  may  glory  in  the  Lord. 

26.  These  are  the  great  works  of  the  Lord,  sought  out      c. 

'  *  Ps   111 

unto  all  His  will:  and  so  wisely  sought  out,  that,  when  the2.  Vuio'' 
angelic  and  human  creature  had  sinned,  that  is,  had  done, 
not  what  He,  but  what  itself  willed,  even  through  that  same 
will  of  the  creature,  whereby  that  was  done  which  the 
Creator  willed  not.  Himself  fulfilled  what  He  willed  ;  using 
well  even  the  ill,  as  Himself  supremely  good,  unto  the 
condemnation  of  them  whom  He  justly  predestined  to 
punishment,  and  unto  the  salvation  of  them  whom  He 
mercifully  predestined  to  grace.  For  as  far  as  respects 
themselves,  they  did  that  which  God  willed  not :  but  as 
far  as  respects  the  Almighty  power  of  God,  they  could  in  no 
way  so  bring  it  to  pass.  For  in  that  very  thing  that  they  did 
against  His  Will,  His  Will  was  done  on  them.  '  For  on  this 
account  are  the  icorks  of  the  Lord  great,  sought  out  unto  all 
His  ivill,  that  in  a  wonderful  and  unspeakable  way  even  that 
which  is  done  against  His  Will  be  not  done  beside  His  Will : 

L 


146    God  works  good  through  evil  icills,  against  good  ones. 

ENCHi- for   it   would   not   be    done    unless    he    permitted   it;    nor 

assuredly  does  He  permit  it  unwillingly,  but  willingly  :    nor 

could  He  in  His  Goodness  allow  ill  to  be  done,  unless  in 
His  Almighty  Power  He  could  work  good  even  out  of  ill. — 
ci-  But  at  times  man  by  a  good  will  wills  something,  which  God 
wills  not,  Himself  by  a  will  much  more,  and  much  more 
certainly,  good ;  for  at  no  time  can  His  Will  be  ill.  As  if  a 
good  son  were  to  will  his  father  to  live,  whom  God  by  a  good 
will  wills  to  die.  And  again  it  may  happen  that  man  by  an 
ill  will  may  will  that  which  God  wills  by  a  good :  as  if  an 
evil  son  should  will  the  death  of  his  father,  and  God  should 
will  it  also.  Certainly  the  one  wills  what  God  wills  not,  the 
other  wills  that  which  God  also  wills,  and  yet  the  filial  piety 
of  the  one  is  more  in  harmony  with  the  good  Will  of  God, 
although  he  will  what  is  different,  than  the  impiety  of  the 
other,  although  he  will  the  same.  So  great  difference  is 
there  between  what  is  fitting  for  man  to  will,  and  what  fitting 
for  God,  and  what  is  that  end  unto  which  each  man  refers 
his  will,  so  that  it  be  either  praised  or  blamed.  For  certain 
of  His  wills,  assuredly  good,  God  accomplishes  through  the 
evil  wills  of  evil  men.  As  through  the  Jews  willing  evil,  by 
the  good  will  of  the  Father,  Christ  was  put  to  death  for  us: 
which  event  was  so  good,  that  the  Apostle  Peter,  when  he 

Mat.  16,  vt^ilJed  it  not  to  take  place,  was  called  Satan  by  Him  who  had 
come  to  be  put  to  death.  How  good  appeared  the  wills  of 
the  pious  believers,  who  were  unwilling  that  the  Apostle 
Paul  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  that  he  might  not  there  suffer 

Acts2i,ills  which  A";abus  the  Prophet  had  foretold.     And  yet 'God 
'  willed    that    He  should  suffer   there   for   the  preaching  of 

>  Marty- the  faith  of  Christ,  so  exercising  a  Witness'  for  Christ. 
Neither  accomplished  He  that  good  will  of  His  through  the 
good  wills  of  Christians,  but  through  the  evil  wills  of  Jews. 
And  they  i-ather  were  His,  who  willed  not  what  He  willed, 
than  they  by  means  of  whose  willing  that  was  done  which 
He  willed  ;  in  that  they  wrought  indeed  the  same  thing,  but 
cii.  He  through  them  by  good,  they  by  evil  will.  But  how  great 
soever  the  wills  be,  whether  of  Angels,  or  of  men,  whether  of 
the  good,  or  evil,  whether  willing  the  same  with  God,  or 
otherthan  God, the  Will  of  the  Almighty  is  ever  unconquered; 
which  at  no  time  can  be  evil ;  because  even  when  it  inflicts 


lif  what,  sense  God  '  wills  oil  men  to  he  sared.'        147 

-evil,  it  is  just,  and  assuredly  that  Will  which  is  just  is  not  de fide 
evil.     Almighty  God  thevefoi-e,  whether  through  His  mercy  cart- 
He  have  mercy  on  whom  He  will,  or  through  His  judgment  tate. 
harden  whom  He  will,  neither  doth  any  thing  unrighteously, 
nor  doth  any  thing  unless  He  will  it,  and  all  things  what- 
soever He  will,  He  doeth. 

27.  And  for  this  reason  when  we  hear  or  read  in  tlie  holy  ciii. 
Scriptures,  that  He  wills  all  men  to  be  saved,  although  we 
know  certainly  that  all  men  are  not  saved,  yet  ought  we  not 
therefore  to  derogate  any  thing  from  the  supremely  Almighty 
Will  of  God ;  but  so  to  understand  what  is  written,  IV/to 
wills  all  men  to  be  saved,  as  though  it  were  said,  that  no 
man  is  saved,  except  whom  He  hath  willed  to  be  saved ; 
not  that  there  is  no  man,  except  whom  He  wills  to  be  saved ; 
but  that  there  is  no  man  saved,  except  whom  He  wills ;  and 
that  therefore  is  He  to  be  entreated  that  He  may  will, 
because  if  He  will,  it  must  be  done.  The  Apostle  in  fact 
was  treating  of  prayer  to  God,  and  so  came  thus  to  speak. 
For  so  also  we  understand  that  which  is  written  in  the 
Gospel,  Which  lighteth  every  man;  not  that  there  is  no  John  i, 
man  who  is  not  lighted,  but  that  there  is  no  man  lighted '■ 
except  by  Him.  Or,  at  any  rate,  it  hath  been  so  said.  Who 
wills  all  men  to  he  saved;  not  that  there  was  no  man  whom 
He  willed  not  to  be  saved,  seeing  that  He  would  not  do 
mightv  works  of  miracles  among  those  of  whom  He  says 
that  they  would  have  repented  if  He  had  done  them ;  but 
that  by  all  men  we  may  understand  every  kind  of  man  spread 
throughout  how  many  differences  soever,  kings,  private  per- 
sons, nobles,  ignoble,  high,  low,  learned,  unlearned,  persons 
of  sound  body,  weak,  men  of  ability,  slow-minded,  foolish, 
rich,  poor,  those  of  mean  estate,  men,  women,  in  infancy, 
childhood,  boyhood,  youth,  early  manhood,  in  advanced  life, 
in  old  age  ;  men  of  all  languages,  all  habits,  all  arts,  all 
professions,  throughout  all  the  unnumbered  variety  of  wills 
and  consciences,  and  if  there  exist  any  other  difference 
among  men.  For  what  is  there  of  them,  out  of  which  God 
wills  not  that  through  His  Only-begotten  Son  our  Lord 
throughout  all  nations  men  be  saved,  and  therefore  brings  it 
to  pass,  because  the  Almighty  cannot  will  in  vain  whatsoever 
He  shall  will.     For  the  Apostle  had  enjoined  that  prayer 

l2 


148  God  does  all  He  wills.  Man  ai  jxral  free  lo  good  and  ill. 

ENcHi-sboulcl  be  made  for  all  men,  and  had  added  especially,  for 
— -_ —  kings  and  for  all  tltose  ivho  are  in  high  places^  who  might 
i_4.'  'be    thought,   through    arrogance    and   pride   of  this  world, 
to  be  alien  from  tlie  humility  of  the  Christian  faith.     There- 
fore saying.  For  this  is  good  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour, 
that  is,  that  for  such  also  prayer  be  made ;  immediately,  to 
remove  despair,  he  added.  Who  icills  all  men  to  he  saved, 
and  to  come  lo  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.     This,  namely, 
God  hath  judged  good,  that  to  the  prayers  of  the  lowly  Ho 
should  deign  to  grant  the  salvation  of  the  high  and  exalted: 
which  assuredly  we  now  see  fulfilled.    This  manner  of  speech 
the  Lord  also,  used  in   the  Gospel,  where  He  said  to  the 
Lukeii,  Pharisees,    Ye   til  he   mint  and   rue   and  ererii  herh.     For 

42.  .  .  .  . 

neither  did  the  Pharisees  tithe  both  what  belonged  to  others, 
and  all  herbs  of  all  foreign  nations  throughout  all  lands.     As 
therefore  here  by  every  herh,  we  may  understand  every  kind 
of  herb,  so  in  that  other  place  by  all  men,  we  may  under- 
stand every  kind  of  men  :  and  in  whatsoever  other  sense  it 
may  be  understood,  provided  onl}^  that  we  be  not  compelled 
to  believe  that  the  Almighty  God  hath  willed  any  thing  to 
be   done,   and  that  it  hath    not   been    done ;     Who  in  no 
equivocal  sense,  if  in  Heaven  and  in  earth,  as  the  Truth 
Ps.  115,  says  of  Him,  All  things  whatsoever  He  uould.  He  did,  hath 
li^      '  assm'edly  willed  not  to  do  whatsoever  He  hath  not  done. 
Vulg.)        og    "Wherefore  also  God  would  have  willed  to  keep  the 
^^^ '    first  man  in  that  state  of  salvation  in  which  he  was  formed, 
and  to  bring  him  at  a  fitting  season,  after  he  had  begotten 
sons,  without  the  intervention  of  death,  unto  better  things, 
wherein  now  he  not  only  might  not  commit  sin,  but  might 
not  even  have  the  will  to  sin,  if  He  had  foreknown  that  lie 
would  have  the  abiding  will  to  continue  without  sin  as  he 
had  been  created.     But  in  that  He  foreknew  that  he  would 
use  ill  his  free-will,  that  is,  that  he  would  sin  ;    He  prepared 
His  own  will  in  order  for  this  rather,  that  He  Himself  might 
work  good  even  of  him  working  evil,  and  so  by  the  evil  will 
of  man  the  good  will  of  the  Almighty  might  not  be  rendered 
cv.     of  none  effect,  but  nevertheless  fulfilled.     For  so  it  behoved 
that  man  should  at  first  be  created,  as  that  he  might  have 
the  power  both  of  willing  well  and  ill;  and  that  not  without 
reward,  if   well,  nor  without  punishment,  if  ill ;    hereafter 


JVill  made  free  hy  Grace  cannot  choose  evil.  ]  i9 

however  he  will  be  so,  as  no  longer  to  have  the  power  of  de fide 
willing  ill ;    and  yet  will  he  not  on  that  account  be  without  cari- 
free-will.     Much  more  free  in  fact  will  the  will  be,  when  it  tate. 
shall  be  altogether  incapable  of  being  a  servant  of  sin.     For 
neither  is  that  will  to  be  blamed,  nor  does  it  cease  to  be 
will,  nor  is  its  freedom  to  be  denied,  whereby  we  so  will  to 
be  happy,  as  that  we  not  only  are  unwilling  to  be  miserable, 
but  absolutely  have  not  the  power  to  will  it.     As  therefore 
our  soul  even  now  hath  an  unwillingness  of  unhappiness,  so 
will  it  ever  have  an  unwillingness  of  unrighteousness.     But 
the  ordered  course  was  not  to  be  past  by,  wherein  God  willed 
to    shew  how  good  is  a  reasonable  animal,  even  with   the 
power  of  not  sinning,  although  that  be  better  which  is  with- 
out the  power  of  sinning ;    in  like  manner  as  that  was  less 
immortality,  and  yet  was  such,  wherein  he  had  the  power  of 
not  dying,  although  that  will  be  greater  wherein  he  will  not 
have  the  power  of  dying.     The  former  human  nature  lost    cvi. 
through  free-will ;    the  latter  it  is  about  to  receive  through 
grace,  which,  if  it  had  not  sinned,  it  would  have  been  about 
to  receive  through  desert:   although  not  even  then  could  any 
desert  have  existed  without  grace.      Because,  although  sin 
had  its  place  in  free-will  alone,  yet  was  not  free-will  sufficient 
for  the  retaining  of  righteousness,  vmless  Divine   aid  were 
rendered  it  by  participation  of  the  unchangeable  Good.     For 
as  to  die  is  in  the  power  of  man  when  he  wills  it,  for  there  is 
no  man  but  may  kill  himself,  to  say  nothing  more,  even  by 
abstaining  from  food,  yet  for  the  preservation  of  life  the  will 
is  not  enough,  if  there  be  wanting  the  helps  either  of  food  or 
of  any  other  means  of  preservation  whatsoever ;    so  man  in 
Paradise  was  by  his  will  sufficient  for  his  own  destruction 
by   deserting   righteousness,    but   in    order   that    he    might 
continue   in   the  life   of  righteousness,  it  was   little  to  will, 
unless  He  should  keep  him  Who  had  created  him.     But 
after  that  fall  the  mercy  of  God  is  yet  greater,  in  that  the 
will  itself  is  to  be  set  free  from  slavery,  as  now  ruled  over  by 
sin  together  with  death.     Nor  is  it  set  free  at  all  by  itself, 
but  by  the   alone  grace  of  God,  which  is  set  in  the  faith  of 
Christ;  that  the  will  itself,  as  it  is  written,  may  be  prepared 
of  the   Lord,    whereby    the    other    gifts    of    God    may    be 
received,  through  which  one  cometh  unto  His  eternal  gift.  Prov.  8, 

35. 


150         God  made  Man,  the  Saviour  needed  by  man. 


ENCHi-  Wherefore    eternal    life    itself   too,   which    certainly   is    the 
— ^-;^— reward '  of  good  works,  the  Apostle  calls  the  grace  of  God; 
^cvu.    -p^^,  ^j^^  wages'^,  says  he,  of  sin  is  death,  hut  the  grace  of 
-stif en- God  is  eternal  life  in   Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.     For  wages 
Bo'u.  6  ai'e  paid  as  due  for  military  service,  not  given:  therefore  he 
^^*        said,  the  wages  of  sin  is  death;  that  he  might  shew  that 
death   was  not  undeservedly   brought    upon    sin,    but   due. 
But  grace  unless  it  be  gratuitous  is  not  grace.     Therefore 
we   are  to  understand  that  even  the  very  good  deserts  of 
man  are  the  gifts  of  God ;  unto  which  when  eternal  life  is 
John  1,  rendered,  what  is  it  but  that  grace  is  rendered  for  grace  ? 
^^"        Thus  therefore  was  man  ci'eated  upright,  as  that  he  should 
possess  the  power  both  of  continuing  in  that  uprightness, 
yet  not  without  divine  aid,  and,  of  becoming  perverse  by  his 
own  will.     Whichever  of  these  he  had  chosen,  the  will  of 
God  would  be  done,  either  also  by  him,  or  at  any  rate  con- 
cerning him.     Then  because  he  chose  rather  to  do  his  own 
will  than  the  will  of  God,  the  will  of  God  was  done  con- 
cerning him.  Who  out  of  one  and  the  same  mass  of  perdition, 
Rom.  9,  which  flowed  from  his  stock,  makes  one  vessel  unto  honour, 

21 

another  vessel  unto  dishonour:  unto  honour,  through  mercy  ; 
unto  dishonour,  through  judgment:  that  no  one   may  glory 

cviii.  in  man,  and  so,  neither  in  himself     For  neither  should  we 
„.       be  set  free  through  that  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men 

2,  5.  the  man  Jesus  Christ,  unless  also  He  were  God.  But  when 
Adam  was  created,  that  is  when  man  was  created  upright, 
there  was  no  need  of  a  Mediator.  But  when  their  sins  had 
separated  the  human  race  far  from  God,  it  behoved  that 
through  a  Mediator,  Who  alone  was  born  without  sin,  lived, 
and  was  put  to  death,  we  should  be  reconciled  unto  God 
even  unto  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  unto  eternal  life :  - 
that  human  pride  might  be  convinced  and  liealed  through 
the  humiliation  of  God,  that  it  might  be  shewn  unto  man 
how  far  he  had  departed  from  God,  when  by  God  Incarnate 
he  was  called  back,  and  that  an  example  of  obedience  might 
be  given  unto  stubborn  man  by  Man-God,  and  that  the 
Only-begotten  taking  unto  Himself  the  form  of  a  servant, 
whicli  had  before  no  merits,  a  fount  of  grace  might  be 
opened;  and  that  also  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  promised 
to  the  redeemed  might  be  foreshewn  in  the  Redeemer  Him- 


Intermediate  slate.    Oblation  and  alms  for  the  dead.  151 

self",  and  that  by  means  of  that  very  same  nature  which  he  de fide 
exulted  in  being  deceived,  the  devil  might  be  overcome;  and  cari- 
yet  that  man    should    not    glory,  lest    again    pride    should  tate. 
spring  up :  and  if  there  be  any  thing  else  concerning  the  so 
great  mystery  of  a  Mediator  which  they  who  make  progress 
can  see  and  speak,  or  which  can  be  seen  only,  although  it 
cannot  be  spoken. 

Q9.  But  the  time,  which  lies  between  the  death  of  man    cix. 
and   the  last   resurrection,  holds    the    souls    in  hidden  re- 
ceptacles, as  each  is  worthy  of  rest  or   of  misery,   accord- 
ing to  that  which  it  hath  gotten  in  the  body  when    alive. 
Nor  is   it  to   be    denied   that   the    souls    of  the  dead    are    ex. 
relieved  by  the  piety  of  their  living  friends,  when  for  them 
the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mediator  is  offered,  or  alms  are  done  in 
the  Church.     But  these  things  are  profitable  to  them  who, 
when  alive,  deserved  that  these  things  might  hereafter  profit 
them.     For  there  is  a  certain  manner  of  life,  neither  so  good 
as  not  to  stand  in  need  of  these  things  after  deatli;  nor  yet 
so  bad  as  that  these  things  profit  not  after  death:  but  there 
is  such  in  goodness,  as  not  to  stand  in  need  of  these,  and 
again   such  in  wickedness,  as  that  neither  by  these  things 
can  one  be  assisted,  after  he  have  departed  out  of  this  life. 
Wherefore  here  is  all  desert  provided,  whereby  any  one  may 
after  this  life   be  relieved  or   oppressed.     But  let    no    one 
hope'  after  death  to  merit  in  the  sight  of  God  what  he  hath 'al. 'pre- 
hcre  neglected.     Those  things  therefore  which  for  the  com-'' 
mending,  (unto  mercy)  of  the  dead  the  Church  is  wont  to  use, 
are  not  opposed  to  that  sentence  of  the  Apostle,  wherein  it  is 
said,  For  we  shall  all  stand  before  the  Judgment-seat  o/'Rom. 
Christ,  that  each  maij  receive  according  to  the  things  which.     ' 

^  \— ■  or*  Oj 

lie  hath  done  in  the  body,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  ]o. 
be  ill;  because  each  man  hath  for  himself  whilst  living  in 
the  body  procured  this  desert,  that  there  things  may  be  able 
to  profit  him.  For  they  profit  not  all;  and  wherefore  profit 
they  not  all,  unless  by  reason  of  the  difference  of  the  life 
which  each  hath  lived  in  the  body  ?  When  therefore 
sacrifices,  whether  of  the  Altar  or  of  any  alms  whatsoever,  are 
offered  for  all  baptized  persons  deceased,  for  the  very  good 
they  are  givings  of  thanks ;  for  the  not  very  bad  they  are 
propitiations ;  for  the  very  ba'd,  although  they  be  no  helps 


1 

tio 


152       Error  of  those  who  think  punishment  not  eternal. 

ENCHi-  of  the  dead,  yet  are  they  consolations,  such  as  they  are,  of 

-: — the  living.     But  those  whom  they  profit,  they  either  profit 

unto  this,  that  there  be  a  full  remission,  or,  at  any  rate,  that 
their  very  condemnation  be  more  tolerable ".  But  after  the 
resurrection,  when  the  general  Judgment  hath  been  made 
and  finished,  then  shall  the  two  kingdoms  have  their  accom- 
plishment; the  one,  that  is,  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  the  other, 
the  kingdom  of  the  devil;  the  one  of  the  good,  the  other  of 
the  evil ;  either,  however,  both  of  angels  and  men.  To  the 
one  there  shall  not  be  possible  the  will,  to  the  other  the 
condi-  power  of  sinning,  or  any  occasion'  of  death;  the  one  in 
eternal  life  living  truly  and  hapjiily,  the  other  abiding 
unhappily  in  eternal  death  without  the  power  of  dying; 
since  both  ai-e  without  end.  Yet  of  these  continuing  in  their 
blessedness,  will  one  man  be  in  a  higher  state  than  another, 
of  those  in  their  misery,  will  one  man  be  in  a  more  tolerable 
cxii.  state  than  another.  For  in  vain  certain,  or  rather  very  many, 
with  human  feelings  compassionate  the  eternal  punishment 
of  the  damned,  and  their  continual  torments  without  inter- 
mission, and  so  believe  not  that  it  will  take  place :  not 
indeed  in  the  way  of  opposing  themselves  to  the  divine 
Scriptures,  but  by  softening,  according  to  their  own  feelings, 
all  the  hard  sayings,  and  by  turning  unto  a  more  gentle 
meaning,  such  things  in  them  as  they  think  to  be  said  rather 
V.  Civ.  to  excite  terror  than  as  the  true.  For  God  forgettetJi  not, 
18.  24!*  *^^^y  s^J'  '^  ^^  gracious,  neither  rcill  He  in  His  anger  shut 
Ts.  77,  lip  His  tender  mercies.  This  is  indeed  read  in  the  sacred 
Psalm;  and  is  understood  without  any  doubt  of  those, 
who  are  called  vessels  of  mercy,  because  that  they  them- 
selves, not  for  their  merits,  but  by  the  mercy  of  God,  are 

»  Ed.  Btn.  quotes  V.  Lombard.  Sent,  sima  damnatio,  as  if  there  were  other, 

vi.  Dist.  45.  e.  nerjue  negaiulum  est,  as  and  certainly  uses  '  damnatio'  for  other 

taking   this  to  be  said   of  the  finally  punishment  "on  Ps.  ix.  5.  and  says  that 

lost,  but  rather  approves  the  interpre-  there  must  be  a  remission  after  tem- 

tation     of     Albertus     Magnus,     who  porary    punishment    beyond    this   life 

takes    it    of    those    under    temporary  to  satisfy  the  text  Matt.  xii.  32.     See 

punishment.     See  his  com.  on  Sent.  iv.  note  p.  84,  and  p.  128.  observe  also  the 

Dist.  45.  c.  3.  where  he  quotes  St.  Aug.  end   of  the  present  paragraph,  which 

de   Civ.   Dei,  xxii.    (xxi.  18—24.    the  looks  as   if  he  meant  that  some  that 

sentiment  quoted  is  not  in  book  xxii.)  would  else  be  lost  are  saved  at  last  by 

as  saying  that  the  Church  would  not  the  Church's  prayers,  and  that  some  of 

pray  for  the  reprobate,  if  known,  any  the  reprobate  may  perhaps   have  less 

more  than   for  the  devil.     It  may  be  suffering  before  the  Judgment  owing  to 

added  that   St.  Aug.  speaks   of  7iovis-  such  prayers. 


The  wicked  cut  ojf  from  God  for  ever.  Chridian  Hope.  153 

set  free  from  misery.     Or  if  they  think  that  this  belongs  to  de fide 
all,  it  is  not  therefore  necessary  that  they  think  that  their  ^^^^_ 
condemnation    may   have    an   end,   concerning  whom   it   is  tate. 
written,  And  theij  shall  go  unto  eternal  punishment ;  lest  in 
this  way  it  come  to  be  thought  that  an  end  will  one  day 
come    to    their   happiness    also,    concerning    whom   on   the 
other  hand  it  is  said,  But  the  just  unto   life  eternal.     ButMat.25, 
tliey  may  judge,  if  this  pleases  them,  that  the  pains  of  the  ^' 
damned  are  at  certain  intervals  of  time  in    some  measure 
mitigated.     Seeing  that  even  thus  the  wrath  of  God  may  be  John  3, 
understood  to  abide   on  them,  that  is,  their   condemnation  36- 
itself,  (for  this  is  meant  by  the  wrath  of  God,  not  any  pertm*- 
bation  of  the  divine  mind,)  so  that  in  His  anger,  that  is.  His 
anger  continuing.  He  yet  may   "  not  shut  up  His  tender 
mercies,"'  not  by  putting  an  end  to  their  eternal  punishment, 
but  by  applying,  or  interposing  between  their  tortures  some 
alleviation.     For  neither  does  the  Psalm  say,  to  put  an  end 
to  His  anger,  or,  after  His  anger,  but,  in  His  anger.    Which 
if  it  were  alone  the  very  least  that  there  can  be  conceived ; 
to  perish  from  the  Kingdoni  of  God,  to  be  an  exile  fi'om  the 
City  of  God,  to  be  an  alien  from  the  Life  of  God,  to  want 
"  so  great  multitude  of  God's  sweetness  which  He  hath  laid 
up  for  them  that  fear  Him,  but  hath  wrought  for  them  that  Ps.  31, 
hope  in  Him,"  is  so  great  a  punishment,  that  no  torments  oi]?'^^' 
which  we  know  can  be  compared  to  it,  if  it  be  eternal,  andinioe. 
they  continue  through  how  many  ages  soever.     There  will  cxiii. 
therefore   continue   without   end  that    eternal   death    of  the 
damned,  that  is,  alienation  from  the  life  of  God,  and  itself 
will  be  common   to  all,  whatever  men   according   to    their 
human  feelings  may  imagine  concerning  variety  of  punish- 
ments, or  concerning  relief  or  intermission  of  pains ;  as  the 
eternal  life  of  the  Saints  will  remain  in  common  the  life  of 
all,  in   whatever   distinction   of  honours   they  harmoniously 
shine. 

30.  From  this  confession  of  Faith,  which  is  briefly  contained  cxiv. 
in  the  Creed,  and  which  carnally  understood  is  the  milk  of 
babes,  but  spiritually  considered  and  handled  is  the  meat  of 
strong  men,  arises  the  good  Hope  of  the  faithful,  which  is 
always  accompanied  by  holy  Cnarity.  But  of  all  these  things 
which  are  to  be  faithfully  believed,  those  only  appertain  unto 


154  Petitions  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  for  this  life  and  the  next. 

ENCHi-  Hope    which    are    contained   in    the  Lord's   Prayer.       For, 

Cursed  is  every  one,  as  the  divine  words  testify,  wlio  placet h 

6.        '  his  hope  in  man  :   and  tlnis  he  also  who  placeth  his  hope  in 

himself,  is  bound  by  the  bond  of  this  curse.     Therefore  we 

ought  to  seek  from  no  other  than  God,  whatsoever  we  hope 

that  we  ourselves  shall  either  do  of  good  works,  or  obtain  in 

>al.' by.' return  for'  our  good  works.     Wherefore  in  the  Evangelist 

^^^'  S.    Matthew   the    Lord's    Prayer    seems    to    contain    seven 

9—13.'  petitions  ;  by  three  whereof  things  eternal  are  asked,  by  the 

other  four,  things  temporal,  which  yet  are  necessary  in  order 

to  obtain  things  eternal.     For  in  that  we  say,  Halloued  be 

Thy  Name,  Thy  Kingdom   come,   Thy  Will  be  done  as  in 

Heaven  so  also  on  earth,  (by  which  some  have  understood 

not  ill,  in  spirit,  and  body,)  the  things  are  wholly  to  be  retained 

without  any  end;  and  being  begun  here,  how  great  progress 

soever  we  make,  are  increased  in  us ;  but  when  perfected, 

which    is   to    be   hoped    for   in    another   life,  will   be    kept 

for  ever.     But  in  that  we  say.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 

bread.  And  forgive   us    our  debts,  as  ue  also  forgive  our 

debtors.  And  lead  us  not   into  temptation,  But  deliver  tis 

from  evil ;  who  but  must  see  that  they  pertain  to  the  state 

of  want  of  this  present  life  ?     Therefore  in  that  eternal  life, 

where  we  hope  that  we  shall  ever  be,  both  the  hallowing  of 

the  Name  of  God,  and  His  Kingdom,  and  His  Will  in  our 

spirit  and  body  v/ill   abide  perfectly  and   immortally.     But 

our    daily    bread    is    therefore    so    called,    because    here    is 

necessary  so  much  as  is  to  be  assigned  to  our  soul  and  flesh, 

whether  it  be  understood  spiritually,  or  carnally,  or  in  both 

ways.     Here  also  is  the  remission  which  we  ask,  v\here  is 

the  commission  of  sins ;  here  the  temptations  which  either 

entice  or  drive  us  to  sin;  here  finally  that  evil  from  which 

we  wish  to  be  delivered,  but  There  is  no  one  of  those  things. 

cxvi.   But  the  Evangelist  Luke  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  has  compre- 

Lukeii,]jgj;if|g(j   not  seven   petitions,  but  five*^:    and  yet  is  he  not 

'■^  so  Lat.  assuredly    at    variance    with    that    other,    but   by   his    very 

andsonie  1^     .j^     hath    admonished    us   how  those    seven    are   to  be 

Mss.  .J 

understood.  That  is  to  say,  the  Name  of  God  is  hallowed  in 
the  spirit,  but  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  to  come  in  the  resur- 
rection of  the  flesh.  S.  Luke,  therefore,  shewing  that  the 
third  petition  is  in  a  certain  way  a  repetition  of  the  two  first, 


Faith  and  Hope  vain  tcitlioat  GocVs  ijijt  of  Love.      155 

causeth  it  more  to   be  understood  by  passing  it  by.     Then  de fide 
he  adds  three   others,   concerning  daily  bread,    concerning  ^cahi-^ 
forgiveness  of  sins,   concerning    avoiding  temptation.     But  tate. 
tliat  which  S.  Matthew  set  down  last,  But  deliver  us  from 
evil;  S.  Luke  hath  not  set  down,  that  we  might  understand 
that  that  which  was   said  concerning  temptation  pertained 
to  what  came  before.    For  this  very  reason,  that  is,  S.  I\Iatthew 
says.  But  deliver  us;  and  says  not,  And  deliver  us,  (Do  not 
this,  but  this) :  that  each  may  understand  that  he  is  therein 
delivered  from  evil,  in  that  he  is  not  led  into  temptation. 

31.  Now  further  Love,  which  the  Apostle  hath  declared  to  be  cxvii. 
greater  than  these  two,  that  is,  than  faith  and  hope,  by  how 
much  the  more  it  be  in  any  one,  by  so  much  is  he  better  in 
whom  it  is.     For  when  it  is  asked,   whether  any  one  be  a 
good  man,  it  is  not  asked,  what  he  believes,  or  hopes,  but 
what  he   loves.      For  he   who   loves   aright,  without  doubt 
believes  and  hopes  aright:    but  he   who  loves  not  believes 
in  vain,  even  if  those  things,  which  he  believes,  be  true ; 
hopes  in  vain,  even  if  those  things  whicli  he  hopes  be  taught 
to  appertain  unto  true  happiness  :  unless  also  he  believe  and 
hope  this  which  it  may  be  given  to  him,  asking  it,  that  he 
may  love.     For  although  one  cannot  hope  without  love,  yet 
it  may   happen   that  he   love  not    that,   without   which  he 
cannot  arrive  at  that  which  he  hopes.     As  if  one  should  hope 
for  eternal  life,  (which  who  loves  not?)  and  love  not  righte- 
ousness, without  which  no  one  arriveth  at  it.     But  this  is  that 
i'aith  of  Christ,  which  the  Apostle  commends,  which  uorketJi  Gal.  5, 
by  love;  and  what  in  love  it  yet  hath  not,  it  asks,  that  it  may^' 
receive,    seeks,    that    it    may   find,    knocks,    that    it    may  Mat.  7, 
be   opened    unto    it.      For   faith    obtaineth,   what   the    law 
obligeth.     For  without  the  gift  of  God,  that  is,  without  the 
Holy   Ghost,  through  Whom    love  is    shed    abroad   in  ournom.  5, 
hearts,  the  law  may  bid,  but  it  cannot  aid,  and  may  more-  ^' 
over  make  a  man  a  transgressor,  in  that  he  cannot  excuse 
himself  on  the  plea  of  ignorance.     For  carnal  lust  reigneth, 
where  the  love  of  God  is  not.     But  when  in  the  deepest  cxviii. 
darkness  of  ignorance,  without  any  reason  to  resist,  man 
lives  according  to  the  flesh,  this  is  the  first  state  of  a  man. 
Next  when  by  the  law  hath  been  wrought  a  knowledge  of  sin, 
if  the  Divine  Spirit  as  yet  help  not,  the  man  willing  to  live 


4 


156    Four  states  of  man ^  in  Nature,  Law,  Grace,  Glory. 

ENCHi-  according  to  the  law  is  overcome,  and  sins  knowingly,  and 

RiDioN_j    brout^ht  under  and  made  the  servant  of  sin,  For  by  ivl/om 
2  Pet  2  .  • 

19,    "   'a  ma)i  is  overcome,  unto  the  same  also  is  he  made  over  as  a 

slave;  the  knowledge  of  the  commandment  bringing  this  to 
pass,  that  sin  works  in  man  all  lust,  the  aggravation  of  trans- 
gression   being    added,    and   so    that   which    is    written    be 
Rom.  5  fulfilled,  The  law  entered,  that  the  offence  miglit  abound. 
20-        This  is  the  second  state  of  a  man.     But  if  God  shall  look 
upon  him,  so  that  He  may  be  believed  Himself  to  help  him 
to  fulfil  what  He  commands,  and  man  shall  begin  to  be  led 
Gal.  5    by  the    Spirit    of  God,  he   lusteth    against  the  flesh,   with 
^''-         stronger  might  of  love;  so  that,  although  there  still  be  that 
which    proceeding  from   a  man    fighteth    against    the   man, 
Hab.  2,  his  whole  disease  not  yet  being  healed,  yet  doth  the  just 
Rom  1  ^^'^    ^y  f'^^f^h  ^^^^    lives  justly,  in  so    far    as   he   yieldeth 
17.         not    to    evil   lust,   the    delight    in    righteousness  prevailing. 
This  is  the  third  state  of  good  hope  of  a  man  ;  wherein  if 
any  one  make   progress   by   pious    perseverance,   there    re- 
maineth  peace  at  last,  which  shall  be  fulfilled  after  this  life, 
in  the  rest  of  the  spirit,  and  afterwards  in  the  resurrection 
also  of  the  flesh.     Of  these  four  different  slates,  the  first  is 
before  the  Law,  the  second  under  the  Law,  the  third  under 
grace,  the  fourth  in  full  and  .perfect  peace.     Thus  also  hath 
the   people   of  God  been   appointed   at   intervals  of  times, 
"Wisd.     according    as   it   hath    pleased    God,    Who    appointetJi    all 
'         tilings  in   measure   and  number  and  neigld.      For  it  was 
at  first  before  the  Law ;  secondly  under  the  Law,  which  was 
given  by  means  of  Moyses;   next  under  grace,  which  was 
revealed    by   means   of  the   first   coming   of  the    Mediator. 
John  1,  Which  very  grace  was  yet  not  wanting  before,  to   those  to 
17-         whom  it  behoved  that  it  should  be  imparted,  although  veiled 
and  hidden  according  to  the  dispensation  of  the  time.     For 
neither  could  any  of  the  elder  just  men  find  salvation  other- 
wise than  through  the  faith  of  Christ;  nor  yet, unless  He  had 
been  known  to  them  also,  could  He  have  been  through  their 
ministry  prophesied  of  unto  us,  at  one  time  more  openly,  at 
cxix.  another  time  more  obscurely.     But  in  whatsoever  of  those 
four,  as  it  were,  ages,  the  grace  of  regeneration  hath  found 
any  man,  there  are  all  his  past  sins  forgiven  him,  and  that 
stale  of  condemnation  which  he  hath  contracted  by  his  birth. 


Commandments  truly  kept  only  throiiyh  Love.         157 

is  done  away  by  his  second  birth.     And  so  availing  is  it  that  de fide 
the   Spirit    blowcth    ivhere   If  u-ill,   that    some   have   never  'cfaiJ 
known  that  second  servitude  under  the  Law,  but  together  tate. 
with  the  command  begin   to  possess   a  divine  help.     Butg°'^°'^' 
before  a  man  can  be  capable  of  the  commandment,  he  must 
of  necessity  live  according  to  the  flesh  :  but  if  he  have  been 
already  imbued  in  the  sacrament  of  regeneration,  it  will  in   cxx. 
no  way  harm  him,  if  he   shall   then  pass  out  of  this  life. 
Because,  There/ore  hath  Christ  died  and  risen  again,  that  Uom. 
He  may  be  Lord  of  the  living  and  of  ihe  dead.     Nor  shall  ^'^'^^ 
the  kingdom  of  death  detain  him,  for  whom  He  died  Who  is 
free  among  the  dead.  Ps.88,5. 

32.  All  the  divine  commandments  therefore  are  referred  to  cxxi. 
Love,  of  which  the  Apostle  says.  But  the  end  of  the  com-  ^  Tim. 
mandment  is  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  a  good  con-  ' 
science,  and  faith  unfeigned.     The  end  therefore  of  every 
commandment  is  Charity;    that  is,  every  commandment  is 
referred  to  Charity.     But  that  which  is  so  done,  either  from 
fear  of  punishment,  or  from  any  carnal  design,  as  that  it  be 
not  referred  unto  that  Love  which   the  Holy  Ghost  sheds  Ro™-5j 
abroad  in  our  hearts,  is  not  yet  done  as  it  behoves  it  to  be 
done,  although  it  seem  so  to  be  done.     That  is  to  say,  this 
Love  is  the  love  of  God  and  of  one's  neighbour,  and  as- 
suredly, on    these   two   commandments   hang  all   the   Zaz£7Mat.22, 
and  the  Prophets.     Add  the  Gospel,  add  the  Apostles ;  for 
from  no  other  source  is  that  saying,  The  end  of  the  com- 1  John 
mandment  is  charity,  and  God  is  love.     Whatsoever  things   ' 
therefore  God   commands,  whereof  one  is.   Thou  shall  not^^^-^^t 

14 

commit  adultery,  and  whatsoever  things  are  not  commanded,  Matt.  5, 
but  by  s]:)iritual  counsel  advised^,  whereof  is  one,  //  is  good^''', 
for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  icoman,  are  then  done  aright,  when  'vowed.' 
they  are  referred  to  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbour  fori  ^,°^' 
the  sake  of  God,  both  in  this  world,  and  in  that  which  is  to 
come:  now  God  by  faith,  then  by  sight,  and  our  very  neigh- 
bour now  by  faith.     For  we  mortals  know  not  the  hearts  of 
mortals,  but  then, //«(?  Lord  shall  bring  to  light  the  hidden^  Gov. 
things  of  darkness,  and  make  maiiifest  the  thoughts  of  the   '   ' 
heart,  and  every  man  shall  have  praise  of  God:    because 
that  shall  be  praised  and  loved  by  one  neighbour  in  another, 
which  God  Himself  shall  bring  to  light,  that  it  be  not  hid. 


158  Charity  to  he  perfected  in  Heaven. 

ENCHi-But  lust  decreases  as  charity  increases,  until  it  arrive  here  at 
^I^^il^sucli  greatness,  as  that  it  cannot  be  greater.     For  greater 
15, 13.    love  hath  no  man,  than   that  a  man  Ian  down  his  life  for 
his  friends.    But  There  who  can  unfold  how  great  Charity  will 
be,  where  shall  be  no  lust  for  it  even  by  restraining  to  over- 
come.^   since  the  greatest  soundness  shall   be,  when  there 
shall  be  no  strife  of  death. 
cxxii.       33.  But  let  this  book  at  length  come  to  an  end,  which  you 
yourself  will  see  to,  whether  you  ought  to  call  it,  or  to  have 
it  as,  a  Manual.    But  T  judging  your  zeal  in  Christ  not  to  be 
despised,  believing  and  hoping  good  things  of  you  with  the 
help  of  our  Redeemer,  and  loving  you  ranch  in  His  members, 
have  according  to  my  ability,  composed  for  you  a  book  (I 
would  it  were  as  useful  as  it  is  long)  concerning  Faith,  Hope, 
and  CHArxiTv. 


S.  AUGUSTINE 


0\ 


THE     CHRISTIAN     CONFLICT. 


This  treatise  must  have  beeu  -written  A.  D.  396  or  397,  as  it  occurs  iu  the 
3d  place  iu  the  2(1  book  of  his  Retractations,  amongst  his  earliest  works 
in  the  office  of  Bishop,  which  he  received  late  in  395.  In  cap.  29, 
where  he  urges  as  a  reason  for  not  joining  the  Donatists,  that  as  Donatus 
had  tried  to  divide  Christ,  so  was  he  himself  divided  by  the  frequent 
subdividing  of  his  party,  he  yet  does  not  mention  the  reception  of  Prae- 
textatus  and  Felicianus  by  the  Donatists,  after  they  had  been  expelled 
by  him  for  their  crimes  by  the  well-known  sentence  of  the  Council  of 
Bagaia.     Now  this  reception  took  place  about  the  beginning  of  397. 

The  book  is  entitled  '  on  the  Christian  Conflict,'  as  instructing  Christians 
for  their  warfare  with  the  devil.  The  invisible  enemy,  he  teaches,  is  to 
be  overcome  by  right  faith  and  good  practice.  Hence  he  begins  by 
warning  us  to  fight  against  our  desires,  and  bring  our  body  into  subjec- 
tion, and  make  ourselves  subject  to  God.  Then  since  we  begin  to  be 
subject  to  God  by  Faith,  he  exhorts  us  to  hold  the  Rule  of  the 
Catholic  Faith,  rejecting  the  contrary  heresies,  mentioning  several 
sects,  but  especially  aiming  at  the  Manicbees,  as  in  the  first  part  he 
refutes  their  notion  of  the  Race  of  darkness  fighting  against  God,  and 
in  the  latter  part  defends  against  their  ridicule  the  simplicity  of  the 
Christian  Faith.  It  is  mentioned  by  the  Senator  Cassiodorus  in  his  book 
'  De  institutione  Divinarum  Literarum,'  c.  IG,  as  '  most  needful  to  those 
who  have  trodden  the  world  underfoot,  and  labour  in  the  Christian 
contest.'     Ab.from  Ben. 

Retr.  ii.  §.  3.  '  My  book  on  the  Christian  conflict  was  written  in  a  humble 
style  for  brethren  not  learned  in  the   Latin  tongue.     It  contains   the 
Rule  of  Faith  and  precepts  of  life.     In  which  the  statement,  "  Neither  c.  32. 
let  us  hear  those  who  deny  that  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  the  body, 
and  allege  what  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  Flesh  and  blood  shall  not  inherit 


160     TJie  Word  took  Flesh,  in  It  to  overcome  Satan. 

the  Idngdom  of  God;  not  unclerstanding  what  the  same  Apostle  says, 
Tliis  corruptihle  must  put  on  incorriqjtion,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on 
immortality ;  for  when  this  is  done,  it  will  be  no  more  flesh  and  blood, 
but  a  celestial  body ;"  is  not  to  be  understood  as  though  there  should  be 
no  substance  of  flesh;  but  by  the  name  of  flesh  and  blood  ^\q  Apostle 
is  to  be  understood  to  have  meant  the  very  corruption  of  flesh  and  blood, 
which  will  assuredly  be  no  more  in  that  kingdom  where  the  flesh  will  be 
incorruptible.  Though  it  may  also  be  otherwise  understood,  taking  the 
Apostle  to  have  called  the  works  of  flesh  and  blood,  j^e?//  and  blood,  and 
meant  that  those  who  persevered  in  loving  these  should  not  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God.     The  book  begins,  "  A  crown  of  victory." 


"^  1.  A  CROWN  of  victory  is  not  promised,  save  to  them  who 

AGONE  _  _  _     ;'  ,  ■  ' 

chRis-  strive.      But  in  the  divine  Scriptui'es  we  constantly  find  a 

^^     crown  promised  to  ns,  if  we  shall  have  overcome.     But,  not 

to  mention  many  places,  which  were  tedious;  in  the  Apostle 

2Tim.6,  Paul  we  most  clearly  read,  /  ]iave  accomplisJted  my  work ', 

iQj.[^j^^I  /lavejinished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith;  there  now 

^'  ^ ■     remaineth  for  me  a  croivn  of  righteousness.     We  ought  then 

fuvyht    to  understand  who  is  that  very  adversary,  whom  if  we  shall 

'i^,'?''     have  overcome,  we  shall  be  crowned.     For  it  is  he  himself 
fig  fit. 

and  so  whom  our  Lord  hath  overcome  Ijefore  us,  that  we  also  abiding 
"  ^'  in  Him  may  overcome.  And  certainly  the  Power  and  Wisdom 
of  God,  and  the  Word  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  Who 
is  the  Only  Son  of  God,  continueth  ever  unchangeable  above 
every  creature.  And  seeing  that  beneath  Him  is  even  that 
creature  which  hath  not  sinned,  how  much  more  beneath 
Him  is  every  creature  that  sinneth  ?  Wherefore  seeing  that 
beneath  *IIim  are  all  the  holy  Angels,  much  more  beneath 
Him  are  all  angels  who  are  transgressors,  whereof  the  devil 
is  chief.  But  because  he  had  deceived  our  nature,  the  Only- 
begotten  Son  of  God  deigned  to  take  upon  Him  that  our 
very  nature,  that  of  that  very  nature  the  devil  might  be  over- 
come, and  that  He  might  make  him,  whom  He  Himself  hath 
ever  beneath  Him,  to  be  beneath  us  also.     He  it  is  whom  He 

Johni2  signifieth,  when  He  saith,  The  prince  of  this  world  is  cast  out. 

^^'  Not  that  he  was  cast  out  beyond  the  world,  as  some  heretics 
suppose,  but  out  from  the  souls  of  those  who  adhere  to  the 
Word  of  God,  and  love  not  the  world  whereof  he  is  prince : 
because  he  ruleth  over  them  who  love  temporal  goods,  which 


Sata/t^s  rule  is  through  lust.     He  devours  sinners.    161 

are  contained  in  this  visible  world:  not  because  he  is  himself     de 
the  Lord  of  this  world,  but  tlie  prince  of  those  lusls  whereby  chris- 
every  thing  that  passeth  away  is  lusted    after;  so  that  they  tiano. 
are  subject  to  him,  who   neglect  the  everlasting  God,  and 
love  things  which  change   and  have  no  abiding.     For   ihe\T\m. 
root  of  all  evils  is  lust;   ichich  certain  coveting  after,  have   ' 
erred  from  the  faith,  and  have  brought  themselves  into  many 
sorrotvs.     Through  this  lust  the  devil   reigns  in   man,  and 
keeps  ])ossession  of  his  heart.     Such  are  all  those  who  love 
this  world.     But  the  devil  is  cast  out,  when  with  the  whole 
heart  renunciation  is  made  of  this  world.     For  thus  renun- 
ciation is  made  of  the  devil,  who  is  the  prince  of  this  world, 
when  renunciation  is  made  of  his  seductions,  his  pomps,  and 
his  angels.     And  therefore  the  Lord  Himself,  bearing  man's 
nature   even  now  triumphant,  says,  Knoiv  ye,  that  I  have  J ohnie, 
overcome  the  world. 

2.  But  many  say,  How  can  we  overcome  the  devil  whom     ii. 
we  see  not?     But  we  have  a  Master,  Who  hath  deigned  to 
shew  us,  how  invisible  enemies  may  be  overcome.     For  con-  Col.  2, 
cerning  Him  saith  the  Apostle;  Unclothing  Himself  of Jlesh'^,  i  taking 
He  made  a  shoic  of  principalities  and  powers,  confidently  \^^^'^' 
triumphing  over  them  in  Himself.     There  therefore  are  over- reflex. 
come  the  invisible  powers  hostile  to  us,  where  are  overcome 
the  invisible  lusts:  and  therefore  because  within   ourselves 
we  overcome  the  lusts  of  temjDoral  things,  of  necessity  within 
ourselves  also  must  we  overcome  him,  who  through   those 
very  lusts  reigneth  in  man.     For  when  it  was  said  to  the 
devil,  earth  shall  thou  feed  on;  it  was  said  to  the  sinner, 
earth  art  thou,  and  into  earth  shall  thou  go.     Wherefore  the  Gen.  3, 
sinner  was  given   as  food  unto  the  devil.     Let  us  not  be 
earth,  if  we  would  not  be  fed  on  by  the  serpent.     For  as  that 
which  we  feed  on  we  turn  into  our  own  body,  so  that  the 
very  food  according  to  the  body  is  made  that  which  we  our- 
selves are:  thus  by  evil  habits  through  wickedness,  and  pride, 
and  impiety,  each  one  is  made  that  which  the  devil  is,  that 
is,  like  him;  and  is  made  subject  to  him,  as  our  own  bod}'  is 
subject  unto  us.     And  this  is  that  which  is  said,  '  To  be  fed 
on^  by  the   serpent.'     Whosoever  therefore  fears  that  fire^mandu- 
which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  let  him  take  Sar'k'g" 
good  heed  that  he  triumph   over  him  within  himself.     For  44. 

M 


16*2       Kingdom  of  Darkness  not  coeiernal  with  God. 

DE     those  who  assault  us  without,  we  overcome  within,  by  over- 

cuKis^  coming   the  lusts   whereby  they  rule   over  us.     And   those 

TXANo.  whom  they  shall  lincl  like  unto  themselves,  they  drag  with 

them  into  punishment. 

iii.         3.  Thus  also  the   Apostle   says,   that    within   himself  he 

Eph.  6,^.arreth  against  powers  without.     For  he  so  speaks,  We  have 

not  to  itrestle  against  jlesh  and  hlood,  hut  against  princes 

and  powers  of  this  tvorld,  the  riders  of  this  darkness,  against 

spiritual  things  of  wickedness  in  heaven! g  places.     For  the 

name  of  heaven  is  given  also  to  this  air,  wherein  winds  and 

clouds    and    storms    and    whirlwinds    have    place;    as    also 

Ps.  18,  Scripture  saith  in  many  places,  and  the  Lord  thundered 

Ps  «  8  f'^'om  heaven;    and  birds  of  heaven,  and  fowls  of  heaven. 

Mat.  6,  when  it  is  clear  that  the  birds  fly  in  the   air.     And  we  also 
26  Lat  .... 

'are  in  the   habit  of  calling   this   air  heaven;  for  when   we 

inquire  whether  it  be  clear  or  cloudy,  we  say  at  times,  How 

is  the  air?   at  times.  How  is  the  heaven?     I   have   noticed 

this,  that  no  one  may  think  that  the  evil  demons  dwell  there 

1  al. and  where  God  hath  set  in  their  order  the  sun  and  moon  as'  stars. 

Which  evil  demons   the  Apostle    therefore    calls    spiritual, 

because  in  the  divine  Scriptures  even  evil  angels  are  called 

spirits.     But  thei'efore  doth  he  call  them  the  rulers  of  this 

darkness,  because  he  calls  sinful  men  darkness,  over  whom 

Eph.  6,  these  rule.     Therefore  also  in  another  place  he  says.  For  ye 

^'  were  sometime  darkness,  hut  now  light  in  the  Lord:  because 

from    being    sinners  they  had  been  justified.      Let  us  not 

therefore  suppose  that  the  devil  with  his  angels  dwells  in  the 

highest  heaven,  whence  we  believe  him  to  have  fallen, 

iv.         4.  For  such  has  been  the   error  of  the  Manichees,  who 

assert,  that  before  the  world  was  framed  there  existed  a  nation 

of  darkness,  which  was  in  rebellion  against  God ;    and  in 

this  war  the  wretched  men  believe  that  the  Almighty  God 

could  in  no  other  way  succour  Himself,  save  only  by  sending 

a  portion  of  Himself  against  them.     And,  as  these  state,  the 

princes  of  this  nation   ate  up  a  portion  of  God,  and  were 

attempered  so  as  that  of  them  the  world  might  be  formed. 

Thus  they  assert  that  God  attained  unto  the  victory  with 

great  losses  and  tortures  and  miseries  of  His  own  members ; 

which   members  they  assert  were  mixed  up  with  the  dark 

entrails  of  those   princes,  in  order  to  attemper  them,  and 


Nor  is  God,  or  a  part  of  Him,  involved  in  it.         163 

restrain  them   from   their  fury.     And  they  understand  not     de 
that   so  sacrilegious  is  their  sect,   as   to  believe  that  that  chris- 
whereby   Almighty  God  warred  with   darkness  was   not   a  t^ano. 
created  being  which  He  made,  but  His  own  very  Nature ; 
which  thing  it  is  impious  to  believe.     Nor  merely  this,  but 
further   also,  that   those  who   were  conquered   were    made 
better,  in  that  their  fury  were  restrained,  but   that  God's 
Nature  which  conquered  was  made  most  miserable.     Also 
they  assert   that  it   by  its   very  admixture  lost  its    proper 
understanding   and   happiness,    and    became    entangled    in 
great  errors  and  losses.    Now,  even  if  they  should  assert  that 
at  some  time  or  other,  this  Nature  were  cleansed,  even  the 
whole  of  it,  yet  would  they  affirm  what  is  a  great  impiety 
against  Almighty  God,  in  believing  a  part  of  Him  to  have 
been  so  long  time  tost  to  and  fro  in  errors  and  pains  without 
any  charge  of  offence.     But,  as  it  is,  the  unhappy  men  dare 
yet  further  to  assert,  that  neither  can  the  whole  be  cleansed; 
and  that  that  very  part,  which   cannot  be  cleansed,  makes 
progress  towards  a  chain,  that  so  it  may  be  bound,  and  tied 
into  a  grave  of  wickedness'';  and  that  thus  there  be  even 
there  the   very  portion    of  God    miserable,  (albeit   it  hath 
never  sinned,)  and  be  evil  entreated  for  ever  in  "^  the  prison- 
house  of  darkness.     Thus  these  affirm,  in  order  to  deceive 
simple  souls.     But  who  is  there  so  simple,  as  not  to  perceive 
that  these  things  are  impious,  wherein  they  affirm  that  Al- 
mighty God  hath  been  overcome  by  necessity,  so  as  to  give 
up  a  part  of  Himself,  good  and  innocent,  to  be  overwhelmed 
with  so  great  losses,  and  defiled  by  so  great  impurity,  and  to 
be  unable  to  set  the  whole  free ;  and  that,  which  He  could 
not  set  free,  to  bind  with  everlasting  chains.     Who  then  but 
must  execrate  these  things .''    Who  but  must  perceive  them 
to  be  impious  and  not  to  be  uttered  ?    But  when  those  men 
seek  to  carry  others  away  with  them ;  these  are  not  the  first 
things  which  they  affirm;  for  if  they  affirmed  these,  all  men 
would  mock  them  or  flee  from  them  :   but  they  choose  out 
certain  passages  from  the  Scriptures,  which  simple  men  do 
not  understand;  and  by  means  of  these  deceive  souls  unused 
to  them,  inquiring,  '  Whence  is  evil  ?    As  is  their  wont  to  do 

»  So^Ben.  sepulcro.  MSS.  '  sepul-    wickedness  may  be  enrolled  and  bound,' 
chrum,'  '  that  therewith  the  grave  of         ^  al.  '  fastened  for  ever  unto,' 

M  2 


164  IVe,  in  a  heavenly  calling,  strive  with  powers  of  the  air. 

DE     in   that  passage,  where  the   Apostle  writes,  Rulers  of  this 
t^V!I'  darkness,  and  spiritual  things  of  wickedness  in  heavenly 

CHRIS"  '  K/  ^ 

TiANo.  places.  For  those  deceivers  inquire,  and  ask  of  one  who 
Eph.  6,  understands  not  the  divine  Scriptures,  How  it  comes  to  pass 
that  there  are  in  Heaven  rulers  of  darkness?  in  order  that, 
when  he  shall  be  unable  to  answer,  he  may  be  seduced  by 
them  through  curiosity  ;  for  every  unlearned  soul  is  curious. 
But  he  who  hath  learnt  well  the  Catholic  Faith,  and  is  fortified 
by  right  habits  and  true  piety,  although  he  be  ignorant  of 
their  heresy,  yet  answers  them.  For  neither  can  he  be 
deceived  who  already  knoweth  what  pertains  to  the  Christian 
Faith,  which  is  called  Catholic,  spread  abroad  over  the 
whole  world,  and  against  all  impious  men  and  sinners,  yea 
and  against  those  of  her  own  who  neglect  her,  by  the 
governance  of  the  Lord,  secure. 
V.  5.  Since  then  we  wexo  saying  that  the  Apostle  Paul  had 

said  that  we  have  to  wrestle  against  rulers  of  darkness,  and 
spiritual  things  of  wickedness  in  heavenly  places,  and  have 
shewn  that  that  very  air  which  is  nearest  the  earth  is  called 
Heaven  :  we  ought  to  believe  that  we  are  striving  against  the 
devil  and  his  angels,  who  rejoice  in  our  being  disturbed. 
For  tlie  Apostle  himself  also  in  another  place  calls  the  devil 

Eph.  2,  i],f;  prince  of  the  power  of  this  air.  Although  that  place, 
in  which  he  says.  Spiritual  things  of  wickedness  in  heavenly 
places,  may  also  be  understood  in  another  manner,  as  that 
he  said,  not  that  the  offending  Angels  themselves  are  in 
heavenly   places,  but  rather  ourselves,  of  whom  in  another 

Phil.  3,  place  he  affirms.  Our  conversation  is  in  Heaven,  that  we, 

20  . 

being  settled  in  heavenly  places,  that  is,  walking  in  the 
spiritual  coumiandments  of  God,  may  strive  against  spiritual 
things  of  wickedness,  who  labour  to  withdraw  us  thence. 
That  therefore  is  rather  the  question,  in  what  manner  we 
may  be  enabled  to  fight  against,  and  overcome  those  whom 
we  see  not ;  that  fools  think  not  that  we  have  to  fight 
against  the  air. 
vi.  6.  Therefore  the  Apostle  himself  teaches  us,  saying, 
iCor.9,  jVo^  so  fight  I,  as  beating  the  air;   hut  I  chasten  inn  bod u, 

26   27  •     ^'  ^  •-  ,/  u 

and  bring  it   into   subjection,  lest   haply,  preaching   vnto 

1  Cor.    others,  I  myself  be  found  a  reprobate.     Also  he  says;  Be  ye 

'    "    followers  of  me,  as  I  also  of  Christ.     Wherefore  we  are  to 


The  body  to  he  subdued,  lest  God  justly  punish  it.     165 
understand  that  the  Apostle  also  himself  in  himself  trimnphed     de 

AGONE 


IS- 


over  the  powers  of  this  world,  as  he  had  asserted  of  the  ^.^^ 
Lord,  of  Whom  he  professes  himself  to  be  followei*.     There-  tiano. 
fore  let  us  also   follow   him,  as  he  exhorts  us,  and  let  us  "^  *-'"/• 

...  2,  14. 

chasten  our  body,  and  reduce  it  unto  subjection,  if  weCol.3,5. 
would  ovei'come  the  world.  Forasmuch  as  by  means  of  its 
unlawful  delights,  and  pomps,  and  deadly  curiosity,  this 
world  may  have  rule  over  us,  that  is,  those  things  which  are 
in  this  world  by  the  destructive  delight  which  they  minister 
bind  captive  the  lovers  of  things  temporal,  and  compel  them 
to  serve  the  devil  and  his  angels ;  wherefore,  if  we  have 
renounced  these,  let  us  reduce  our  body  unto  subjection. 

7.  But,  in  order  that  we  have  not  this  very  question  put  to    vii. 
us,  how  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  we  submit  our  bodies  unto 
subjection  :    it  may   easily  be  understood  and   done,  if  we 
first  subject  ourselves  to  God,  with  a  good  will,  and  sincere 
love.     For  every  created  being,  whether  he  will  it,  or  not,  is 
made  subject  to  his  one  God  and  Lord.     But  this  we  are 
admonished,  that  with  our  whole  will  we  serve  the  Lord  our 
God.     Seeing  that  the  just  man   serves  as  a  freeman,  the 
unjust  in  fetters.     Yet  do  all  serve  the  Divine  Providence: 
but  the  one  obey  as  sons,  and  with  It  do  what  is  good;  the 
other  are  bound  as  slaves,  and  there  is  done  of  them  what  is 
just.     Thus  Ahnighty  God,  the  Lord  of  the  whole  creation, 
JVJio  made  all  things,  as  it  is  written,   very  good,  hath  so  Gen.  i, 
appointed  them,  as  both  of  the  good  and  of  the  evil  to  do  ^^' 
well.     For  that  which  is  done  justly,  is   done  well.     But 
justly  are   the   good  blessed,  and  justly   do   the  evil  suffer 
punishment.     Wherefore  both  of  the  good  and  of  the  evil 
God  doeth  well,  seeing  that  justly  He  doeth  all  things.     But 
they  are  good,  who  with  their  whole  will  serve  God ;  but  the 
evil  serve  of  necessity ;  for  no  one  escapes  the  laws  of  the 
Almighty.     But  it  is  one  thing  to  do  what  the  law  commands, 
another,  to  suffer  what  the  law  commands.     Wherefore  it  is 
according  to  the  laws  that  the  good  do,  according  to   the 
laws  the  evil  suffer. 

8.  Nor  let  it  move  us,  that,  in  this  life,  according  to  the 
flesh  which  they  bear,  the  first  suffer  many  things^  grievous 
and  harsh.  For  no  ill  do  they  suffer,  who  can  already  say 
that  wherein  that  spiritual  man  the  Apostle  exults  and  pro- 


166  Body  of  the  righteous  to  he  changed.      Wages  of  sin. 

DK      claims,  saying,  But  we  glory  in  tribulations ;  knowing  that 
CHRIS-  tribulation  worketh  patience,  and  patience  experience^,  and 
TiANo.  ewperience  hope,  and  hope  confoiindeth  not:  because    the 
^^'^'  love  of  God  hath  been  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  through 
'  Lat.     tJie  Holy  Spirit,  who  hath  been  given  unto  us.      If  there- 
proof.    fore  in  this  life,  wherein  are  so  great  torments,  good  and  just 
men  are  enabled,  when  suffering  such  things,  not  only  to 
endure  them  witli  equanimity,  but  also  to  glory  in  the  love 
of  God ;    what    ought   we    to    think    of  that  life,  which   is 
promised  to  us,  v/herein  we  shall  feel  no  annoyance  from  the 
body  ?    Inasmuch  as  the  body  of  the  just  will  not  rise  again 
for  that,  whereunto  will  rise  again  the  body  of  the  ungodly  : 
1  Cor.    as  it  is  written,    JVe  shall  all  rise  again,  but  ice  shall  not 
52I     *  all  be  changed.     And,  that  no  one  may  think  that  that  not 
to  the  just  that  change  is  promised,  but  rather  to  the  unjust, 
and  may  think  it  to  be  penal,  he  goes  on  and  says,  And  the 
dead  shall  rise  again  incorrupt,  and  ice  shall  be  changed. 
«' ordi- Whosoever   therefore    are    evil,   have    been    thus    placed^; 
because  both  doth  each  one  injure  himself,  and  all  injure 
one  another.     For  they   desire  that,   the  love   of  which  is 
fraught  with   death,  and  which   may  easily  be  taken  away 
from  them ;  and  this  they  take  away  one  from  another,  when 
they  persecute  one  another.     And  so  they,  from  whom  things 
temporal  are  taken  away,  are  greatly  pained,  because  of  their 
love  of  them :  but  they  who  take  them  away,  rejoice.      But 
such  joy  is  blindness  and  supreme  misery :  for  this  very  joy 
involves  the  soul  the  more,  and  leads  it  unto  greater  tor- 
ments.    For  the  fish  also  rejoices,  when,   not   seeing   the 
hook,  it  swallows  the  bait.     But,  when  the  fisher  hath  begun 
to  draw  it  unto  himself,  its  entrails  are  tormented  first;  next, 
from  all  its  joy,  by  means  of  that  very  bait  wherein  it  joyed, 
it  is  dragged  unto  destruction.     In  such  like  condition  are 
all,   who  think  themselves  blessed  by  reason   of  temporal 
goods;    for  they  have  received  a   hook,  and   with  it  they 
3<  sibi    wander  their  own  way^:   a  time  will  come,  for  them  to  per- 
t„ff°'    ceive  how   great   torments   they   have    greedily    swallowed. 
And  therefore  not  at  all  do  they  injure  the  good;  seeing  that 
they  take   from  them   this  which   they  love  not :    for  that 
which  they  love,  and  whence  they  are  blessed,  no  one  can 
take  away  from  them.     But  bodily  torture  miserably  afflicts 


God  governs  through  the  wills  of  His  creatures.       167 

evil  souls,  but  the  good   it   strongly   cleanses.     Thus  is  it     de 
brought  to  pass,  that  both  the  evil  man  and  the  evil  angel  chris- 
serve  under  the  Divine  Providence ;  yet  know  not  what  good  tjano. 
God  worketh  of  tliem.     Therefore  not  according  to    their 
deserts  of  service,  but  according  to  their  deserts  of  sin,  do 
they  receive  wages. 

9.  But,  as  these  souls,  which  possess  a  will  whereby  to    viii. 
injure,  and  reason  whereby  to  reflect,  have  been  set  in  place 
under  the  divine  laws,  that  each  man  suffer  not  any  thing 
unjust;  so  all  things,  both  those  which  have  souls  and  those 
which  have  bodies,  in  their  own  kind  and  in  their  own  order, 
are  set  under  the   laws  of  Divine   Providence,  and  are  so 
gov^erned.     Therefore  the  Lord  saith,  Are  not  two  sparrows ^'^^^-^o, 
sold  for  a  farthing^,  and  one  of  them  falleth    not    to  theiasss 
ground  witltout  the  will  of  your  Father.     For  this  He  spake, 
willing  to  shew  that  whatsoever  men  esteem  to  be  of  least 
value,  is  governed  by  the  Almighty  Power  of  God.     For 
thus,  that  both  the  fowls  of  the  Heaven  are  fed  by  Hira,  and  ^Tat.  6, 

_  *'  '  26 30. 

the  lilies  of  the  field  clothed  by  Hira,  the  Truth  speaketh, 
Which  saith  that  even  our  hairs  are  numbered.     But  since  Mat.  lo, 

or* 

pure^  reasonable  souls  God  Himself  by  Himself  taketh  careamun. 
of,  whether  it  be  in  His  most  good  and  great  Angels,  or  in'^^''- 
men  who  serve  Him  with  their  whole   will ;  and  all  other 
things  He  governs  by   their  means;  most  truly  could  that 
also^be  said  by  the  Apostle,  For  not  for  oxen  hath  God  care,  i  Cor.9, 
For  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  God  teaches  men  how  to  act  in^' 
their  doings  with  men,  and  how  to  serve  God  Himself;  but 
how  to  act  in  their  doings  with  their  cattle,  they  know  of 
themselves,  that  is,  how  to  administer  the  well-being  of  their 
own  cattle,  by  use,  and  experience,  and  natural  reason;  all 
which  things  indeed  they  have  received   out  of  the   great 
riches  of  their  Creator.     Whoever  therefore  can  understand 
how  God  the  Creator  of  the  whole  creation   governs  it  by 
•means  of  holy  souls,  who  are  His  ministers  in  the  Heavens 
and  in  the  earth ;  because  both  the  holy  souls  were  them- 
selves created  by  Him,  and  in  His  creation  hold  the  first 
place :  whosoever  therefore  can  understand,  let  him  under-  Mat.26, 
stand,  and  let  him  enter  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.  ^^* 

10.  But,  if  this  we  cannot,  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  body,    ix. 
and   are  absent  from   the   Lord,   let  us  at  least  taste   howE^'"'"^' 

6. 


168  Fulness  of  the  Spiril.    Man  changed  by  grace  or  sin» 

DE     sweet  the  Lord  is,  Who  hath  given  unto  us  as  a  pledge  the 

CHRIS-  Spirit,  that  in   Him  we   may  perceive  His  sweetness :  and 

TiANo.  may  long  for  the  fount  of  life  Itself,  that  therein   with  a 

2CorV^'-'^^^'  int^hriation  we  may  be  overflowed  and  watered,  like 

22.         the  tree  which  is  planted  by  the  water-courses,  and  givetli 

Ps.  1,3.  fruit  in  its  season,  and  its  leaves  shall  not  foil  off.     For  the 

Ps.  36,  Holy  Spirit  saith,  But  the  so)is  of  men,  beneath  the  covering 

of  Thy  icings  shall  they  hope ;  they  shall  be  made  drunken 

tcitli  the  fatness  of  Thy  House,  and  of  the  full  river  of  Thy 

pleasure  shalt  Thou  make  them  to  drink.     For  icith  Thee  is 

the  Fount  of  Life.     Such  drunkenness  overthroweth  not  the 

mind,  and  yet  carryeth  it  by  force  upward,  and  causeth  a 

for^ret fulness  of  all  earthly  things  :   but  only  provided  we  can 

P8.42,l.alieady  say  with  entire  affection.  Like  as  the  hart  longeth 

unto  the  founts  of  waters,  so  longeth  my  soul  unto  Thee, 

O  God. 

X.  11.  But  if  haply  as  yet,  by  reason  of  the  sicknesses  of  the 

soul,  which  from  the  love  of  the  world  it  hath  contracted,  we 

are  unable   even   to   taste  how  sweet  the  Lord  is  ;    let  us 

however  believe  the  divine  testimony,  which  He  hath  willed 

Rom.  1,  should  be  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  concerning  His  Son,  Who 

icas  made  unto  Him  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the 

jlesli;  as  the  Apostle  speaks.     For  all  things  were  made  by 

Johni,  Him,  as  in  the  Gospel  it  is  written,  and  without  Him  teas 

nothing   made.     Who    had    compassion    on    our   weakness, 

which  weakness  not  by  work  of  His,  but  by  our  own  will 

Wisd.2,  we    have    deservedly    gotten.     For    God  created   7nan    not 

^^'         liable  to  be  destroyed,  and  gave  unto  him  the  free  choice  of 

will.     For  he  would  not  be  most  excellent,  were  he  to  obey 

the  commands  of  God  of  necessity,  not  of  his  own  will.     It 

is  altogether  an  easy  thing,  as  far  as  I  suppose,  which  they 

nve  unwilling  to  believe,   who  have   deserted  the   Catholic 

Faith,  and  wish  to  be  called  Christians.     For  whereas  they 

confess  with   us,  that  our  nature  is  not  healed  except  by 

acting  aright;    they  must  confess    that  it  is  not  weakened 

except  by  sinning.     And  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  believed 

that  our  soul  is  this  same  thing  which  God  is;  for  if  it  were 

this,  neither  by  its  own  will,  nor  by  any  necessity  whatever 

would  it  suffer  change  for  the  worse ;  forasmuch  as  God  is 

understood   to    be    in    every   way   unchangeable,   by    those, 


Tlie  perverse Jind fault  uilh  Christ's  humiliation.     169 

however,  who  do  not  in  contention  and  rivah-y  and  desire  of     de 
vain  glory  love  to  speak  of  that  of  which  they  know  not,  but  chris- 
in  Christian  humility  have  thouglds  concerning  God  in  good-  '^^tano. 
nesSi  and  in  simplicitg  of  heart  seek  Him.     This  weakness  ^''*'^'  ^' 
therefore   of  ours  the   Son    of  God   deigned   to  take    upon 
Himself,  and   The  Word  teas  made  Jiesli,  and  dwelt  among  John  i, 
us;   not  because  that  Eternity  was   changed,  but  because 
unto    men's    eyes   that    are    subject  to  change,   a  Creature 
subject   to    change    He    shewed.   Which    in    unchangeable 
majesty  He  took  upon  Himself. 

12.  Cut  there  are  fools  who  say,  Could  not  the  Wisdom  xi. 
of  God  any  otlierwise  set  men  free,  than  by  taking  man's 
nature'  upon  Him,  and  being  born  of  a  woman,  and  suffer- ^g^""' 
ing  all  those  things  at  the  hands  of  sinners?  To  whom  we 
say,  He  could  assuredly,  but  were  He  to  do  it  in  other 
manner.  He  would  in  like  manner  be  displeasing  unto  your 
folly.  For  were  He  not  to  appear  unto  the  eyes  of  sinners, 
assuredly  His  eternal  light,  which  is  seen  through  the  inner 
eyes,  would  not  be  able  to  be  seen  by  polluted  minds. 
But  now  because  He  hath  deigned  in  a  \ibible  form  to 
admonish  us,  that  He  may  prepare  us  for  things  invisible. 
He  is  displeasing  unto  the  covetous,  because  He  had  not  a 
body  of  gold:  He  is  displeasing  unto  the  unchaste,  because 
He  was  born  of  a  woman  ;  (lor  the  unchaste  hate  greatly, 
that  women  conceive  and  bear  children;)  He  is  displeasing 
unto  the  proud,  because  He  most  patiently  endured  insults. 
He  is  displeasing  to  them  of  soft  lives,  because  He  was  put 
to  the  torture  of  the  Cross-;  He  is  displeasing  to  the  fearful,- cruci- 

Situs 

because  He  died.  And,  in  order  that  they  may  not  seem  to 
defend  their  own  vices,  they  say  that  this  is  displeasing  to 
them,  not  in  a  man,  but  in  the  Son  of  God.  For  they  under- 
stand not  what  is  the  Eternity  of  God,  Which  assumed  to 
Itself  human  nature,  and  what  that  very  human  creature 
which  by  the  changes  which  it  underwent  was  being  recalled 
unto  its  ancient  stedfastness,  that  so  we  might  learn,  by  the 
teaching  of  the  Lord  Himself,  that  the  weaknesses,  which  by 
committing  sin  we  have  gathered  around  us,  can  by  acting 
aright  be  healed.  For  it  was  to  be  shewn  unto  us,  unto  what 
frailly  man  by  his  own  fault  had  arrived,  and  out  of  what 
frailty  by  the  Divine  help  he  is  set  free.     Therefore  the  Son 


170  Manhood  of  Christ  a  remedy  suited  to  all. 

BE  of  God  assumed  unto  Himself  Man,  and  therein  suffered  the 
cHRis^-  things  which  belong  unto  man.  This  Medicine  for  men  is 
"^^o-  so  great,  as  that  thought  cannot  reach  unto  it.  For  what 
pride  can  be  healed,  if  it  be  not  healed  by  the  humiliation  of 
the  Son  of  God  ?  What  covetousness  can  be  healed,  if  it  be 
not  healed  by  the  poverty  of  the  Son  of  God  ?  What  wrath 
can  be  healed,  if  it  be  not  healed  by  the  long-suffering  of 
the  Son  of  God }  What  ungodliness  can  be  healed,  if  it  be 
not  healed  by  the  love  of  the  Son  of  God?  Finally,  what 
fearfulness  can  be  healed,  if  it  be  not  healed  by  the  Resur- 
rection of  the  Body  of  Christ  the  Lord }  Let  the  race  of 
man  lift  up  its  hope,  and  learn  to  know  its  own  nature ;  let  it 
see  how  great  a  place  it  has  in  the  works  of  God.  Despise 
not  yourselves,  ye  men  ;  the  Son  of  God  took  upon  Him 
the  nature  of  a  man.  Despise  not  yourselves,  ye  w^omen  • 
the  Son  of  God  was  born  of  a  woman.  Yet  love  not 
the  things  of  the  flesh.  For  in  the  Son  of  God  are  we 
Gal.  3,  neither  male  nor  female.  Love  not  the  things  of  time ; 
for  if  it  were  well  to  love  them,  the  Manhood"  which 
the  Son  of  God  took  upon  Himself,  would  love  them. 
All  this  exhortation,  which  is  now  every  where  preached, 
every  where  reverently  received,  which  heals  every  soul  that 
obeys,  would  not  be  in  human  affairs,  unless  all  those  things 
had  been  done,  at  which  men  most  foolish  are  displeased. 
Whom  doth  corrupt  boasting  deign  to  imitate,  that  so  it  may 
be  led  unto  the  partaking  of  virtue,  if  it  blush  to  imitate 
Him,  of  Whom,  before  yet  He  was  born,  it  was  said,  that 
Lukei,  He  shall  he  called  the  Son  of  the  Most  High,  and  Who  now, 
^^*  throughout  all  nations,  (as  no  one  can  deny,)  is  called  the 
Son  of  the  Most  High .?  If  we  think  much  of  ourselves,  let 
us  deign  to  imitate  Him,  Who  is  called  the  Son  of  the  Most 
High :  if  we  think  little  of  ourselves,  let  us  dare  to  follow 
fishermen  and  publicans,  who  followed  Him.  O  Medicine, 
that  provideth  for  all,  that  restraineth  all  swelling  things,  that 
restoreth  all  things  that  are  wasting  away,  that  cutteth  off  all 
things  needless,  and   guardeth  all   things  needful,  that  re- 

a  '  Homo.'     It    has    been    thought  tractations  a  phrase  of  like  appearance, 

well  to  translate  this  '  Manhood'  rather  in    his    commentary    on   the   Psalms, 

than  '  Man,'  where  it  might  otherwise  But  the  Latin  idiom  will  bear  it  better 

bear  the  appearance  of  a  distinct  per-  than  English, 
sonality.     St.  Aug.  corrects  in  his  Re- 


The  Church  strong  in  hope  through  Christ.  171 

iieweth  all  things  that  be  lost,  and  correcteth  all  things  that     de 
be  amiss.     Who  now  shall  set  himself  up  against  the  Son  of  ^H^^g^ 
God  ?    Who  despair  of  himself,  for  whom  the  Son  of  God  ttanq. 
willed  to  be  made  so  low  ?    Who  shall  judge  a  blessed  life  to 
stand  in  those  things,  which  the  Son  of  God  hath  taught  us 
are  to  be  despised  ?     To  what  adversities  shall  he  give  way, 
who  believes  that  man's  nature  in  so  great  persecutions  was 
guarded  in   [the  Person  of]  the  Son  of  God  ?     Who  shall 
think  that  the   kingdom  of  God  is  shut  against  him,  who 
understands  that  publicans  and  harlots  followed  the  Son  of 
God  ?    From  what  going  astray  shall  not  he  be  free,  who 
looks  into  and  loves  and  follows  the  actions  and  sayings  of 
that  Manhood  \  wherein  the  Son  of  God  rendered  Himself' homi- 
unto  us  as  an  ensample  of  life  ?  °'^' 

13.  Therefore  already  both  males  and  females,  and  every  xii. 
age,  and  every  rank  of  this  world,  hath  been  moved  unto  the 
hope  of  eternal  life.  Some,  neglecting  temporal  goods,  fly 
together  unto  divine.  Others  yield  to  the  excellencies  of  those 
who  thus  act,  and  praise  what  they  dare  not  follow.  But  some 
few  yet  murmur,  and  are  tormented  with  fruitless  envy ; 
either  they  who  seek  Iheir  own  things  in  the  Church, 
although  they  seem  Catholics,  or  heretics  seeking  glory  from 
the  very  name  of  Christ,  or  Jews  desiring  to  defend  the  sin 
of  their  ungodliness,  or  Pagans  fearing  to  lose  their  over- 
curiousness  of  vain  licence-.  But  the  Church  Catholic, 2oneMs. 
throughout  the  whole  world  far  and  wide  spread  abroad,  in   ^^^', 

.  ...  .  ence. 

former  times  breaking  in  pieces  their  assaults,  hath  been 
more  and  more  strengthened ;  not  by  resisting,  but  by  long- 
suffering.  But  now  these  crafty  questions  by  her  faith  she 
mocks  at,  by  her  diligence  she  dispels,  by  her  understanding 
she  unravels :  them  who  charge  her  chaff  she  heeds  not ; 
for  the  time  of  harvest,  and  the  time  of  the  threshing-floors, 
and  the  time  of  the  garners  she  cautiously  and  carefully 
distinguishes :  but  them  who  charge  her  wheat,  she  either 
corrects,  if  in  error,  or  if  through  envy,  counts  among  the 
thorns  and  tares. 

14.  Therefore  let  us  subject  the  soul  to  God,  if  we  would   xiii. 
subject  our   body   unto   obedience,  and    triumph    over   the 
devil.     It  is  Faith  which  first  bows  down  the  soul  to  God ; 
next  precepts  concerning  life,  by  observing  which  our  hope 
is  strengthened,  and  our  love  nourished,  and  that  begins  to 


172  Purity  of  heart  needed  to  see  the  Trinity  in  Unity. 

DE  beam  on  the  sight,  which  before  was  only  believed.  For, 
cHRis^-  whereas  knowledge  and  action  make  a  man  blessed ;  as  in 
TiANo.  knowledge  we  must  shun  error,  so  in  action  must  we  shun 
wickedness.  But  he  is  in  error,  whosoever  supposes  that  he 
can  know  truth^  whilst  as  yet  he  is  living  wickedly.  But  it 
is  wickedness  to  love  this  world,  and  to  esteem  as  great, 
those  things  which  are  born  and  pass  away ;  and  to  lust 
after  these  things,  and  to  labour  for  them,  in  order  to  acquire 
them  ;  and  to  rejoice,  when  they  are  abundant;  and  to  fear,  lest 
they  perisii;  and  to  be  rendered  sad,  when  they  perish. 
Such  a  life  cannot  see  That  pure,  and  undefiled,  and  un- 
changeable Truth,  and  cleave  unto  It,  and  for  ever  now  no 
more  be  moved.  Therefore  before  our  mind  be  cleansed, 
we  ought  to  believe  what  we  are  not  yet  able  to  understand; 
^^- ^' ^'  since  most  truly  is  it  said  by  the  Prophet,  Unless  ye  shall 
believe,  ye  shall  not  understand. 

15.  Tn  very  few  words  is  the  Faith  delivered  in  the 
Church,  and  in  it  are  set  forth  things  eternal,  which  cannot 
as  yet  be  understood  by  carnal  men  ;  and  temporal  things, 
past  and  future,  which  the  Eternity  of  the  Divine  Providence 
luith  accomplished,  and  will  hereafter  accomplish,  for  man's 
salvation.  Let  us  therefore  believe  in  the  Father,  and  in 
the  Son,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost:  these  things  are  eternal 
and  unchangeable,  that  is,  One  God,  of  one  Substance  a 
Rom.     Trinity    eternal;    God    of   Wltom    are   all   things,  through 

Whom  are  all  things,  in  Whom  are  all  ilrings, 
xiv.         IG.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  say  tliat  there  is  only 
the  Father,  and  that  He  has  not  a  Son,  and  that  there  is  not 
with  Him  the  Holy  Ghost;  but  that  the  Father  Himself  is 
called,  at  times  the  Son,  at  times  the  Holy  Ghost.      For 
such  are  ignorant  of  the  Beginning,  of  Whom  are  all  things, 
and  of  His  Image,  through  Whom  are  all    things,  and  of 
His  Holiness,  in  Whom  are  all  things  set  in  order. 
XV.         17.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  are  indignant  and  angry, 
because  we  say  that  there  are  not  three  Gods  to  be  wor- 
shipped.    For  they  are  ignorant  what   one    and   the    same 
Substance  is;  and   are  mocked    by    their    own    phantasms, 
because  they  are  wont  to  see  after  a  bodily  manner,  either 
three  animals,  or  any  three  bodies  whatsoever,  to  be  set  in 
their  places  apart  one  from  the  other;   in  this  sense  they 
think  that  they  are  to  understand  the   Substance  of  God; 


Eternal  Generation  n?i/sterious.     Heresy  carnnl.     173 

and  are  mucli  in  error,  because   they  are  proutl ;  and  are     de 
unable  to  learn,  because  they  are  unwilling  to  believe.  chr^s^. 

18.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  say  that  the  Father  alone  is  tiano. 
True  God  and  Eternal ;  but  that  the  Son  was  not  Begotten    xvi. 
of  Him,  but  made  by  Him  out  of  nothing,  and  that  there  was 

a  time  when  He  was  not,  and  yet  notwithstanding  that  He 
hath  the  first  ])lace  in  all  creation';  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  •'mom- 
is  of  less  Majesty  than  the  Son,  and  was  Himself  made  after  tura.'  " 
the  Son  ;  and  that  of  These  Three  there  are  diiferent  sub-  Col.  i, 
stances,  just  as  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass.  But  they  know  ' 
not  what  they  say,  and  of  those  ihiiigs  which  they  are  wont 
to  see  through  the  eyes  of  the  flesh  they  transfer  vain  images 
unto  their  disputations.  Forasmuch  as  in  reality  it  is  a 
great  thing  to  behold  with  the  mind  a  Generation,  which 
takes  not  place  from  any  time,  but  which  is  eternal ;  and 
that  very  Love  and  Holiness,  whereby  the  Begetter  and  the 
Begotten  are  in  an  unspeakable  manner  joined  together;  it 
is  a  great  and  difficult  thing  to  behold  these  things  with  the 
mind,  even  although  it  be  at  peace  and  still.  It  cannot 
therefore  be  that  they  should  S3e  these  things,  who  look  too 
much  to  earthly  generations,  and  unto  that  darkness  add 
further  the  smoke  which  they  unceasingly  cause  to  arise  unto 
themselves  by  their  daily  strifes  and  contentions ;  having 
souls  flowing  abroad  in  carnal  affections,  as  logs  of  wood 
saturated  with  moisture,  in  which  the  fire  vomits  forth  smoke 
alone,  and  cannot  have  bright  flames.  And  this  indeed  ;Qiay 
most  rightly  be  said  concerning  all  heretics. 

19.  Believing  therefore  in  the  Unchangeable  Trinity,  let  us  xvii. 
believe  also  in  the  Dispensation  in  time  for  the  salvation 

of  the  human  race.     Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  wlio  say  that 
the  Son  of  God,  Jesus   Christ,  is  none  other  than  Man, 
yet  so  righteous  as  to  be  worthy  of  being  called  the  Son  of 
God.     I'or  these  also  the  discipline  of  the  Church  Catholic 
hath  cast  forth;  forasmuch  as,  being  deceived  by  a  desire  of 
vain  glory,  they  have  willed  to  contend  in  a  spirit  of  strife, 
before  that  they  understood  what  is  Me  Power  of  God,  andiCoT.i, 
the  Wisdom  of  God,  a.nd  in  the  beginning  the  ?For</,  through  ^'*' 
Whom  all  things  were  made,  and  how  the   Word  was  made  i.  3. 14. 
Jiesli,  and  dwelt  among  us. 

20.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  say  that  the  Son  of  God  xviii. 


174       Chrises  Manhood  real  in  hotly,  soul,  and  spirit. 

t'E     took  not  upon  Him  true  Man,  neither  was  born  of  a  woman, 
CHRIS-  but  shewed  unto  them  that  beheld  Him  an  unreal  flesh  and  a 
'^^^'^°-  feigned  image.     For  they  know  not  how  the  Substance  of 
God  administering  the  whole  Creation  is  altogether  inca- 
pable of  being  polluted :  and  yet  they  profess  that  that  sun 
which  we  see  scatters  its  rays  through  all  dregs  and  filth  in 
bodies,  and  preserves  those  rays  every  where  clean  and  pure. 
Seeing  therefore  clean  things  which  are  seen  can  be  touched 
by  unclean  things  which  are  seen,  and  yet  not  be  polluted ; 
how  much  more  the  Unseen  and  Unchangeable  Truth,  taking 
upon  Him  through  the  Spirit  a  Soul,  and  through  the  Soul 
'Man'  ^  ^o^J'  Slaving  assumed  the  whole  of  Manhood',  hath  He, 
without  any  contamination  of  Himself,  set  it  free  from  all 
weaknesses  ?     Therefore    they    are    in    great    straits,    and, 
whereas  they  fear,  (what  cannot  happen,)  lest  by  human  flesh 
the  Truth  be  defiled,  they  assert  that  the  Truth  hath  lied. 
Matt.  5,  And  whereas  He  gave  command,  saying,  Let  there  he  in  your 
mouth.    Yea,    Yea;     Nay,    Nay;    and    the    Apostle    crieth 
2  Cor.    aloud.  There  was  not  in  Him   Yea  and  Nay,  hat  in  Him 
'     '     was  Yea;  they  contend  that  His  whole  body  was  an  unreal 
flesh,  and  seem  not  to  themselves  to  follow  Christ,  unless 
they  lie  to  their  hearers. 
xix.        21.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  confess  indeed  a  Trinity 
in  One  Eternal  Substance ;  but  dare  to  say  that  the  Man- 
hood,  Which   in    the    Dispensation  in    time   was  assumed. 
Itself  had  not  the  mind  of  a  man,  but  only  the  animal  soul 
and  body.     That  is  to  say.  It   was  not  man,  but  had  the 
bodily  members  of  a  man.     For  beasts  also  have  a  soul  and 
body,  but  have  not  reason,  which  is  the  peculiar  property  of 
mind.     But  if  they  are  execrable  who  deny  that  He  had  a 
human  body,  which  is  the  lowest  thing  in  man ;  I  wonder 
that  they  blush  not,  who  deny  that  He  had  that  which  is  the 
best  thing  in  man.     For  great  must  be  our  mourning  for  the 
mind  of  man,  seeing  that  it  is  overcome  of  its  own  body;  if 
in  very  truth  it  hath  not  been  formed  again  in  that  Man,  in 
Whom    the    human    body   itself  hath   already  received   the 
dignity   of  an   heavenly   form.     But  far  be  it  from  us  that 
we  believe  this,  which  rash  blindness  and  proud  talkative- 
ness hath  devised. 
^^-         22.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  say,  that  the  Man  which 


Manhood  in  Christ  glorijied  not  as  in  other  men.      175 
was  bom  of  a  Virgin,  was  by  That  Eternal  Wisdom  so  taken     de 


AGONE 


RTS- 


unto  Himself,  in  like  manner  as  by  It  other  men  also  become  ^^ 
wise,  who  are  perfectly  wise.     For  they  know  not  the  pecu-  tiano. 
liar  mystery  of  That  Man,  and  think  that  this  alone  It  had 
more  among  the   rest  which  are  most  blessed,  that  It  was 
born  of  a  Virgin.     Which  very  thing  if  they  consider  aright, 
haply  they  may  come  to  believe  that  therefore  It  obtained ^i<mera- 
this  beside  the  rest,  because  that  very  taking  unto  Himself^^^®* 
hath  in  it  somewhat  peculiar  beside  the  rest.     For  it  is  one 
thing  merely  to  become  wise  through  the  Wisdom  of  God,  and 
another  thing  to  bear  the  very  Person  of  the  Wisdom  of  God, 
For  although  the  nature  of  the  body  of  the  Church  be  the2Susti- 
same,  who  understands  not  that  there  is  a    great  interval '^^''®* 
between  the  Head  and  the  rest  of  the  members  ?    For  if  the 
Head  of  the  Church  is  that  Man  by  the  taking  unto  Himself 
of  Which  the  Word  became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us;  but 
the  rest  of  the  members  are  all  Saints,  by  whom  the  Church 
is  perfected  and  made  up.     In  such  manner  therefore  as  the 
soul  animates  and  gives  life  to  our  whole  body,  but  in  the 
head  perceives  both  by  sight,  and  hearing,  and  smell,  and 
taste,  and  touch,  but  in  the  rest  of  the  members  only  by 
touch  ;  and  therefore  all  are  set  under  the  head  to  labour, 
but  it  is   set  above  to   exercise  forethought;  because  in  a 
certain  manner  the  head  bears  the  person  of  the  soul  itself, 
which  exercises  forethought  for  the  body ;  for  in   it  every 
sense  is  seen  :  thus  unto  the  universal  people  of  the  Saints  as 
unto  one  body  the  Head  is  tlie  Mediator  between  God  andi  Tim. 
men^  ike  Man  Christ  Jesus.     And  therefore  the  Wisdom  of  '   * 
God,  and   the   Word   in  the  beginning  through   Whom  all 
things  were  made,  did  not  so  take  unto  Himself  that  Man  as 
the  rest  of  the  Saints :  but  in  a  way  much  more  excellent, 
and   much  more  sublime ;  in  the  way  in  which  it  behoved 
that  It  alone  should  be  assumed,  that  therein  Wisdom  should 
appear  unto  men,  as  it  was  fitting  that  It  should  be  visibly 
shewn  forth.     Wherefore  in  one  sense  are  they  wise,  the  rest 
of  men  whosoever  are  so,  or  have  been,  or  shall  be,  enabled 
to  be  so ;  and  in  another  sense  The  One  Mediator  between 
God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  Who  of  That  very 
Wisdom,  through  Which  are  made  wise  whosoever  of  men 
are  made  so,  not  onlv  hath  the  benefit  done  unto  Him,  but 


176  Flesh  of  Christ  real,  and  really  assumed. 

DE  also  beareth  the  Person.  For  of  the  rest  of  wise  and  spiritual 
cHRi's^-  ^°^^^^  ^*  ^^^y  I'ightly  be  said,  that  they  have  in  them  the  Word 
TiANo.  of  God  through  Whom  all  things  were  made:  but  in  none 


of  them  can  it  rightly  be  said,  that  tlie  Word  was  made  flesh, 
and  dwelt  among  us;  which  is  rightly  said   in    our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  alone. 
xxi.        23.  Nor   let  us  listen   to    them  who  say    that    a   human 
body  alone  was  taken  unto  Himself  by  the  Word  of  God, 
and  so  understand  what  is  said,  And  the  Word  was  made 
Jlesh,  as   to   deny  that  that  Man   possessed   either  soul   or 
any  thing  of  man,  except  the   flesh   alone.     For  they  err 
greatly,   and    understand  not  that  therefore   was   the    flesh 
alone  named  in  that  which  was  said,  The  Word  was  made 
Jlesh,   because  unto  the  eyes  of  men,  for  whose  sake  that 
taking  unto  Himself  had  place,  the  flesh  alone  could  appear. 
For  if  it  is  absurd  and  highly  unworthy,  that  that  man  should 
have  possessed  not  a  human  spirit,  as  we  have  treated  of 
above  ;   how  much  more  absurd  and  unworthy  is  it  that  It 
should  have  possessed  neither  spirit  nor  soul,  and  possessed 
that  only  which  even  in  cattle  is  the  viler  and  the  remoter 
part,  that  is,  the  body  ?    From  our  faith  therefore  let  that 
ungodly  doctrine  also  be  excluded,  and  let  us  believe  that 
whole  and  perfect  Man  was  taken  unto  Flimself  by  the  Word 
of  God. 
xxii.       24.  Nor  let  us  hsten  to  them  who  say  that  our  Lord  had 
such  a   body  as   appeared    in    the   Dove,   which   John    the 
Baptist  saw  descending  from  heaven  and  abiding  upon  Him 
in  sign  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     For  thus  they  essay  to  persuade 
that  the  Son  of  God  was  not  born  of  a  woman  ;  '  Because  if 
it  behoved  that  He  should  be  shewn  unto  carnal  eyes.  He 
could,  they  say,  thus  assume  a  body,  in  like  manner  as  the 
Holy  Ghost.'      For  neither  was  that  Dove,  say  they,  born  of 
John  1,  an  egg ;  and  yet  It  could  appear  to  human  eyes.    To  whom 
this  first  is  to  be  made  answer,  that  we  read  that  the  Holy 
ig^  ■  '  Ghost  appeared  unto  John  in   the  form   of  a  Dove,  there. 
Matt.  1,  where  we  read  that  Christ  was  born  of  a  woman;    and  it 
18—25.  behoveth  not  in  part  to  believe  the  Gospel,  and  in  part  not 
to  believe  it.     For  whence  believestthou  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  shewn  in  the  form  of  a  Dove,  save  because  thou  hast 
read  it  in  the  Gospel }    Wherefore  I  also  thence  believe  that 


The  Dove  a  true  body,  hut  not  assumed  as  Our  Lord's.   177 

Christ  was  born  of  a  Virgin,  because  I  have  read  it  in  the     dr 
Gospel.     But  wherefore  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  born  of  a  chris- 
dove',  in  such  manner  as  Christ  was  born  of  a  woman,  the  ^^^^'o- 
reason  is  this,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  came  not  to  set  free  y^a"^*^™* 
doves^,  but  to  signify  unto  men  innocent  and  spiritual  love,2coium- 
which  was  visibly  figured  in  the  form  of  a  Dove.     But  the  ^°^- 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  Who  came  to  set  free  men,  in  the  number 
of  whom  both  males    and   females  pertain   unto   salvation, 
disdained  neither  males,  in  that  He  took  on  Hira  the  male ; 
nor  females,  in  that  He  was  born  of  a  female.     Unto  this  is 
added  a  great  mystery,  that,  since  through  a  female  death 
had  happened  unto  us,  life  unto  us  through  a  female  should 
be  born :    that  so  of  either  nature,  that  is,  the  female  and 
male,  the   devil  being  overcome  might  be  put  to  torment, 
seeing  that  he  was  rejoicing  in  the  overthrow  of  both;    unto 
whom   it  had   not   been    enough  for    punishment,    if  both 
natures  in  us  were  set  free,  unless  also  through  both  we  were 
set  free.     Nor  this  do  we  so  say,  as  to  say  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  alone  had  a  true  body,  but  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
after   a   deceitful  manner  appeared  unto  the  eyes  of  men  : 
but  both  those  bodies  we  believe  to  have  been  real  bodies. 
For  as  it  behoved  not  that  the  Son  of  God  should  deceive 
men,  so  it   was   not   seemly  that  the   Holy  Ghost   should 
deceive  men  ;    but  to  Almighty  God,  Who  framed   out  of 
nothing  the  whole  creation,  it  was  not  hard  to  form  the  true 
body  of  a  Dove  without  the  help  of  other  Doves,  as  to  Hira 
it  was  not  hard  to  frame  a  true  body  in  the  womb  of  Mary 
without   the  seed  of  a  man;    whereas  bodily  nature^  was'al.crea- 
servant  of  the  power  and  will  of  God,  both  in  the  bowels  of  ^^^' 
the  female  in  order  to  form  the  Man,  and  in  the  world  itself 
in  order  to  form  the  Dove.     But  men,  fools  and  wretched, 
what  either  themselves  are  not  able  to  do,  or  what  in  their 
own  lives  they  have  never  seen,  that  even  by  Almighty  God 
they  believe  not  could  have  been  done. 

25.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them,  who  therefore  would  compel  us  xxiii. 
to  number  the  Son  of  God  among  creatures,  because  He 
suffered.  For  they  say:  If  He  suffered.  He  is  subject  to 
change;  and  if  He  is  subject  to  change,  He  is  a  creature, 
because  the  Substance  of  God  cannot  be  changed.  With 
whom  we  also  say,  both  that  the  Substance  of  God  cannot  be 

N 


178      Body  of  Christ  real,  though  its  acts  miraculous. 

DE      changed,  and  that  a  creature  is  subject  to  change.     But  it  is 

CHRIS-  *^"6  thing  to  be  a  creature,  and  another  thing  to  take  unto 

^^^^o-  Himself  a  creature.     Therefore   the  Only-Begotten  Son  of 

God,  Who  is  the  Power  and  Wisdom  of  God,  and  the  Word 

through  Whom  all  things  were  made,  because  He  is  altogether 

incapable  of  change,  took  upon  Himself  the  created  nature  of 

' '  hu-    man',  which  He  deigned  to  set  up  now  that  it  was  fallen,  to 

creafu-  I'euew  now  that  it  was  grown  old.     Nor  in  it  through  His 

ram.'     passion  was  He  changed  for  the  worse,  but  it  rather  through 

His  resuiTection  He  changed  for  the  better.     Nor  on  that 

account  must  we  deny  that  the  Word  of  the  Father,  that  is, 

the  Only  Son  of  God,  through  Whom  all  things  were  made, 

was  born  and  suffered  for  us.     For  of  Martyrs  also  we  say, 

that  they  have  suifered  and  died  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's 

sake;  and  yet  neither  in  that  their  passion  and  death  were  their 

Mat.  10,  souls  slain.     For  the  Lord  says.  Fear  not  them  which  kill 

1^*         the  body,  hut  can  do  nothiny  to  the  soul.     As  therefore  we 

4.         'say  that  the  Martyrs  suffered  and  died  in  those  bodies  which 

they  bore  about  with  them,  without  any  slaughter  or  death  of 

the  souls:  so  we  say  that  the  Son  of  God  suffered  and  died 

2 lit.       in  that  Manhood^  which  He  bore,  without  any  change  or 

'  ^^°-'  death  of  His  Divine  Nature. 

xxiv.       26.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them  who  deny  that  there  ai'ose 

such  a  body  of  our  Lord,  as  was  laid  in  the  sepulchre.     For 

had  it  not  been  such.  He  would  not  Himself  have  said  to  the 

Luke24,  disciples  after  His  resurrection,  Handle,  and  see,  for  a  spirit 

hatJi  not  hones  and  Jiesh,  as  ye  see  Me  have.     For  it  is  a 

sacrilegious  act,  to  believe  that  our  Lord,  being  Himself  the 

Truth,  hath  in  any  thing  lied.     Nor  let  it  move  us,  that  it  is 

John20,  written,  that  when  the  doors  were   shut  on  a  sudden  He 

appeared  unto  His  disciples,  that  therefore  we  should  deny 

it  to  have   been  a  human   body,  because  we  see   it  to  be 

contrary  to  the  nature  of  this  body  to  enter  through  closed 

Mat.  19,  doors.     For  all  things  are  possible  unto  God.     For  it  is  clear 

that  the  walking  upon  the  waters    also  is   contrary  to  the 

nature-of  this  body;  and  yet  not  only  did  the  Lord  Himself 

Mat.  14,  before  His  passion  walk,  but  also  He  caused  Peter  to  walk. 

2a.  29.    -pi-jjjg  therefore  after  His  resurrection  also  He  made  of  His 

own  body  what  He  would.     For  if  He  was  able  before  His 

Mat,  17  passion  to  make  His  body  to  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the 


He  alone,  Who  descencled,ascended  to  God''s  Right  Hand.  179 

sun ;  wherefore  could  He  not  also  after  His  passion   in  an     de 
instant  of  time  reduce  it  unto  how  subtile  a  nature  He  would,  chris- 
so  as  to  be  able  to  enter  through  closed  doors ?  tik-kq. 

27.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them,  who  deny  that  our  Lord  xxv. 
raised  His  very  body  with  Him  up  into  heaven,  and  repeat 
what  is  written  in  the  Gospel,  No  one  hath  ascended  into  ^^hn  3, 
heaven,  save  He    Who  came  down  from  heaven;  and  say, 
because  His  body  descended  not  from  heaven,  that  it  could 

not  ascend  into  heaven.  For  they  understand  not,  how  that 
the  body  ascended  not  into  heaven:  for  the  Lord  ascended, 
but  the  body  ascended  not,  but  was  raised  up  into  heaven, 
He  raising  it  up  Who  Himself  ascended.  For  if  one  descend, 
for  example,  from  a  mountain  naked,  but  after  having 
descended  clothe  one's  self,  and  being  clothed  again  ascend, 
surely  we  say  rightly,  No  one  ascended,  save  he  who 
descended,  nor  do  we  regard  the  clothes  which  he  took 
up  with  him,  but  say  that  he  who  was  clothed  alone 
ascended. 

28.  Nor  let  us  listen   to  them,  who  deny  that  the  Son  xxvi. 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Fother.     For  they  say,  *  What, 
hath  God  the  Father  a  inght  or  left  side,  in  like  manner  as 
bodies  have?'     '  Neither  do  we   conceive  thus  of  God  the 
Father:  for  by  no  form  of  body  is  God  inclosed  and  shut  in. 

But  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  is  everlasting  blessedness, 

which  is  promised  to  the  Saints;  as  that  is  most  rightly  called 

His  left  hand,  everlasting  misery,  which  is  assigned  to  the 

ungodly  :  so  that  not  in  God  Himself,  but  in  His  creatures, 

in  this  way  whereof  I  have  spoken  is  understood  the  right 

hand  and  the  left  hand.     Because  also  the  body  of  Christ, 

which  is  the  Church,  will  be  hereafter  at  the  very  right  hand, 

that  is,  in  very  blessedness,  as  the  Apostle  says,  that  He  hath 

both  raised  us  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly 

places.'     For  although  our  ])ody  be  not  yet  there,  yet  is  our 

hope  there  ah-eady.  Wherefore  also  the  Lord  Himself  after  His 

resurrection  bade  His  disciples,  whom  He  found  fishing,  to 

cast  their  nets  on  the  right  side.     Wliich,  when  they  had 

done,  they  caught  fishes,  and  these  all  were  great,  that  is,  Jo^n2i, 

fill 

signified  the  just,  unto  whom  the  right  hand  is  promised.   ~ 
And  this  is  also  signified,  in  that  He  said  that  in  the  Judg-Mat.25 

N  2  33. 


180  No  Scripture  really  denies  the  Judgment. 

»E     ment  He  will  set  the  sheep  on  His  right  hand,  and  the  goats 
CHRIS-  O'^  His  left  hand. 

^^^^°-       29.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them,  who  deny  that  there  will  be 
xxvn.  ^  jgy  Qf  Judgment,  and  repeat  what  is  written  in  the  Gospel, 
John  3,  that  he  '  who  believeth  in  Christ,  is  not  Judged;  but  whoso 
believeth  not  in  Him  hath  been  already  judged.''     For  they 
say.  If  both  he  who  believeth  shall  not  come  into  judgment, 
and  he  who  believeth  not  hath  been  already  judged;  where 
are  they  whom  He  will  hereafter  judge  in  the  Day  of  Judg- 
ment ?     They  understand  not  that  the  Scriptures  so  speak, 
1 '  insi-  as  that  they  represent'  a  past  time  for  a  future;  as  we  said 
Eph'2    ^^ove,  what  the  Apostle  spake  concerning  us,  that  He  made 
6.  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places,  is  not  yet  brought  to  pass, 

but,  because  it  will  most  surely  be  hereafter,  it  is  so  spoken, 
as  if  it  were  already  brought  to  pass.     In   such   manner  as 
John  15,  the  Lord  also  Himself  said  to  the  disciples.  All  things  which 
/  have  heard  of  3Ty  Father,  I  have  made  known  unto  you: 
Johnie  and  a  little  after  He  says,  I  have  many  things  to  say  unto  you, 
12«        hut  ye  cannot  hear  them  yet.     How  then  had  He  said.  All 
things  which  1  have  heard  of  My  Father,  I  have  made  known 
unto  you,  save  that  because  of  that,  which  through  the  Holy 
Ghost  He  was  most  surely  about  to  do,  He  spake,  as  if  He 
had  already  done  it  ?     In  like  sort  therefore  when  we  hear, 
'  He  that  believeth  in  Christ  shall  not  come  into  judgment;' 
let  us  understand,  shall  not  come  into  condemnation.     For 
judgment  is   put   for  condemnation,   as    the   Apostle   says, 
Rom.i4,  Whoso  eateth  not,  let  him  not  judge  him  that  eateth:  that  is, 
Matt  7  ^^*  ^^^^^  ""'  think  evil  of  him:  and  the  Lord  sdiiih.  Judge  not, 
1.  that  ye  he  not  judged.     For  He  taketh  not  away  from  us  the 

understanding  of  judging,  whereas  also  the  Prophet  saith, 
Ts.58,\.  If  of  a  truth  ye  love  righteousness,  judge  things  which  he 
John  7,  rigid,  ye  sons  of  men.    And  the  Lord  Himself  saith.  Judge 
2^-        not  according  to  the  appearance,  hut  judge  righteous  judg- 
ment.    But  in  that  place  where  He  forbids  us  to  judge.  He 
gives  us  this  admonition,  that  we  condemn   not   any  one, 
either  whose  thoughts  are  not  laid  open  to  us,  or  of  whom 
we  know  not  what  kind  of  person  he  may  be  about  hereafter 
to  be.     Thus  therefore  when  He  said,  '  shall  not  come  into 
judgment;'  He  said  this,  that  he  shall  not  come  into  con- 


When  the  Holy  Ghost  came.  The  Church  noiin  Africa  only.181 

deinuation.       But    whoso   helieveth   not  hath   been  judged    de 
already ;  this  He  said,  that  he  hath  been  ah'eady  condemned  chris- 
by  the  foreknowledge  of  God,  Who  knoweth  what  hangeth  tiano. 
over  them  that  believe  not. 

30.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them,  who  say  that  the  Holy  Ghost, xxviii. 
Whom  in  the  Gospel  the  Lord  promised  to  the  disciples, 
came  either  in  Paul  the  Apostle,  or  in  Montanus  and  Priscilla, 

as  the  Cataphryges  say,  or  in  some,  I  know  not  who,  Manes 
or  Manichaeus,  as  the  Manichoeans  say.  For  so  blind  are 
these,  that  they  understand  not  clear  Scriptures;  or  so  careless 
of  their  own  salvation,  that  they  altogether  read  them  not. 
For  who,  when  he  hath  read,  but  must  understand  even  in 
the  Gospel  that  which  after  the  Lord's  resurrection  was 
written,  the  Lord  saying,  /  send  the  promise  of  My  Father 'LM\e2A , 
upon  you;  but  do  ye  remain  here  in  the  city,  until  ye  be 
endued  with  power  from  on  high  ?  And  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  after  that  the  Lord  departed  from  the  eyes  of  the 
disciples  into  heaven,  after  ten  days  were  past,  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  they  mark  not  that  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  most  open 
manner  came:  and  when  the  disciples  were  in  the  city,  as 
He  had  before  admonished  them,  filled  them,  so  that  they 
spake  with  tongues.  For  different  nations,  which  were  then  Acts  2, 
there,  understood,  each  hearer  his  own  tongue.  But  those 
men  deceive  such,  as  neglecting  the  Catholic  Faith,  and 
that  their  very  Faith  which  is  in  the  Scriptures  most  clearly 
set  forth,  are  unwilling  to  learn,  and,  (what  is  worthy  ofiorinthe 
heavier  and  great  sorrow,)  living  heedlessly  in  the  Catholic  •|,';f  0"^' 
(Church')  lend  a  heedful  ear  to  heretics.  the  Cu- 

31.  Nor  let  us  listen  to  them,  who  deny  that  the  Holy  (^faith.) 
Church,  which  alone  is  Catholic,  is  scattered  throughout  the  xxix. 
world,  and  judge  that  it  prevails  in  Africa  alone,  that  is,  in 

the  portion-  of  Donatus.  So  deaf  are  they  against  the  words ^  parte, 
of  the  Prophet,  3Ty  Son  art  Thou,  I  this  day  have  begotten  ^^'  ' 
Thee :  Demand  of3Ie,  and  Iivill  give  unto  Thee  the  nations  for 
Thine  inheritance,  and  for  Thy  possession  the  bounds  of  the 
earth.  And  many  other  things,  in  the  books  whether  of  the 
Old  or  of  the  New  Testament,  which  were  written  in  order  most 
openly  to  set  forth  that  the  Church  of  Christ  hath  been  spread 
abroad  throughout  the  whole  world.  Which  thing  when  we 
object  to    them,  they  say   that   all   those    things  had    been 


182     Those  who  uUfully  divide  perish  by  the  '  sword.'' 

DE     already  fulfilled  before  the  portion'  of  Donatus  existed,  but 
cHufs^  afterwards   they  contend   that  the   whole  Church  perished, 
TTANO.  and  that  in  the  portion  of  Donatus  did  remains  of  it  continue. 
1  pars,    o  tongue  proud  and  impious!  no  not  even  if  they  truly  so 
lived,  as  even  among  themselves  afterward  to  maintain  peace  ! 
But  now  they  mark  not  that  already  in  Donatus  himself  hath 
Matt.7,that  been  fulfilled  which  was  said,  In  whatsoever  measure  ye 
shall  have  measured^  in  that  shall  it  be  measured  unto  you 
again.     For  in  like  manner  as  he  strove  to  divide  Christ,  so 
is  he  by  his  own  followers  daily  cut  in  sunder  and  divided. 
Mat.26,  To  this  pertains  also  that  saying  of  the  Lord,  For  whosoever 
shall  strike  with  the  sivord,  by  the  sword  shall  he  die.     For 
the  sword  in  that  place,  seeing  that  it  is  put  in  an  evil  sense, 
signifies  a  tongue  which  causeth  discord,  wherewith  at  that 
time  the  wretched  man  struck  the  Church,  but  slew  it  not. 
For  the  Lord  said  not,  Whosoever  shall  slay  with  the  sword, 
by  the  sword  shall  he  die;  but.  Whosoever  shall  use   the 
sword,  saith   He,  by  the    sword  shall  die.     Wherefore   he 
struck  the  Church  with  a  tongue  full  of  strife,  whereby  now 
himself  is  cut  in  pieces,  that  he  may  altogether  perish  and 
die.     And  yet  at  that  time  the  Apostle  Peter  had  thus  acted, 
not  through   any  pride  of  his  own,  but  through   affection, 
although    carnal,  for   his   Lord.     Therefore   he,   being  ad- 
monished, put  again  his  sword  into  its  sheath;  but  the  other 
did  not  so,  no  not  when  vanquished.     Forasmuch  as,  when 
he  pleaded  his  cause  with   the  Bishop  Caecilianus,  in  the 
hearing    of  the  Bishops    at   Rome,  whom  he  himself  had 
sought,    he    was    unable    to     prove    any    of    the     charges 
which  he  had  brought;  and  so  he  remained  in  schism,  that 
by  his  own  sword  he  might  die.     But  his  own  people,  in  that 
they  hear  not  the  Prophets  and  the  Gospel,  wherein  it  is 
most  openly  written  that   the  Church    of  Christ  is   spread 
abroad  throughout  all  nations  ;  and  hear  schismatics,  who 
seek  not  the  glory  of  God,  but  their  own;    give  sufficient 
signs  that  they  are  a  servant,  not  a  free  man,  and  that  they 
have  the  right  ear  cut  off.  For  Peter,  erring  in  affection  for  the 
Lord,  cut  off  the  right  ear  of  the  servant,  not  of  the  free  man. 
Whence  it  signifies,  that  they,  who  are  cut  off  by  the  sword 
of  schism,  both  are  the  servants  of  the  desires  of  the  flesh, 
not  yet  led  forth  into  the  liberty  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  so 


Dotmiisls  slaves  and  ill  hearers.     Pride  of  Lucifer ians.  183 

they  may  now  not  trust  in  man';  and  hear  not  what  is  on  the     de 
rights  that  is,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  throngh  the  Catholic  ^h?.ts^- 
Church  most  widely   caused  to  traverse,  but  hear  the  left  tiano. 
hand  error  of  human  inflation.     But  yet  when  the  Lord  says  \*^^  ^' 

■J  J     Aug.  on 

in  the  Gospel,  that,  when  the  Gospel  shall  have  been  preached  Ps.  lo. 
throughout  all  nations,  then  shall  the  end  be;  in  what  manner  trum." 
do  they  assert  that  already  the  rest  of  the  nations  have  fallen 
from  the  faith,  and  that  in  the  jjortion  of  Donatus  alone  the  . 
Churcli  hath  continued,  seeing  that  it  is  manifest,  that,  since 
the  time  that  that  part  was  cut  off  from  unity,  certain  nations 
have  afterwards  believed,  and  that  there  are  yet  some  who 
have  not  yet  believed,  unto  whom  daily  the  Gospel  ceases 
not  to  be  preached  ?     Who  but  must  wonder  that  there  is 
any  one,  who  would  have  himself  called  a  Christian,  and  yet 
be  carried  away  by  so   great  impiety  against  the  glory  of 
Christ,  as   to  dare    to    assert   that  all   the    peoples    of  the 
nations,  who  only  now  are  approaching  unto  the  Church 
of  God,  and  are  hasting  to  believe  in  the  Son  of  God,  do  so 
to  no  purpose,  because  some  Donatist  baptizes  them  not  ? 
Without  doubt  men  would  execrate  these  things,  and  leave 
them    without  delay,  if  only  they    were    seeking  Christ,  if 
they  loved  the  Church,  if  they  were  free,  if  they  had  the  right 
ear  sound. 

32.  Neither  let  us  hear  them,  who,  although  they  rebaptizc  xxx. 
no  one,  have  yet  cut  themselves  off  from  unity,  and  have 
preferred  to  be  called  Luciferians  rather  than  Catholics. 
For  in  that  they  understand  that  the  Ba])tism  of  Christ  is  not 
to  be  repeated,  they  do  right.  For  they  perceive  that  the 
Sacrament  of  the  holy  Laver  is  no  where,  save  of  the  Catholic 
Church  ;  but  that  the  branches  when  cut  off  have  with  them 
that  form,  which  in  the  very  vine,  before  they  were  cut  off, 
they  had  received.  For  these  are  they  of  whom  the  Apostle 
says,  Having  i he  form  of  (/odliness,  but  denying  the  pouer  2  Tim. 
thereof.  For  it  is  a  great  power  of  godliness,  peace,  and  3,  5- 
unity ;  because  God  is  One.  This  these  have  not,  because 
they  are  cut  off  from  unity.  Wherefore  if  any  of  them  come 
into  the  Catholic  Church,  they  repeat  not  the  form  of  godli- 
ness which  they  have,  but  they  receive  the  power  of  godli- 
ness which  they  have  not.  For  that  even  branches  which 
have  been  cut  ofi'  may  be  graffed  in  afresh,  if  they  shall  not 


184       Keys  given  to  a  Penitent  to  he  used  mercifully. 

DE     continue  in  unbelief,  the  Apostle  most  openly  teaches.     Now 

CHRIS-  whereas  the  Lucifeiians  undevstand  this  and  rebaptize  not, 

TiAxo.  y^Q  blame  them  not :  but  that  they  have  willed  themselves 

?,°'oQ    also  to  be  cut  off  from  the  root,  who  but  must  perceive  it  to 

be  a  thing  to  be  abhorred  r     And  on  this  account  especially, 

because  this  hath  displeased  them  in  the  Church  Catholic, 

which  truly  belongeth  unto  Catholic  holiness.     For  no  where 

ought  the  bowels  of  mercy  to  be  so  strong  as  in  the  Catholic 

Church,  that,  as  a  true  mother,  she  neither  proudly  trample 

on   her  sons  when   in  sin,   nor    hardly  pardon   them   upon 

amendment.     For  not  without  cause  among  all  the  Apostles 

doth  Peter  sustain  the  person  of  this  Church  Catholic ;  for 

Mat.  16,  unto  this  Church  were  the  keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven 

given,  when  they  were  given  unto  Peter:  and   when  it  is 

John2i,said  unto  him,  it  is  said  unto  all,  Lovest  thou  Me?    Feed 

^^'        My  sheep.     Therefore  the  Church  Catholic  ought  willingly 

to  pardon  her  sons,  upon  their  amendment,  and  confirmation 

Mat.i4,j^  trodhness;  when  we  see  that  Peter  himself,  bearing  her 


30, 


D 


person,  both  when  he  had  tottered  on  the  sea,  and  when 
with  carnal  feeling  he  had  sought  to  call  back  the  Lord  from 
suffering,  and  when  he  had  cut  off  the  ear  of  the  servant 
with  the  sword,  and  when  he  had  thrice  denied  the  Lord 
Himself,  and  when  afterwards  he  had  fallen  into  superstitious 
dissembling,  had  pardon  granted  unto  him,  and  after  amend- 
ment and  strengthening  attained  at  last  unto  the  glory  of  the 
Jjord's  suffering.  Therefore  after  the  persecution  which  was 
brought  about  by  means  of  the  Arian  heretics,  after  that 
peace,  which  truly  the  Church  Catholic  holds  in  the  Lord, 
was  by  the  rules  also  of  this  world  restored,  the  Bishops  who 
in  that  persecution  had  consented  to  the  faithlessness  of  the 
Arians,  many  of  them  were  amended  and  chose  to  return  into 
the  Catholic  Church,  condemning-  that  which  they  had  either 
believed  or  feigned  to  believe.  These  the  Church  Catholic 
received  in  her  maternal  bosom,  like  Peter  after  his  tears 
for  his  denial,  when  admonished  by  the  crowing  of  the  cock, 
or  as  the  same,  after  his  evil  dissembling,  amended  by  the 
voice  of  Paul.  This,  their  mother's  charity,  they  proudly 
taking,  and  impiously  blaming,  because  they  have  not 
Mat.26,  welcomed  Peter  rising  after  the  cock-crowing,  have  deserved 
js.H     to  fall  with  Lucifer,  who  arose  in  the  morning. 

]2. 


All  sin  remissible^  Widows  may  marry.  True  Resurrecl ion. 185 

33.  Nor  let  us  hear  them,  who  deny  that  the  Church  of     de 
God  can  remit  all  sins.     Therefore  they  wretched,  not  under-  chris- 
standing  in  Peter  the  Rock,  and  being  unwilling  to  believe  tiano. 
that   unto    the   Church   have  been   given   the    keys    of  the  xxxi. 
Kingdom  of  Heaven,  have  themselves  lost  them  out  of  their 
hands.     These  are  they  who  condemn  as  adulteresses  their 
widows,  if  they  marry  again,  and  proclaim  that  they  are  more 
pure  above  the  teaching  of  the    Apostles.     Who,   if  they  i  Tim. 
would    recognise    their   own   name,  would    call    themselves  ' 
worldly'  rather  than  pure^.     For  in  that  they  are  unwilhng, " mun- 
if  they  have  smned,  to  receive  correction,  they  have  chosen-'  mun- 
nothincT  else  than  to  be  condemned  with  this  world.     For*^o'*-' 
them,  to  whom  they  deny    forgiveness   of  their  sins,  they 
guard  not  with  any  healthful  discipline,  but  being  sick  they 
withdraw  from  them  their  medicine,  and  compel  their  widows 

to  burn,  as  not  allowing  them  to  marry.     For  they  are  not  to 

be  esteemed  more  prudent  than  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  had  ^  Cor.  7, 

rather  that  they  should  marry  than  burn. 

34.  Nor  let  us  hear  them,  who  deny  that  there  will  be  axxxii. 
resurrection  of  the  flesh,  and  make  mention  of  that  which 

the  Apostle  Paul  says.  Flesh  and  blood  shall  not  inherit  the  \^°^q^ 
Kingdom    of  God;    not   understanding    what    the    Apostle 53.' 
himself  says.  This  corruptible  must  put  on  i,)icorruption,  and 
this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality.     For  when  this  shall 
have  taken  place,  it  will  no  longer  be  flesh  and  blood,  but  an 
heavenly  body^     Which  the  Lord  also  promises,  when  He^seeEe- 
says,  They  shall  neither  be  given  in  marriage,  nor  '>narry^J^^f-^' 
u-ives,  but  shall  be  equal  to  the  Angels  of  God.     For  not  Mat.22, 

■  30. 

any  longer  unto  men,  but  unto  God  shall  they  live,  when 
they  shall  have  been  made  equal  unto  the  Angels.  Therefore 
flesh  and  blood  shall  be  changed,  and  shall  be  made  a 
heavenly  and  angelic  body.  For  the  dead  also  shall  rise 
again  uncorrupted,  and  we  shall  be  changed;  that  both  the 
one  may  be  true,  that  the  flesh  shall  rise  again  ;  and  the 
other  be  true,  that  flesh  and  blood  shall  not  inherit  the 
Kingdom  of  God. 

35.  With  this  simple  and  pure  fliith  fed  as  with  milk  be  xxxiii. 
we  nourished  in  Christ;  and,  being  little  ones,  seek  we  not 

the  food  of  elders,  but  with  most  wholesome  nourishments 
grow  we  in  Christ,  a  good  life  and  Christian  righteousness 


186       Perfect  love  conquers  earthly  desires  and  fears. 

DE     being  added,  wherein  is  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbour 
cHRis^-  perfected  and  confinned :  that  each  one  of  us  may  triumph  in 
TiANo.  himself  over  our  enemy  the  devil  and  his  angels,  in  Christ 
Whom  he  hath  put  on.     Because  perfect  love  hath  neither 
the  desire  of  this  world  nor  the  fear  of  this  world ;  that  is, 
neither  desire,  that  it  may  obtain  things  temporal,  nor  fear, 
lest  it  lose  things  temporal.     By  which  two  doors  the  enemy 
enters  in  and  reigns,  whom  we  must  drive  forth,  first  by  the 
fear  of  God,  next  by  love.     We  ought  therefore  so  much 
the  more  eagerly  to  seek  a  most  open  and  clear  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  the  more  we  find  ourselves  to  make  progress  in 
love,  and  in  its  simplicity  to  have  our  heart  purified,  for  it  is 
Matt.  5,  with  the  very  inner  eye  that  truth  is  seen  :  for.  Blessed  are  ilie 
Eph.  3,  "pure  in  hearty  for  they  shall  see  God.     That,  being  rooted 
J7.  18.   fi^fi  grounded  in  love,  we  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with 
all  saints  what  is  the  breadth  and  lengtlt  and  height  and 
depth  ;  to  know  also  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  know- 
ledge, that  we  may  be  filled  tmto  all  the  fulness  of  God: 
that,  after  these   contests  with   an  unseen  enemy,  since  to 
Mat.il,them  who  are  willing,  and  love,  the  yoke  of  Christ  is  easy, 
and  his  burthen  light,  we  may  win  a  crown  of  victory. 


S.  AUGUSTINE 


OF 


THE  CATECHIZING  OF  THE  UNLEARNED" 


Retr.  ii.  14.  There  is  also  a  book  of  mine  '  on  the  catechizing  of  the 
unlearned,'  so  entitled.  In  which  book  where  I  have  said,  '  Nor  did 
the  Angel,  who,  with  other  spirits  his  servants,  in  pride  left  the 
obedience  of  God,  and  became  the  devil,  in  any  wise  harm  God,  but 
himself.  For  God  knoweth  how  to  order  souls  that  leave  Him:'  it  were 
more  fitly  said,  '  spirits  that  leave  Him,'  since  angels  were  in  question. 
This  book  begins,  '  You  have  asked  me,  brother  Deogratias.' 

You  have   asked  me,  brother  Deogratias'',  to  write  you     de 
something  which  might  be  of  use   to   you,  on  the  subject  "^^Jj^' 
of  catechising  the  unlearned.     For  you  have  told  me,  that^^Nois 
at  Carthage,  where  you  hold  the  office  of  a  deacon,  persons    bus." 
arc  often  brought  to  you,  to  receive  instruction  in  the  first      i^ 
rudiments   of  the  Christian  Faith,  in  consequence  of  your 
being  judged  to  possess  a  rich  power  of  catechizing,    the 
result  both  of  knowledge  in  the   Faith,  and  of  sweetness 
of  speech  :    but  that  you  yourself  on  almost  every  occasion 
feel  yourself  to  be  in  a  strait,  in  what  manner  profitably  to 
set  forth  that  very  doctrine,  by  the  belief  of  which  we  are 
Christians  ;    at  what  point  to  commence,   and  up  to  what 
point  to  carry  on  the  narration ;  whether  when  the  narration 

»  Written  about  the  year  400,    Ben.     Augustine  writes  about  406,  in  answer 
b  This   Deogratias    is    perhaps    the     to  questions  from  Pagans  sent  to  him 
same    with    the    Priest   to    whom    St,     from  Carthage.    Ep.  cii.  Ben. 


188        The  Catechiser  often  ill  content  tvlth  Jdmself. 

DE     is  ended  we  ought  to  use  any  exhortation,  or  merely  to  add 

^^cnf.'  tliose  precepts,  by  the  future  observance  of  which  he  whom 

zANDis  we  are  addressing  may  understand  that  the  Christian  life  and 

BUS.    profession  is  maintained.     Then  again   you  have  confessed 

'  and  complained  that  it  hath  often  happened  to  you,  that  in 

a  long  and  luke-warra  discourse  you  grew  to  be  worthless 

and  wearisome  to  yourself,  much  more  to  him  whom  you 

were  by  your  speech  endeavouring  to  instruct,  and  to  the 

rest  who  were  present  as  hearers :    and  that  this  necessity 

hath  compelled  you  to  press  upon  me,  by  that  love  which 

I  owe  you,  that  1  refuse  not  among  my  occupations  to  write 

you  something  on  the  present  subject. 

2.  I  for  my  part  am  bound  not  only  by  that  love  and 
service  which  I  owe  to  you  as  my  friend,  but  also  by  that 
which  I  owe  on  all  occasions  to  my  mother  the  Church, 
if  in  any  thing  by  help  of  mine,  which  by  the  bounty  of  our 
Lord  I  am  enabled  to  render,  that  same  Lord  commands  me 
to  assist  those  whom  He  himself  hath  made  my  brethren, 
in  no  way  to  refuse,  but  rather  to  undertake  it  with  a  ready 
and  devoted  will.  For  the  more  widely  I  desire  that  the 
riches  of  our  Lord  may  be  dispensed  abroad,  the  more 
is  it  my  duty,  if  I  perceive  the  stewards  who  are  my  fellow- 
servants  feeling  any  difficulty  in  dispensing  it,  to  do  all 
that  lies  in  me,  that  they  may  be  enabled  to  perform 
easily  and  readily  what  they  desire  strenuously  and 
zealously. 
ii.  3.  But  to  return  to  that  which  respects  your  own  opinion 

of  yourself,  I  would  not  have  you  be  moved  because  that 
frequently  your  discourse  has  appeared  to  you  to  be  mean 
and  wearisome.  For  it  is  possible,  that  it  may  not  have 
appeared  so  to  him  whom  you  were  instructing,  but  that 
because  you  felt  desirous  that  something  better  should  be 
heard,  therefore,  what  you  were  saying  aj^peared  to  you 
unworthy  the  ears  of  others.  For  1  too  am  almost  always 
displeased  with  my  own  discourse.  For  I  am  greedy  of 
something  better,  the  sense  of  which  I  often  enjoy  in  ray 
1  sonan- mind,  before  I  commence  setting  it  forth  in  actual'  words; 
*'*'"'*'  and  then,  when  I  find  that  I  cannot  express  it  adequately 
as  I  know  it,  I  am  grieved  that  my  tongue  hath  not 
availed   to   prove    sufficient    for    my    heart.       For    all    that 


GATE- 
CHI- 


Thoiight,  even  as  seen  in  the  face,  sicifter  than  speech.  189 

I   understand   myself,   I    wish  him    who  hears  me  to   un-     de 
derstand  also,   and  I   perceive  that  I   do  not  so  speak   as 
to    effect   this,    principally    because    conception,    as    by    azANois 
rapid   flash,  spreads  itself  over   the  mind,    but  speech    on    pus. 
the  other  hand  is  slow  and  long  and  far  other,  and  whilst 
it  is  being  put  forth,  the  conception  hath  by  this  time  hid 
itself  in  its  secret  recesses;   yet  inasmuch  as  it  hath  in  a 
wonderful  manner  impressed  certain  traces  of  itself  upon  the 
memory,  those  traces  continue  together  with  the  pauses'  of'morulis 
syllables ;    and  for  these  same  traces  we  form  vocal  signs, 
which  are  called  either  the  Latin,  Greek,  Hebrew,  or  any 
other  language,  whether  their  signs  be  thought  on,  or  whether 
they  be  also  uttered  by  the  voice;  whereas  those  traces  are 
neither  Latin,  nor  Greek,  nor  Hebrew,  nor  peculiar  to  any 
other  nation  whatever,  but  are  so  made  in  the  mind,  as  looks 
in  the  body.     For  anger  has  one  word  to  express  it  in  Latin, 
and  another  in  Greek,  and  is  again  expressed  differently  in 
different  languages.    But  the  look  of  the  angry  man  is  not  Latin 
or  Greek.     Therefore  all  nations  understand  not,  if  any  one 
say,  I  am  angry,  Iratits  sum,  but  the  Latins  only;  but,  if  the 
feeling  of  the  mind  becoming  enraged  go  forth  into  the  face, 
and  produce  a  certain  look,  then  all  who  see  the  angry  man 
understand.     But  neither  is  it  so  in  our  power  to  lead  forth, 
and,  as  it  were,  to  hold  out  to  the  senses  of  the  hearers  by 
the  sound  of  the  voice  those  traces  which  this  conception 
impresses  on  the  memory,  jn  the  same  manner  as  the  look  is 
clear  and   evident;  for  they  are   within    in  the   mind,  this 
w^ithout  in  the  body.     Wherefore  we  must  conjecture  how 
greatly  the  sound  of  our  mouth  differs  from  that  rapid  stroke 
of  conception,  since  it  corresponds  not  even  to  the  impression 
made  in  the  memory.     But  we  for  the  most  part,  greatly 
desiring  to  benefit  our  hearer,  wish  so  to  speak  as  our  con- 
ception then  is,  when  by  reason  of  its  very  intensity  we  are 
unable  to  speak  at  all;   and   because  this  fails  us,  we  are 
pained,  and,  as  though  we  were  labouring  to  no  purpose,  we 
are  wearied   and   pine   away,  and  then  this  very  weariness 
makes  our  discourse  more  languid  and  more  dead,  even  than 
it  was  when  it  of  itself  led  to  weariness. 

4.  But  in  my  own  case,  I  often  perceive  by  the  eagerness 
of  them  who  desire  to  hear  me,  that  my  discourse  is  not  so 


190  Men  speak  best  ofuhat  they  deliyhtin. 

DE     frigid  as  to  myself  it  appears ;  and  that  iny  hearers  derive  from 


GATE 


1  Cor. 
13,  12 


CHI-    it  some  advantage,  I  understand  from  their  taking  pleasure; 

zANDis  g^jjjj  J  ^Q  jjjy  utmost  with  myself  not  to  be  wanting  in  offering 
BUS.  a  service,  in  which  I  see  that  they  take  kindly  what  is  offered. 
And  so  you  also,  from  the  very  fact  that  persons  are  very 
frequently  brought  to  you  to  be  instructed  in  the  Faith,  ought 
to  understand  that  your  discourse  does  not  fail  in  pleasing 
others,  in  the  same  manner  as  it  fails  in  pleasing  yourself; 
nor  ought  you  to  esteem  yourself  unfruitful  because  you  do 
not  explain,  as  you  wish,  those  things  which  you  see,  since  it 
may  be  neither  are  you  able  to  see  as  you  wish.  For  who 
in  this  life  sees,  save  only  as  in  a  riddle  and  in  a  glass  }  Nor 
is  love  itself  so  mighty,  as  that,  having  burst  through  the 
darkness  of  the  flesh,  it  should  penetrate  into  that  eternally 
calm  heaven,  whence  even  the  things  which  pass  away 
draw  whatever  brightness  they  possess.  But  because  good 
men  are  day  by  day  advancing  onward  to  see  day  wherein  is 

1  Cor.    ]^o  cloud  in  the  sky,  no  inroad  of  night,  ivhicli  eye  hath  not 
'  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of 

man:  there  exists  no  greater  reason  why  whilst  we  are 
occupied  in  teaching  the  unlearned,  our  discourse  should 
grow  to  seem  worthless  to  us,  than  this;  that  it  is  pleasing  to 
see  in  an  unwonted  manner,  and  tedious  to  utter  to  others 
in  an  ordinary  way.  And  in  reality  we  are  listened  to  with 
much  greater  pleasure,  when  we  ourselves  are  at  the  same 
time  delighted  with  our  occupation;  for  the  thread  of  our 
discourse  is  affected  by  the  very  joy  which  we  feel,  and 
goes  forth  more  easily  and  more  acceptably.  Wherefore  it 
is  no  difficult  task,  in  respect  of  those  things  which  are 
sought  to  be  taught  as  the  objects  of  Faith,  to  advise,  from 
and  up  to  what  point  they  are  to  be  set  forth,  nor  again  in 
what  way  the  narration  is  to  be  varied ;  so  that  at  one  time 
it  may  be  shorter,  at  another  longer,  and  yet  at  times  full  and 
perfect ;  also  when  it  will  be  suitable  to  use  the  longer  and 
when  the  shorter;  but  by  what  means  it  is  to  be  brought 
about,  that  each  man  may  catechize  with  pleasure  to  him- 
self, (for  the  more  he  shall  be  able  to  effect  this,  the  more 
pleasing  will  he  be  to  others,)  this  is  a  subject  of  very  great 
care.  The  precept  indeed  for  this  is  easily  found.  For  if 
in  carnal  wealth,  how  much  more  in  spiritual  does  God  love 


Narration  of  chief  points  from  the  bee/inning  till  now.   191 

a  cheerful  giver  ?    But  that  this  cheerfulness  may  be  present     de 
at  the  time  when  it  is  needed,  is  the  gift  of  His  pity  Who    chi-' 
hath   given  us  these  precepts.     First  therefore,  as  I  ^^wowzandis 
you  wish  to  be  done,  concerning  the  manner  of  narration,  next,    bus. 
concerning  precept    and  exhortation,  afterward  concerning 
the  obtaining  this  cheerfulness,  we  will  discourse,  so  far  as 
God  shall  put  it  into  our  mind. 

5.  The  Narration  is  full,  when  each  is  at  first  catechized    iii. 
from  that  which  is  written,  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  Gen.  i, 
heaven  and  the  earth,  down   to   the  present  times  of  the 
Church.     It  does  not,  however,  follow  that  we  ought  either, 
if  we  have  learnt  the  whole  Pentateuch,  the  whole  of  the 
books  of  Judges  and  Kings  and  Esdras,  and  the  whole  of  the 
Gospel  and  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  to  repeat  them  by 
memory,  or  by  narrating  in  our  own  words  all  things  which 
are  contained  in  these  volumes,  to  put  them  forth  and  expound 
them.    Which  neither  the  time  allows  of,  nor  does  any  neces- 
sity demand  it  of  us,  but  to  embrace  all  things  summarily 
and  generally,  in  such  a  way  as  to  select  certain  of  a  more 
wonderful  character,  which  are  listened  to  with  more  pleasui'e, 
and  which  were  set  in  the  very  turning  periods  in  such  wise, 
as  that  it  is  not  fitting  to  shew  them,  as  it  were,  wrapped  up, 
and  straightway  to  hurry  them  out  of  sight,  but  by  delaying 
on  them  somewhat  as  it  were  to  open  and  unfold  them,  and 
to  hold  them  forth  as  objects  for  the  minds  of  our  hearers  to 
inspect  and  admire ;  but  for  the  rest,  rapidly  running  them  over 
to  insert  and  weave  them  into  the  narration.     So  both  those 
things,  which  we  wish  to  be  especially  urged  upon  the  attention, 
stand  forth  the  more  from  the  others  being  kept  back,  and  he 
whose  interest  we  are  wishing  by  our  narration  to  excite, 
does  not  come  to  them  with  feelings  of  weariness,  nor  again 
do  we  render  confused  his  memory  whom  by  our  teaching  we 
ought  to  instruct. 

6.  In  all  things  indeed  not  only  ought  we  ourselves  to 
look  to  the  end  of  the  commandment,  which  is  charity  out  iT^m.i, 
of  a  pure  heart,  and  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  unfeigned, 
to  which  to  refer  all  things  which  we  speak,  but  to  this  we 
must  turn  and  thitherward  direct  his  gaze  also  whom  we  are 
instructing  by  our  words.  For  of  a  truth  for  no  other  purpose 
before  the  coming  of  our  Lord  were  all  things  written  which 


192     The  Headjirst,  though  coming  after  other  parts. 
DE     we  read  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  than  that  His  coming  might 


CATE- 
CHI- 


be   urged   upon    onr  attention,  and  the   future   Church  be 
zANDis  pointed  out  beforeliand,  that  is,  the  people  of  God  throughout 
BUS.    all  nations,  which  is  His  body,  having  joined  and  numbered 
with  it  all  the  Saints,  who  even  before  His  coming  lived  in 
this  world,  so  believing  that  He  should  one  day  come,  as  we 
believe  that  He  is  come  already.     For  as  Jacob,  at  the  time 
of  his  birth,  sent  forth  his  hand  first  out  of  the  womb,  by 
which  also  he  was  holding  the  foot  of  his  brother  that  was 
having  birth  before  him,  next  the  head  followed,  and  then  of 
Gen. 26,  necessity  the  rest  of  the  members.     But  yet  the  head  in 
dignity  and  power  precedes  not  only  those  members  which 
followed,  but  even  the  very  hand  wdiich  in  the  time  of  birth 
went  before,  and,  allhough  not  in  lime  of  appearing,  j^et  in 
order   of  nature,  is   first :    so  also  the    Lord  Jesus   Christ, 
although  before  He  appeared  in  the  flesh,  and  in  a  certain 
manner  out  of  the  womb  of  His  mystery  came  forth  before 
the  eyes  of  men,  the  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  Man, 
Kom.  9,  Who  is  over  all  God  blessed  for  ever,  in  the  holy  Patriarchs 
^'  and  Prophets  sent  before  Him  a  certain  portion  of  His  body, 

by  which,  as  by  a  hand,  announcing  His  own  future  birth, 
by  the  bonds  of  the  Law,  as  by  five  fingers,  He  supplanted 
the  people  going  before  Him  in  their  pride,  (in  that  both 
i^jjjjIjJj.' during  five  periods  of  times  His  future  coming  ceased  not  to 
§•  31.     be  the  subject  of  preaching  and  of  prophecy,  and  agreeably  to 
this  he  through  whom  the  Law  was  given  wrote  five  books ; 
Eom.io,  and  proud  men,  being  carnally  minded,  and  seeking  to  esta- 
blish their  own  righteousness,  were  not  filled  with  blessing 
from  Christ's  open  hand,  but  had  that  hand  closed  and  shut, 
and  were  thereby  restrained.     Therefore  their  feet  were  tied, 
Ps.20,8.  and  they  fell,  but  ice  are  risen,  and  stand  upright;)  although, 
therefore,  as  I  have  said,  the  Lord  Christ  sent  before  Him  a 
certain  portion  of  His  body,  in  the  Saints,  who  in  respect  of 
their  time  of  birth  were  before  Him,  yet  is  He  Himself  the 
Col.  1,    Head  of  the  body,  the  Church,  and  all  they  have  been  joined 
together  to  that  same  body,  of  which  He  is  the  Head,  by 
believing  in  Him  Whom  they  foretold.     For  they  were  not 
separated  from  Him  in  that  they  went  before  Him,  but  rather 
fixed  to  Him  in  that  they  obeyed  Him.     For  although  the 
'     hand  may  be  sent  before  by  the  head,  yet  is  its  connection 


God  shews  His  love  to  us  that  tre  may  love  Him.     193 

beneath  the  head.     Wherefore  all  things  which  were  written      dr 
before,  were  written  that  we  might  be  taught  thereby,  and    ^^^_' 
were  figures  of  us,  and  happened  in  their  case  in  a  figure ;  zandis 
and  were  written  for  our  sake,  upon  whom  the  end  of  times    bus. 


hath  come.  Rom. 

7.    But  what    greater   reason    exists    then   of  our    Lord's  ^cor. 

coming,  than  that  God   might  shew  in  us  His  Love,  com- 'o,  ii. 

mending  it  mightily,  in   that   whilst  we  were  yet  enemies ^^^' ^ 

Christ  died  for  us?    And  that  for  this  cause,  seeing  that  loves,  lo. 

is  the  end  of  (he  commandment  and  t  lie  fulfilling  of  the  Z,ai6',  iTim.i, 

that  we  also  may  love  one  another,  and  in  like  manner  aSj^^^ 

He  laid  down  His  life  for  us,  so  we  also  may  lay  down  ouri3,  lo. 

life  for  the  brethren;  and  in  respect  of  God  Himself,  since 3  ig. 

Hejirst  loved  us,  and  spared  not  His  own  only  Son,  but  gave  i  j^jj^ 

Him  up  for  us  all,  that,  even  if  to  love  Him  were  irksome,  4,  10. 

1  1  •  1       •  1  -  TT-    Rom.  8, 

yet  that,  now  at  least,  it  may  not  be  irksome  to  return  His  32. 

love.  For  there  is  no  greater  invitation  to  love,  than  loving 
first,  and  that  soul  is  sterner  than  it  ought,  which,  even  if  it 
were  unwilling  to  bestow  love,  is  also  unwilling  to  repay  it. 
But  if,  even  in  evil  and  sordid  loves,  we  see  that  they  who 
seek  to  be  loved  in  return,  make  nothing  else  their  business 
than  to  shew  and  declare,  by  all  the  proofs  in  their  power, 
how  much  they  themselves  love,  and  endeavour  to  cloak  what 
they  do  with  that  appearance  of  justice,  as  in  some  sort  to 
demand  that  a  return  be  made  them  by  those  souls  which 
they  are  aiming  to  ensnare :  and  themselves  are  the  more 
enkindled,  when  now  they  see  those  minds  also  which  they 
are  aiming  to  affect,  moved  by  the  same  fire :  if,  therefore, 
both  the  soul  which  was  before  torpid,  is  aroused  as  soon  as 
it  hath  perceived  itself  to  be  the  object  of  love,  and  that 
which  was  alreadv  warm,  is  the  more  enkindled  as  it  hath 
learnt  that  its  love  is  returned,  it  is  clear  that  there  exists  no 
greater  cause  either  for  the  beginning  or  for  the  increase  of 
love,  than  when  he  who  as  yet  loves  not  perceives  that  he  is 
beloved,  or  he  who  loves  before,  either  hopes  that  he  may  be, 
or  is  already  assured  that  he  is,  loved  in  return:  and  if  this  is 
the  case  even  in  shameful  loves,  how  much  more  in  friend- 
ship ?  For  what  else  do  we  guard  against  in  that  which 
causes  discontent  in  friendship,  but  this,  that  our  friend 
may  not  judge  that  we  either  do  not  love  him  at  all,  or  lov<? 

o 


194  All  Scripture  points  iv  CItrist,  and  to  His  Law  of  Love. 

DE  him  less  than  he  loves  us  r  If  he  shall  come  to  believe  this, 
^c^Hi^"  ^^  ^'^^'  ^^  more  cold  in  that  love  in  which  men  enjoy  mutual 
zANDis  intimacy  with  one  another;  and  if  he  be  not  so  weak  of 
BUS.'  purpose,  as  that  this  cause  of  discontent  make  him  to  grow 
cold  in  all  manner  of  affeclion,  he  yet  confines  himself  to 
that,  in  which  he  so  loves,  as  to  seek  to  benefit  rather  than 
to  enjoy.  But  it  is  worth  while  to  observe,  how,  (although 
superiors  too  are  willing  to  be  objects  of  affection  to  inferiors, 
and  are  pleased  with  their  zealous  service  paid  to  themselves, 
and  the  more  they  perceive  this,  the  more  do  they  love  them,) 
notwithstanding  with  how  great  love  the  heart  of  the  inferior 
burns,  when  he  perceives  himself  beloved  by  his  superior. 
For  there  is  love  more  pleasing,  where  it  is  not  parched  from 
the  dryness  of  want,  but  flows  forth  from  the  fulness  of  good- 
ness. For  the  one  comes  from  misery,  the  other  from  com- 
miseration. Still  further,  supposing  the  inferior  to  have 
despaired  even  of  the  possibility  of  being  the  object  of  his 
superior's  love,  he  will  be  unspeakably  moved  to  love;  if  that 
superior  shall  have  deigned  of  his  own  accord  to  shew  how 
much  he  loves  him  who  dared  not  in  any  way  to  promise  to 
himself  so  great  a  good.  But  what  is  there  superior  to  God 
as  judging?  what  more  desperate  than  man  as  sinning?  who 
had  so  much  the  more  surrendered  himself  up  to  the 
dominion  and  yoke  of  proud  powers,  which  cannot  bless 
him,  as  he  had  been  led  to  despair  of  the  possibility  of 
his  being  an  object  of  care  to  that  Power,  Which  doth  not 
in  evil  will  aim  to  be  exalted,  but  is  in  goodness  exalted. 

8.  If  therefore  for  this  cause  especially  Christ  came,  that 
man  might  understand  how  greatly  he  is  beloved  of  God; 
and  to  this  end  might  understand  it,  that  he  might  grow 
fervent  in  the  love  of  Him,  by  Whom  he  was  first  loved,  and 
might  love  his  neighbour,  at  His  bidding  and  His  shewing, 
Who  was  made  man's  neighbour,  in  that  He  loved  him  when 
not  his  neighbour,  but  far  off  sojourning ;  and  if  all  divine 
Scripture  which  was  written  before,  was  written  to  proclaim 
beforehand  the  coming  of  the  Lord;  and  whatever  afterwards 
was  committed  to  writing,  and  confirmed  by  divine  authority, 
telleth  of  Christ,  and  admonisheth  of  love  :  it  is  clear  that  on 
these  two  commandments,  of  the  love  of  God,  and  of  our 
Mat.22 ,  neighbour,  hang  not  only  the  whole  Law  and  the  Prophets, 


Love  to  be  drawnforlh  by  love.    Fear,  at  least,  necessary.  195 

which  as  yet,  when  our  Lord  thus  spake,  formed  the  whole  dd 
of  Holy  Scripture,  but  also  whatsoever  portions  of  the  divine  ^cui-' 
volume  have  since  been  written  for  our  health,  and  com-ZANDis 
mitted  to  our  remembrance.  Wherefore  in  the  Old  Testa-  bus." 
ment  there  is  a  veiling  of  the  New,  in  the  New  Testament 
there  is  an  unveiling  of  the  Old.  According  to  that  veiling 
carnal  men  understanding  after  a  carnal  manner,  both  then 
and  now,  have  been  bowed  down  by  a  penal  yoke  of  fear. 
But  according  to  this  revelation  spiritual  men,  both  then  as 
many  as  knocking  piously  had  even  hidden  things  opened  to 
them,  and  now  as  many  as  seek  not  proudly,  lest  even  open 
things  be  closed  to  them,  understanding  after  a  spiritual 
manner,  have  been  made  free  by  that  love  vviih  which  they 
have  been  gifted.  Wherefore  seeing  nothing  is  more  opposed 
to  love  than  envying,  and  that  the  motherof  envying  is  pride, 
that  same  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  God-Man,  is  both  a  token 
of  the  divine  love  towards  us,  and  an  example  of  the  divine 
humility  among  us,  that  thus  our  great  swelling  might  be 
healed  by  a  more  powerful  remedy  counteracting  it.  Great 
misery  indeed  is  it,  proud  man ;  but  greater  commiseration, 
God  humbled!  This  love  therefore  being  taken  by  you 
as  your  proposed  end,  to  which  to  refer  all  things  which 
you  say,  whatever  you  narrate,  do  you  so  narrate  it,  as  that 
he  whom  you  are  addressing  may  by  hearing  believe,  by 
believing  hope,  by  hoping  love, 

9.  On  the  foundation  also  of  the  very  severity  of  God,  by  v. 
which  men's  minds  are  affected  with  most  salutary  fear,  is 
love  to  be  builded  up;  in  order  that,  rejoicing  that  he  is 
beloved  of  Him  W^hom  he  fears,  he  may  dare  to  love  Him  in 
retui'n,  and  even  might  he  do  it  with  impunity,  may  yet 
religiously  fear  to  displease  His  love  towards  himself.  For 
it  very  rarely  happens,  or  rather,  one  should  say,  never,  that 
any  one  comes  with  the  wish  to  be  made  a  Christian,  but 
who  hath  been  stricken  with  some  fear  of  God.  For  if  in 
the  expectation  of  some  good  from  men,  whom  he  judges 
not  that  he  shall  please  by  any  other  means,  or  for  the 
avoidance  of  any  evil  from  men,  whose  displeasure  or  enmitv 
he  dreads,  a  man  wish  to  be  made  a  Christian  ;  it  is  not  to 
be  made  a  Christian  that  he  wishes,  but  to  feign  to  be  one. 
For  Faith  is  a  matter  not  of  the  body  which  does  reverence'-, '  ^^l'^" 


-.  tantis 

o  2 


]£6       How  to  treat  one  who  comes  not  well  disposed. 

CE  but  of  the  mind  which  believes.  Bat  evidently  the  mercy  of 
CATE-  Qq^  jg  often  present  through  the  ministry  of  him  who  cate- 
zANDis  chizes,  so  that,  moved  by  the  discourse,  one  now  wishes 
^Bus^'  t°  ^^  made  that  which  he  had  determined  within  himself  to 
feign  :  when  he  shall  begin  thus  to  wish,  we  may  then  judge 
him  [really]  to  have  come.  And  indeed  it  is  hidden  from 
us,  at  what  time  he  comes  to  us  with  the  mind,  even  when  in 
the  body  he  is  already  present  before  us.  Notwithstanding 
we  ought  so  to  treat  him,  as  to  produce  this  wish  to  him, 
even  aldiough  at  present  it  do  not  exist.  For  nothing  of  this 
sort  is  lost,  seeing  that,  if  the  wish  exist,  it  is  certainly 
strengthened  by  this  act  of  ours,  although  possibly  we  may 
be  ignorant  of  the  exact  time  or  hour  at  which  it  began.  It 
is  indeed  of  use  to  receive  information  beforehand,  if  possible, 
from  those  who  know  him,  of  the  state  of  mind  of  our  hearer, 
and  of  the  causes  which  moved  him  to  embrace  religion. 
But  in  the  case  of  there  being  no  other  person  from  whom 
we  may  learn  this,  then  the  hearer  himself  is  to  be  questioned, 
that  from  his  replies  we  may  draw  the  commencement  of  our 
address.  But  if  he  is  come  with  a  feigned  heart,  desiring 
human  advantages,  or  seeking  to  avoid  human  losses,  in  that 
case  he  will  certainly  speak  what  is  false,  and  yet  from  this 
his  very  falsehood  you  should  take  your  beginning,  not  with  the 
view  of  convicting  his  falsehood,  as  if  that  were  known  to  you, 
but,  supposing  him  to  say  that  he  came  with  such  a  purpose 
as  is  of  itself  truly  praiseworthy,  (whether  he  speak  truly  or 
falsely,)  in  order  that,  by  an  approval  and  praise  of  such  a 
purpose  as  that  with  which  he  states  himself  to  have  come, 
we  may  bring  it  to  pass  that  he  takes  pleasure  in  being  such, 
as  he  is  desirous  of  appearing  to  be.  And  if,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  shall  answer  other  than  what  ought  to  be  present  in 
the  mind  of  one  who  is  about  to  receive  instruction  in  the 
Christian  Faith,  by  gently  and  kindly  reproving  him  as 
though  he  were  unlearned  and  ignorant,  and  again  by  pointing 
out,  and  commending  in  few  and  serious  words,  that  which  is 
the  very  true  end  of  Christian  doctrine,  in  order  neither  to 
occupy  the  time  designed  for  your  coming  discourse,  nor 
again  to  venture  to  impose  it  on  a  mind  not  first  duly  set  to 
receive  it,  you  will  essay  to  make  him  wish  that,  which  through 
error,  or  through  dissinnilation,  he  did  not  as  yet  wish. 


Sacred  hislorij  frum  hegbining  down  to  present  time.    197 

10.  But  if  it  shall  so  happen  tliat  he  shall  answer,  that  he      db 


CATK- 


hath    been    led    to    become    a    Christian    by   some    divine    ^^^, 
admonition    or   alarminur    warniu"-,  he   herein    affords  us  a  zandis 

1-1  V  IIUDI- 

most  welcome  point  at  which  to  commence  our  discourse,  bus. 
on  the  greatness  of  God's  care  for  us.  Certainly  it  will  be  vi. 
for  us  to  turn  his  attention  from  things  of  this  naUire,  be 
they  miracles  or  dreams,  to  the  more  sure  path  and  more 
certain  oracles  of  the  Scriptures,  so  that  he  have  understood, 
before  applying  himself  to  the  study  of  Holy  Scripture,  how 
mercifully  that  very  admonition  also  hath  been  first  granted 
him'.  And  he  must  by  all  means  be  shewn,  how  that  the '  prsero- 
Lord  Himself  would  not  thus  admonish  him,  or  urge  him 
to  become  a  Christian  and  to  be  incorporated  into  the 
Church,  or  teach  him  by  signs  and  revelations  of  this 
nature,  had  He  not  willed  him  to  enter  upon  a  more  secure 
and  sure  path,  a  path,  already  prepared  in  Holy  Scripture, 
wherein  he  should  not  seek  after  visible  miracles,  but 
accustom  himself  to  hope  for  things  invisible,  and  receive 
admonition  not  in  sleep,  but  awake.  From  this  point  we 
must  now  commence  our  discourse,  how  God  in  the  beginning  Gen.  l, 
made  all  things  very  good,  and  continue  it  down,  as  we 
have  stated,  even  to  the  present  times  of  the  Church,  in 
such  sort,  as  that  we  give  the  causes  and  reasons  of  each  of 
the  things  and  events  which  we  relate,  so  as  by  them  to 
refer  them  to  that  end  of  love,  whence  neither  the  eye  of  him 
that  doeth  any  thing  nor  of  him  that  speaketh  is  to  be 
turned  away.  For  if,  in  respect  of  feigned  fables  of  the 
Poets,  and  such  as  are  devised  to  please  minds  which  feed 
on  trifles  of  this  sort,  such  as  are  esteemed  and  called  good 
grammarians  do  notwithstanding  endeav(  ur  to  refer  them  to 
some  use,  although  that  use  be  itself  vain,  and  greedy  of  the 
grossness  of  this  world;  how  much  more  careful  oughi  we  to 
be,  lest  those  very  truths,  which  we  relate,  (there  being  no 
well-ordered  setting-forth  of  their  proper  causes  made,)  be 
believed  with  a  pleasure  which  is  without  fruit,  and,  it  may 
be,  an  eagerness  which  is  fatal.  Not  however  that  we  are  so 
to  append  their  causes,  as  that,  leaving  the  course  of  the 
narration,  we  allow  either  our  heart  or  our  tongue  to  digress 
into  knotty  points  more  difficult  of  discussion  ;  but  so  that 
the  very  truth  of  the  reason  which  we  employ  may  be,  as  it 


1 98  The  learner  to  he  fortified  against  scandals  and  attacks. 

DE  were,  gold  linking  together  a  chain  of  jewels,  and  yet  not 
"cHf-'  disturbing  by  any  excess  of  itself  the  order  and  series  of  the 
zANDis  ornament. 
BUS."  11-  When  the  narration  is  finished,  the  hope  of  the 
yjj  Resurrection  must  next  be  signified,  and  according  to  the 
capacity  and  powers  of  the  hearer,  and  according  to  the 
measure  of  the  time  allowed,  discourse  must  be  had,  in 
opposition  to  the  vain  scoffs  of  unbelievers,  concerning  the 
Resurrection  of  the  body, and  concerning  the  future  Judgment, 
its  goodness  in  respect  of  the  good,  its  severity  in  respect  of 
the  bad,  its  truth  in  respect  of  all;  and  when  the  punishments 
of  the  ungodly  have  been  declared  with  loathing  and  horror, 
then  must  we  preach  with  longing  desire  concerning  the 
kingdom  of  the  just  and  faithful,  and  that  City  which  is 
above,  and  its  joy.  And  this  will  be  the  time  to  fortify  and 
animate  man's  weakness  against  temptations,  and  causes  of 
offence,  whether  from  without,  or  from  within  in  the  Church 
itself:  from  without,  against  Gentiles,  or  Jews,  or  Heretics  : 
from  within,  against  the  chaff  of  the  Lord's  threshing-floor. 
Not  so  as  to  dispute  against  every  particular  class  of  perverse 
men,  or  to  refute  all  the  erroneous  opinions  by  propounding 
definite  subjects  for  arguing,  but  shortly,  according  to  the 
time  allowed,  we  must  shew  that  it  was  so  foretold.  And 
again,  of  what  benefit  temptations  are  in  the  instructing  of 
the  faithful,  and  what  remedy  is  to  be  found  in  the  example 
of  the  patience  of  God,  Who  hath  determined  to  allow  them 
even  to  the  end.  At  the  same  time  also  that  he  is  fortified 
against  those,  of  whom  the  perverse  multitudes  fill  with  their 
persons  the  Churches,  let  there  be  briefly  and  in  due  order 
set  forth  the  commandments  of  a  Christian  and  honest 
conversation,  that  he  suffer  not  men  that  are  drunkards, 
covetous,  deceivers,  gamesters,  adulterers,  fornicators,  lovers 
of  the  public  shows,  who  bind  on  their  bodies  profane 
charms,  enchanters,  astrologers,  or  diviners  using  any  such 
evil  and  vain  arts,  and  all  other  such  like,  thus  easily  to  lead 
him  astray ;  or  allow  himself  to  think  thatit  shall  be  unpunished 
in  himself,  because  he  sees  many  who  are  called  Christians 
loving  these  things,  making  them  their  business,  defending 

'  Of  the  character  of  these  see  Ter-     On  the  grace  of  God.    Tr.  p.  6,  6.    S. 
twllian  De  Spect.  Tr.  p.  187.  S.  C:ypr.     Aug.  Conf.  vi.  §.  7,  8. 


All  to  be  ascribed  to  God.     Of  a  ell-ih formed  learners.   199 

their  use,  and  endeavouring  to  persuade,  and  actually  per-     de 
suading  others.    For  he  is  to  be  fully  instructed  by  proofs  out  '^'^^^' 

o  .,  J    \  CHI- 

of  the  divine  books,  what  is  that  end  appointed  for  them  that  zandis 
persevere  in  such  a  manner  of  life,  and  hovy  they  must  be  bus." 
endured  in  the  very  Church,  out  of  which  they  are  in  the 
end  to  be  separated,  tie  must  be  told  also  beforehand,  that 
he  will  find  in  the  Church  many  good  Christians,  most  true 
citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  if  only  he  himself  shall 
begin  to  be  such.  And  finally,  he  is  to  be  admonished 
diligently,  that  he  place  not  his  hope  in  man :  because 
neither  is  it  easy  for  man  to  judge,  what  man  is  just;  and 
even  were  it  easy  to  be  done,  the  examples  of  just  men  are 
not  therefore  pro]30sed  to  us,  in  order  that  by  them  we  may 
be  justified,  but  that  imitating  them  we  may  understand  that 
we  also  are  justified  by  Him  Who  is  their  Justifier.  For  by 
this  it  will  be  brought  to  pass,  (what  especially  merits 
approval,)  that  when  he  who  hears  us,  or  rather  who  by 
our  mouth  hears  God,  shall  have  begun  to  advance  in 
disposition  and  knowledge,  and  to  enter  upon  the  way  of 
Christ  with  alacrity,  he  will  neither  venture  to  ascribe  it  to 
us,  nor  to  himself;  but  both  himself,  and  us,  and  whomsoever 
else,  being  his  friends,  he  loves,  he  will  love  in  Him  and  for 
His  sake.  Who  loved  him  when  an  enemy,  that  by  justifying 
him  He  might  make  him  a  friend.  And  here  I  conceive  that 
you  have  no  further  need  of  any  one  to  advise  you,  that, 
when  either  your  own  time,  or  that  of  those  who  hear' you,  is 
occupied,  you  treat  briefly ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  speak 
more  fully  when  more  abundant  time  is  allowed  you.  For 
this  the  very  necessity  of  the  case  teaches,  without  your 
having  any  one  to  advise  you. 

12.  But  another  case  I  must  certainly  not  pass  over;  viii. 
supposing  one  to  come  to  you  to  be  catechized,  instructed 
in  all  liberal  knowledge,  who  hath  already  determined  within 
himself  to  be  a  Christian,  and  hath  come  with  the  purpose 
of  being  made  one;  it  can  hardly  be,  but  that  he  hath 
acquainted  himself  with  much  of  our  Scriptures  and  our 
literature,  from  which  having  already  received  instruction, 
he  is  now  come  only  to  be  made  to  share  in  the  Sacraments. 
For  it  is  the  custom  of  such  men,  not  at  the  very  time  at 
which    they    are    made    Christians,    but   before,    to    inquire 


200  Books  lobect  tilt/ disitnguished,  false  impressions  corrected. 

DE     cliligiently  into  all  things,  and  to  communicate  and  discuss 
CHI-    ^^itli  whomsoever  they  can  the  feelings  of  their  own  minds. 

zANDis  Your  mode  of  proceeding  therefore  with  these  must  be  brief, 
nuDi-  .  . 

BUS.    and  that  not  in  the  way  of  tediously  iu"ging  upon  them  what 

they  already  know,  but  modestly  and  lightly  touching  on 
such  points  ;  saying,  that  we  believe  that  they  already  know 
this  and  that  point,  so  as  in  this  way  to  go  through  cursorily 
all  which  require  to  be  urged  upon  the  ignorant  and  un- 
learned ;  so  that,  in  case  the  man  of  education  shall  already 
know  any  thing,  he  may  not  hear  it  as  from  a  teacher;  or, 
in  case  be  be  yet  ignorant,  he  may  learn  it,  whilst  we  are 
recounting  those  things  which  we  already  believe  him  to 
know.  Nor  indeed  is  it  without  its  use  to  inquire  of  such  an 
one,  by  what  circumstances  he  was  moved  to  wish  to  become 
a  Christian,  in  order  that,  if  you  shall  perceive  that  he  was 
moved  thereto  b}-  books,  whether  canonical,  or  written  by 
"Trac- profitable  expounders',  you  may  in  the  first  place  speak 
rum'.'  somewhat  of  these,  commending  them  according  to  the 
different  claims,  of  canonical  authority,  and  of  the  ablest 
diligence  on  the  part  of  those  who  expound  ;  and  in  the 
canonical  Scriptures  especially  commending  that  most  salu- 
tary lowering  down  of  their  admirable  loftiness,  and  in  those 
others,  according  to  the  proper  ability  of  each,  a  style  of 
more  sounding,  and,  as  it  were,  of  moi'e  well-turned  eloquence, 
fitted  for  minds  which  are  prouder  and  therein  weaker.  He 
must  also  draw  from  him  what  author  he  chiefly  read,  and 
with  what  books  he  was  more  intimately  conversant,  which 
wrought  in  him  tlie  wish  of  becoming  a  member  of  the 
Church.  Upon  his  telling  us  this,  then,  if  the  books  are 
known  to  us,  or  if  even  by  the  common  report  of  the  Church 
we  have  understood  that  they  are  the  writings  of  any  one 
well-known  Catholic  man,  let  us  gladly  express  our  approval. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  hath  fallen  upon  the  writings  of 
any  heretic,  and,  in  ignorance,  it  may  be,  hath  laid  hold  in 
his  mind  of  what  the  true  faith  condemns,  and  supposes  it  to 
be  Catholic,  in  that  case  we  nuist  diligently  leach  him, 
setting  above  such  opinions  the  authority  of  the  Universal 
Church,  and  of  other  most  learned  men,  esteemed  highly 
both  as  disputants  and  writers  in  its  truth.  Although  even 
they  who  have  pa«srd  out  of  tins  life  in  the  Catholic  Faith,  and 


Even  Scripture  abused  by  Heretics.    Of  the  holf-educafed.  20 1 
have  left  to  posterity  any  Christian  writings,  in  certain  places     de 


CATE- 


of  their  works,  either  through  not  being  understood,  or  (such    ^^j, 
is  human   infirmity)   unable    with   the  mind's  eye  to  pene-^^^Nois 
trate  into  the  more  hidden  things,  and  erring  from  the  truth    b; 


iUS. 


whilst  following  what  was  like  the  truth,  have  by  the  pre- 
sumptuous and  bold  been  made  occasion  for  projecting  and 
giving  birth  to  some  heresy.  Which  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at,  seeing  that  in  the  very  canonical  Scriptures,  in  which  all 
things  are  spoken  with  perfect  soundness,  not  indeed  through 
understanding  certain  things  in  a  way  other  than  the  writer 
thought,  or  than  the  true  meaning  is,  (for  if  there  were 
nothing  but  this,  who  would  not  willingly  pardon  human 
infirmity  when  willing  to  admit  correction?)  but  by  taking  all 
opportunity  of  upholding  with  sharpest  vehemence  and 
obstinate  conceit  the  opinion  which  they  have  erroneously 
and  ill  conceived,  many  men  have  given  birth  to  many  fatal 
doctrines,  having  cut  asunder  the  unily  of  Communion.  All 
these  things  we  are  to  discuss  in  modest  conference  with 
him  who  seeks  to  enter  the  society  of  the  Christian  People, 
not  as  an  illiterate  man',  so  to  say,  but  with  his  mind  polished  "idiota* 
and  cultivated  by  the  works  of  the  learned,  so  far  assuming 
authority  in  advising  that  he  guard  against  the  errors  of 
vain  confidence,  as  his  humility,  which  led  him  to  us,  is  now 
seen  to  admit  of.  All  other  things  however  according  to  tlie 
rules  of  saving  doctrine,  whether  it  be  concerning  the  Faith, 
whatever  we  have  need  to  state  or  discuss,  or  whether  it  be 
concerning  conduct,  or  concerning  ten:ptations,  going  through 
them  in  the  manner  1  have  said,  we  must  endeavour  to  refer 
to  that  more  excellent  way-.  c^^^ 

13.  There  are  also  certain,  who  come  from  the  ordinary  ix. 
schools  of  grammarians  and  rhetoricians,  whom  you  can 
neither  venture  to  class  among  the  uneducated,  nor,  on  the 
other  hand,  among  the  very  learned  men  just  noticed,  whose 
minds  have  been  exercised  in  questions  of  great  moment. 
When  thereiore  these  men,  who  seem  by  their  art  in  speak- 
ing to  excel  the  rest  of  mankind,  come  for  the  purpose  of 
being  made  Christians,  this  difference  we  ought  to  make  in 
what  we  communicate  to  them  above  what  we  do  to  those 
other  unlearned  men,  in  that  it  is  our  duty  carefully  to 
admonish  them,  that,  being  clothed  with  Christian  humility, 


202     A  little  learning  makes  men  conceited  and  critical. 


DE 
CATE 


they  learn  not  to  despise  them  whom  thev  shall  find  more 

"'ATE"  " 

CHI-    careful   in    avoiding  faults   in  conduct  than    in    language; 

zANDis  and  that  they  venture  not  even  to  compare  with  a  pure  heart, 

BUS.    what   they  have  been  accustomed   even  to   prefer  to   it,  a 

practised  tongue.     But  especially  are  such  to  be  taught  to 

listen  to  the  divine  Scriptures,  that  so  solid  eloquence  grow 

not  vile  in   their  eyes,  because  it  is  not  inflated;  and  that 

they  judge  not,  that  the  words  or  actions  of  men,  which  are 

read  in  these  books,  and  which  are  wrapped  up  and  concealed 

in  carnal  coverings,  are  to  be  so  taken,  as  the  very  words 

sound,  and  not  rather  to  be  unfolded  and  opened,  that  they 

may  be  understood.     And  on  the  subject  of  the  real  use  of  the 

hidden  meaning,  (whence  also   such  are  called  mysteries,) 

what  power  dark  and  obscure  sayings  possess  of  sharpening 

the  love  of  the  truth,  and  of  shaking  off"  the  torpid  feeUngs 

of  weariness,  such  men  must  have  this  taught  them  by  actual 

experience,  when   some   doctrine,  which,  when    openly   set 

before  them,  failed   to   affect  them,  is   drawn  forth  by  the 

unravelhng  of  some  allegory.     To  such  men  it  were  of  great 

use   to  understand,  that  meanings   are   to    be  preferred  to 

words,  in  the  same  way  as  the  soul  is  preferred  to  the  body. 

A  consequence  of  which  is,  that  they  ought  in  like  manner 

to  prefer  to  hear  discourses  which  are  true,  rather  than  such 

as  are  eloquent,  as  they  ought  to  prefer  friends  who  excel  in 

wisdom  to  such  as  excel  in  personal  beauty. 

Let   them    also   understand,    that   the    only   voice   which 
reacheth  to  the  ears  of  God,  is  the  affection  of  the  soul;  for 
so  they  will  not  be  disposed  to  mock,  if  haply  they  shall  per- 
ceive any  prelates  or  ministers  of  the  Church,  either  calling 
upon    God    in    barbarous    or    ungrammatical    language,    or 
failing  to  understand  the  veiy  words  which  they  utter,  and 
using  their  pauses  so  as  to  disturb  the  sense.     Not  because 
there  exists  not  every  necessity  for  such  things  being  cor- 
rected, that  the  people  may  say  Amen  to  that  which  they 
clearly  understand,  but  it  is  the  duty  of  all  to  bear  with  these 
things  in  a  spirit  of  piety,  who  have  learnt,  that,  as  in  the 
3^^,^^^  Forum  it  is  the  sound,  so  in  the  Church  it  is  the  wish,  that 
well-      makes  the  benediction  ^     Therefore  that  of  the  Forum  may 
speak-    i^aply  sometimes  be  called  bo)ia  dictio,  [good  speaking,]  yet 
'  bene-   never  bene-dictio.      Now  concerning  the  Sacrament  which 

did.' 


Ceremonies  to  be  explahied.    Catechizing  tahy  tedious.  203 

they  are  about  to  receive ',  it  suffices  for  the  more  intelligent,     de 
that  they  hear  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  act;  it  will  be    chi- 
necessarv  however,  with  those  who  are  duller  of  apprehen-  ?:andis 

J  ^  .  /  '■  ,         RUDI- 

sion,  to  treat  at  greater  length,  and  to  employ  similitudes,  m    bus. 
order  that  they  may  not  despise  what  they  see.  i i.e.  the 

,  .      TT  1  •  J-  V.  /.making 

14.  Here  perhaps  you  require  some  discourse  by  way  ot catechu- 
example,  in  order  that  I  may  shew  you  by  an  actual  "i^°s. 
instance,  in  what  manner  what  I  advise  is  to  be  effected. 
And  this  1  will  do,  as  far  as,  with  the  Lord's  assistance,  I 
shall  be  able.  But  first  I  ought,  according  to  promise,  to 
speak  on  the  subject  of  acquiring  that  cheerfulness  which  I 
mentioned.  For  in  respect  of  delivering  rules  for  forming 
your  discourse,  in  the  case  of  catechizing  a  person  who 
comes  to  you  with  the  purpose  of  being  made  a  Christian,  I 
have  already,  as  far  as  seemed  to  me  sufficient,  performed 
my  promise.  For  surely  I  am  under  no  promise  myself  to 
do  in  this  volume,  what  I  advise  as  fitting  to  be  done.  In 
case  therefore  of  my  doing  thus,  it  will  be  in  the  way  of 
over-measure ;  but  how  can  I  possibly  pour  on  an  over- 
measure,  before  I  have  fulfilled  the  measure  of  what  I  owe? 
And  indeed  your  chief  complaint  which  I  hear  is  no  other 
than  this,  that  your  discourse  seems  to  you  poor  and  worth- 
less, as  often  as  you  are  employed  in  instructing  any  one  in 
the  Christian  name.  Now  this  I  know  is  caused  not  so 
much  by  want  of  matter  necessary  to  speak  of,  (with  which 
T  know  that  you  are  sufficiently  prepared  and  furnished,) 
nor  again  of  language,  but  by  weariness  of  mind,  either 
from  that  cause,  which  I  have  noticed,  that  we  are  more 
pleased,  and  have  our  attention  more  fixed,  by  that  vihich 
we  perceive  mentally  and  in  silence,  and  wish  not  to  be  called 
away  from  it  to  a  noise  of  words  which  is  very  unequal  to  it; 
or  because,  even  when  discourse  is  pleasant,  we  are  more 
pleased  to  listen  to,  or  read,  such  things  as  have  been  better 
expressed,  and  which  are  uttered  without  any  care  or  anxiety 
on  our  part,  than  to  combine  suitable  words  on  the  sudden 
for  the  understanding  of  another,  without  knowing  the  issue  ; 
whether,  on  the  one  hand,  we  find  such  as  will  express  our 
meaning,  or,  on  the  other,  whether  they  be  received  so  as  to 
profit ;  or  because,  from  the  very  fact  that  those  things  which 
are  communicated  to  the  unlearned,  are  such  as  are  every 


204  Various  h hi drances on  Ihepartqftlie  Teacher^  the  Hearer. 

DE     way  well-known  to  us,  and  no  longer  necessary  for  our  own  ad- 
^ci.i'  vancen)ent,we  feel  it  irksome  to  be  thus  constantlyrecuvring  to 
zANDis  them,  and  our  mind,  now  of  somewhat  more  advanced  growth, 
^uT."  experiences  no  kind  of  pleasure  in  going  through  things  so 
common-place,  and,  as  il  were,  childish.    And  again,  it  creates 
a  sense  of  weariness  in  him  who  speaks,  to  have  a  hearer 
whom  he  cannot  move ;  either  because  such  an  one  is  moved 
by  no  feeling,  or  because  he  gives  no  bodily  sign  of  under- 
standing, or  being  pleased  with  what  is  said.     Not  because 
it  is  fitting  that  we  be  greedy  of  human  praise,  but  because 
•what  things  we  minister  are  of  God,  and  the  more  we  love 
them  to  whom  we  speak,  the  more  anxious  are  we  that  those 
things  be  pleasing  to  them  which   are  held   forth  for  their 
salvation;  and  when  this  fails  to  take  place,  we  feel  pained, 
and  are  weakened  and  dispirited  in  the  midst  of  our  course. 
Sometimes  also  when  wc  are  called  away  from  some  other 
business  which  we  wish  to  proceed  with,  and  which  either 
was  a  more  pleasing  occupation,  or  appeared  more  necessary  ; 
and  are  compelled,  cither  by  the  command  of  one  whom  we 
are  unwilling  to  offend,  or  by  some  persons'  iuiporlunity, 
such   as  we  cannot  escape  from,  to  catechize  any  one,  we 
approach  a  matter  which  requires  great  calmness,  with  feel- 
ings already  disturbed  ;  pained,  that  it  is  neither  allowed  us 
to  continue  that  order  in  our  occupations  which    we   wish, 
nor  again  can  we  possibly  be  sufficient  for  all  things:  and  so 
out  of  very  sorrow    our   discourse   which    proceeds  is  less 
pleasing,  in  that  out  of  the   dry  soil  of  sadnoss  the   stream 
issues    not  full    and    overflowing.     At    times    again    sorrow 
hath  taken  possession  of  our  breast  in  consecpience  of  some 
cause  of  offence,  and  then  it  is  said  to  us,  '  Come,  speak  with 
this  man,  he  wishes  to  be  made  a  Christian.'     For  they,  who 
speak  to  us,  know  not  what  is  consuming  us  within;  if  there- 
lore  they  are  such  as  that  we  ought  not  to  disclose  to  them  our 
feelings,  we  undertake  what  they  wish  with  no  pleasure,  and 
feeble  indeed  and  unpleasing  will  that  discourse  be,  which 
has  past  through  the  channel  of  a  chafing  and  reeking  heart. 
From  among  so  many  causes  therefore,  whatever  it  be  which 
clouds  the  clear  cahn  of  our  heart,  we  must  seek  in  accordance 
with  God's  will  for  remedies,  such  as  may  nmke  to  expand 
the  heart  which  is  shrunk  up,  and  cause  that  we   rejoice  in 


D Illness  of  Hearer,  met  by  Charity  and  ChrisCs  example.  205 
fervor  of  spirit,  and  be  t?lad  in  the  calm  of  a  good  work,  For     de 

'  .  CATE- 

Gnd  I'.veth  a  cheerful  giver.  chi- 

15.  For  if  the  cause  of  our  sadness  be  this,  that  our  hearer  ^iandis 

RUDI- 

does  not  enter  into  our  conception,  so  that  descending  in  a    bus. 
way  from  its  lofty  summit,  we  are  compelled  to  linger  in  the2Cor.9, 
tediousness  of  syllables  on  a  much  lower  level,  and  are  full 
of  anxiety  how  that  shall  proceed  out  of  our  mouth  of  flesh 
by  long  and  perplexed  windings,  which  the  mind  drinks  in 
with  a  most  quick  draught,  and  then  because  our  utterance 
is  so  unlike,  speech  is  made  irksome  and  silence  pleasing;  let 
us  meditate  on  what  we  have  received  from  Him  Who  has 
shewed  us  an  example  that  we  may  follow  His  steps.     Fori  Pet.  2, 
however    much    our  articulate  speech   may  differ  from   the 
vividness  of  our  perception,  much   more  does  mortal  flesh 
differ  from  equality   with  God.     And  yet  when  He  was  in 
the  same/or;w,  He  emptied  Himself,  leceiving  the  form  of 
a  servant^  c^c.  so  far  as  to  the  death  of  the  Cross.   Wherefore,  ^^Jjl^^j^j^ 
but  that  to    the   weak  He    became   weak,  that    He    might  is  per- 
gain  the  weak.?     Hear  His  follower  in  another  place  also Jj^^Pf^^ J_ 
saving.  For  ichether  ice  be  beside  ourselves,  it  is  to  God;  or  ist.  Ben. 

Phil.  2 

ichether  ice  be  sober,  it  is  for  your  cause.     For  the  love  ofQ_g^   ' 
Christ  coustraineth  iis,jud()ing  this,  that  one  died  for  all.  cLiCor. 
For  how  could  he  be  prepared  to  be  spent  for  their  souls,  if  2Cor.5, 
he  were  unwilling  to  bend   himself  to  their  ears  ?     Hence  ^^'  ^*- 
therefore  was  he  made  a  little  child  in  the  midst  of  us,  asiThess. 
a  nurse  cherishing  her  children.     For  whether  is  it  pleasing, 
unless  affection  bid  us,  to  lisp  in  short  and  broken  words.? 
And  yet  men  desire  to  have  infants  to  whom  to  render  this 
office.     And  it  is  sweeter  to  a  mother  to  feed  her  little  son 
with  small  pieces  of  meat,  moistened  and  prepared  by  her 
own  mouth,  than  to   eat  and   swallow  large  pieces   herself. 
Neither  let  your  heart  ever  lose  the  thought  of  the  hen,  who  Mat. 23, 
covers  her  tender  young  with  her  rufl^ed  feathers,  and  calls  to 
her  her   chirping  brood   with   a  broken   voice,  from   whose 
kind  wings  they  who  in  their  pride  turn  away,  become  a  prey 
to    birds.     For  if  understanding  be   pleasing  in  its  purest 
recesses,  let  it    be    pleasing  also  to    understand   this,   how 
that  charity,  the  more  readily  it  descend  to  the  lowest  things, 
so  much  the  more  strengthened  does  it  return  to  the  most 


206     Mistakes  should  humble  t/s.     Hon-  io  correct  them. 

»E     inner  things,  through  good  conscience,  in  that  it  seeks  nothing 
CHI-    from  those  to  whom    it   has    descended,  but   their    eternal 
zANDis  welfare. 

RUDI-  T»  • 

BUS.        16.   But   if  we    are   anxious   rather   either  to  read  or  to 


xi.  listen  to  such  things  as  have  been  already  prepared  and 
better  expressed,  and  therefore  feel  it  irksome  in  ignorance 
of  the  issue  to  put  together  for  the  time  what  we  have  to 
say,  only  let  not  our  mind  err  from  the  truth  in  the  things 
themselves,  and  it  is  easy,  supposing  any  thing  in  our  minds 
to  offend  our  hearer,  for  him  to  learn  from  the  very  circum- 
stance, how  entirely  unimportant  it  is,  when  the  matter 
itself  is  rightly  understood,  whether  there  were  any  thing 
imperfect  or  incorrect  in  sounds  which  had  utterance  given 
them  solely  for  this  cause,  that  the  matter  might  be  under- 
stood. But  if  the  aim  of  human  frailty  have  erred  even  from  the 
truth  in  the  things  themselves ;  (although  in  catechizing  the 
unlearned,  where  one  must  keep  the  most  beaten  path,  this 
can  hardly  happen  ;)  yet  sup^josing  it  by  any  chance  so  to 
happen  that  even  on  this  ground  our  hearer  is  offended,  this 
also  we  should  judge  to  have  befallen  us  from  no  other 
quarter,  than  that  God  hath  willed  to  prove  us,  whether 
we  receive  correction  with  gentleness  of  mind,  that  so  we  be 
not  carried  headlong  by  a  worse  error  into  the  defence  of 
our  error.  But  in  the  case  that  no  one  tell  us  of  it,  and 
that  it  have  escaped  altogether  the  notice  both  of  ourselves 
and  of  those  who  hear  us,  there  is  then  no  cause  for  sorrow, 
unless  it  take  place  again.  But  for  the  most  part  we 
ourselves,  when  we  think  over  what  we  have  said,  discover 
something  wrong,  and  are  in  doubt,  how  it  was  received  at 
the  moment  it  was  said,  and  are  the  more  pained,  in  that 
love  is  fervent  within  us,  if,  being  false,  it  was  received 
readily.  And  therefore  having  found  an  opportunity,  as  we 
find  fault  with  ourselves  in  private,  so  must  we  take  heed 
that  they  also  be  by  degrees  set  right,  as  many  as,  not 
by  the  words  of  God,  but  evidently  by  our  own,  have  fallen 
into  any  error.  But  if  again  cex'tain  blinded  by  mad  envy 
Rom.  1,  rejoice   that   we   have  erred,  whisperers,  slanderers,  hateful 

Of) 

to  God,  let  such  afford  us  matter  for  the  exercise  of  patience 
with   pity,  because  that   also   the  patience  of  God  leadeth 


The  event  is  with  God.     His  leading  to  be  followed.  207 
them   to  repentance.     For  what  is  there  more    detestable,     de 


CATE- 


and   more   of  a  character  to  treasure  up  wrath  in  the  day    ^m. 
of  wrath,  and  of  the  revelation  of  the  iust  iudgment  of  God  zandis 
than  to  rejoice  m  the  evil  of  another,  therein  evilly  lollowing    bus. 
the    likeness    and    pattern    of  the    devil.     Again    at  times,  Rom.  2, 
even  when  all  things  are  truly  and  rightly  stated,  something  *'  ^' 
which  is  either  not  understood,  or  which,  as  opposed  to  some 
ancient  erroneous  opinion  or  habit,  sounds  harshly,  offends 
and  disturbs  the  hearer.     In  case  this  is  seen,  and  he  shew 
himself  capable   of  cure,  it  is    our  place    to  heal  him  by 
abundance  of  authorities  and  reasons.     If  on  the  other  hand 
the  offence  be  secret  and  hid,  the  medicine  of  God  is  able 
to  relieve  it.     But  if  he  shall  start  back,  and  refuse  to  be 
healed,  let  that  example  of  our  Lord  be  our  comfort,  Who, 
when  men  were  offended  at  His  word,  and  shrunk  from  it 
as  a  hard  saying,   said  thus  even  to   them  that  remained, 
Will  ye  also   go   away  ?    For   this    ought   to    be   retained  John  6, 
fully  fixed   and  immoveable  in  our  hearts,  that  Jerusalem   '" 
which  is  in   captivity   is   in   the  full   course  of  times  freed 
from  the  Babylon  of  this  world,  and  that  no  one  from  out  of 
her  shall  perish,  because  whosoever  shall  perish  was  not  of 
her.     For  the  foundation  of  God  standelh  Jirm,  having  this^  'J^'™- 
seal,  The  Lord  knoweih  icho  are  His,  and,  Let  every  one 
that  nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  iniquity. 
Whilst  we  think  on  these  things,  and  call  upon  the  Lord 
to  enter  into  our  hearts,  we  shall  less  fear  the  uncertainty 
of  the   issues  of  our   discourse  caused  by  the  uncertainty 
of  the  feelings  of  our  hearers,  and  even  the  very  suffering 
annoyances  in    a    charitable  work   will  be  pleasing  to  us, 
if  only   we    seek  not   our  own    glory  in    it.     For  then   is 
a   work   truly  good,  when  the  purpose  of  the  doer  is  shot 
forth  from  love,  and,  as  if  returning  to  its  own  place,  again 
rests  in  love.     But  the  reading  with  which  we  are  pleased, 
or  any  listening  to  eloquence  better  than  our  own,  (through 
preference   of  which   to  the   discourse  which   we   ourselves 
have   to  deliver,  we  speak  unwillingly  and  with  pain,)  will 
find  us  in  better  spirits,  and  will  come  to  us  more  pleasantly 
after  our   labour,   and    we    shall  with    more   full  assurance 
pray  that  God  will  speak   to  us  as   we  will,  if  we  submit 
cheerfully  that  He  speak  by  us  as  we  are   able ;    so  is  it 


208The  Teacher, ilirough  love,hea)sTruthasiieuin  the  Hearer. 

DE     brought  to  pass  thai  to  them  that  love  God  all  things  come 

^^^l'  together  for  good. 

zANDis       17.  Then  again  if  we  feel  it  irksome  frequently  to  repeat 

"^BusV  things  commonplace  and  suited  to  children,  let  us  imite 
xii.  ourselves  to  them  by  a  brother's,  a  father's,  a  mother's  love, 
and  then  when  our  hearts  are  linked  with  theirs,  to  us  also 
will  these  things  appear  new.  For  so  powerful  is  the  feeling 
of  the  mind  which  sympathises,  that,  whilst  they  are  moved 
as  we  speak,  and  we  as  they  learn,  we  have  our  dwelling 
in  one  another,  and  so,  both  they  as  it  were  in  us  speak 
what  they  hear,  and  we  in  a  certain  w  ay  in  them  learn  what 
we  teach.  Is  not  this  constantly  the  case,  that,  when  we  are 
shewing  to  persons  who  have  never  before  seen  them,  certain 

>  loca.    large  and  beautiful  prospects*  either  of  cities  or  fields,  which 
we  from    often    seeing  had   come   to  pass  by   without  any 
pleasure,  our  own  delight  is  renewed  in  the  delight  which 
novelty  causes  to  them.    And  so  much  the  more  in  proportion 
as  they  are   our  friends,  because  in   proportion   as  by  the 
bond  of  love  we  are  in  them,  so  to  us  also  do  things  become 
new   which   before  were   old.     But,  if  we  have   made   any 
progress  at  all  in    contemplation,  we  seek  not  that   those 
whom  we  love   feel   delight  and   astonishment,   when   con- 
templating the  works  of  human  hands,  but  we  seek  to  lift 
them  up  to  the  very  skill  and  counsel  of  their  author,  and 
hence  to  rise  to  the  admiration  and  praise  of  the  all-creating 
God,  in  Whom  is  the  most  fruitful  end  of  love  :    how  much 
more  therefore  ought  we  to  feel  delight,  when  men  approach 
us  now  to  learn  to  know  God  Himself,  in  order  to  Whom  all 
things,  whatsoever  are   to  be  learnt,  are  to  be   learnt,  and 
ourselves  to  be  renewed  in  their  newness  of  feeling,  so  that, 
if  our  usual  preaching  be  chilled,  it  may  grow  warm  by  their 
unusual   hearing.      And   there   is   this    additional    to    cause 
delight,  that  we  consider  and  reflect,  from  out  of  what  death 
of  error  the  person  is  passing  into  the  life  of  faith.     And  if 
we  are  wont  to  pass  through  streets  to  which  we  are  most 
accustomed  with  the  cheerfulness  of  doing  good,  when  we 
are  shewing  the  way  to  any  one  who  before  was  distressed 
from   having   lost  his  way ;    how  much  more  readily,  and 
with  how  much  greater  joy,  in  that  which  is  saving  doctrine, 
ought  we  to  go  up  and   down  even  those  paths  which  for 


Hoic  to  itin  atteniion  from  a  hearer  who  seems  unmoved.  209 
our   own   sakes  it  is  unnecessary  to  go  over  again  ;    when     de 

GATE" 

we  are  leading  a  wretched  soul,  and  wearied  by  the  wan-    chi- 
derings  of  this  world,  through   the  ways  of  peace,  at  His  zandis 
bidding  Who  Himself  gave  us  that  peace  ?  bus. 

18.  But  indeed  it  is  much  to   continue   speaking  on   to   xiii. 
the  set  period,  when  we  see  our  hearer  continue  unmoved, 
because  lie  either  dares  not,  as  being  restrained  by  religious 
awe,  express  his  approval  by  word,  or  motion  of  body,  or 

is  i-epressed  by  reverence  for  man,  or  fails  to  understand, 
or  despises  what  we  say.  Since  this  must  be  matter  of 
uncertainty  to  us,  in  that  we  see  not  his  mind,  it  behoves  us 
in  our  address  to  make  trial  of  all  things,  which  may  possibly 
avail  to  rouse  him,  and,  as  it  were,  draw  him  forth  from  his 
hiding-place.  For  both  such  fear  as  is  excessive,  and 
hinders  his  expressing  his  opinion,  we  must  remove  by  kind 
and  cheering  words,  and  suggest  our  common  brotherhood 
so  as  to  attemper  his  reverence  for  us,  and  seek  to  ascertain 
by  questioning  whether  he  understand  us,  and  inspire  him 
with  confidence  to  utter  freely  any  objection  which  he 
has  to  make.  We  must  also  ask  him  whether  he  has  already 
at  any  time  heard  these  things,  and  so  they  fail  to  move  him 
as  being  well-known  and  commonplace.  And  we  must  .be 
guided  by  his  answer,  either  to  speak  more  simply,  and  more 
by  way  of  explanation,  or  to  refute  some  opinion  opposed  to 
us,  or,  omitting  the  fiiUer  unfolding  of  such  things  as  are 
known  to  him,  to  embrace  them  briefly  in  a  few  words,  and 
to  select  certain  of  those  things  which  are  spoken  in  a 
mystical  sense  in  the  sacred  books,  and  especially  in  the 
narrative,  by  opening  and  unfolding  which  to  make  our 
discourse  more  pleasing.  But  if  he  be  very  slow  of  under- 
standing, and  unsuited  for  and  disinclined  to  all  such 
methods  of  pleasing,  then  must  we  bear  with  him  in  pity, 
and,  having  briefly  gone  through  all  other  points,  we  must 
carefully  impress  upon  him  such  things  as  are  especially 
necessary,  concerning  the  unity  of  the  Catholic  [Church], 
concerning  temptations,  concerning  Christian  conversation 
with  a  view  to  Judgment  hereafter,  and  must  rather  speak 
to  God  for  him,  than  speak  many  things  to  him  of  God. 

19.  But  it   often  happens,  that  he    who    at   first   was   a 
willing  hearer,  through  being  fatigued  either  by  listening  or 

p 


210      Care  needed  to  preve7it  ic  ear  in  ess  from  standing. 

DE     by   standing,  now  yawns  and  gapes  instead  of  expressing 

cHi^*  approval,  and  even  against  his  will  shews  his  wish  to  depart. 
zANuisUpon  perceiving  this,  we  ought  either  to  refresh  his  mind  by 

BUS.  saying  something  seasoned  with  discreet  cheerfulness,  and 
suited  to  the  matter  in  hand,  or  something  very  wonderful 
and  amusing,  or,  it  may  be,  something  painful  and  mournful: 
and  such  as  may  affect  himself  rather  than  another,  in  order 
that  being  pinched  by  concern  for  self  he  may  continue 
watchful ;  and  yet  -such  as  not  by  any  harshness  to  give 
offence  to  his  spirit  of  reverence,  but  rather  by  a  friendly 
manner  to  conciliate  him  ;  or  we  ought  to  relieve  him  by 
offering  him  a  seat,  although  without  doubt  it  were  better, 
where  it  can  be  done  with  due  regard  to  propriety,  that 
from  the  first  he  sit  and  listen  ;  and  certain  Churches  beyond 
sea  act  with  much  greater  wisdom  and  foresight,  in  which 
not  only  the  chief  ministers  address  the  people  sitting,  but 
seats  are  provided  also  for  the  people  themselves,  that  so 
the  weak  be  not  wearied  with  standing,  and  thus  have  their 
minds  withdrawn  from  that  attention  which  is  most  profitable, 
or  even  be  compelled  to  depart.  And  yet  it  makes  a  great 
difference,  whether  it  be  one  of  a  great  multitude  who 
withdraws  himself  to  recruit  his  strength,  such  an  one  being 
already  bound  by  participation  in  the  Sacraments,  or  whether 
the  person  departing  be  one  who  has  to  be  admitted  to  the 
first  Sacraments,  (for  the  most  part  unavoidably  compelled, 
lest  he  even  fall  to  the  ground,  overcome  by  weakness 
within,)  for  such  an  one  through  shame  does  not  state  the 
reason  of  his  going,  and  by  weakness  is  not  allowed  to 
stand.  I  speak  this  from  experience,  for  a  certain  man 
from  the  country  acted  in  this  way,  when  I  was  catechizing, 
whence  I  have  learned  how  greatly  it  is  to  be  guarded 
against.  For  who  can  put  up  with  our  haughtiness,  when 
we  suffer  not  to  sit  in  our  presence  men  who  are  our 
brethren;  or,  what  calls  for  even  greater  care,  who  are  thus 
to  be  made  our  brethren,  and  yet  a  woman  sat  and  listened 

Lukeio,  to  the  Lord  Himself,  Whom  angels  stand  and  minister  to. 
Certainly  if  there  is  to  be  only  a  short  discourse,  or  the 
place  be  inconvenient  for  sitting,  let  them  stand  and  listen ; 
but  then,  let  it  be  when   the  hearers   are  many,  and  are 

'  'iniii-  not  then  to  be  admitted'.     For  when  they  are  one,  or  two, 

aiiJi.' 


Mliat  remarks  arouse.  We  know  not  what  is  best  to  hedoing.^l  1 

or    a   iew,   who  are  come  for  the  purpose  of  being  made     de 


CATE- 


Christians,  it  is  dangerous    to   speak  with   them    standing,    chi- 
However  if  we   have  begun    to    speak   with   them   in  that^^^nis 

,  •  -1       RUDI- 

way,  at  any  rate,  when  we  see  that  our  hearer  is  weaned,  bus. 
we  ought  both  to  offer  him  a  seat,  nay,  rather  to  urge  him 
by  all  means  to  sit  down,  and  to  address  to  him  some 
remark  which  may  refresh  him,  and  at  the  same  time, 
if  any  anxiety  haply  hath  entered  into  his  mind  and  begun  to 
withdraw  his  attention,  may  put  it  to  flight.  For,  seeing 
that  the  reasons  are  unknown  to  us,  why  he  still  continues 
silent  and  refuses  to  listen,  now  that  he  is  seated,  we  may 
speak  to  him  against  the  thoughts  of  temporal  affairs  which 
suggest  themselves,  either  in  a  cheerful,  as  stated  above, 
or  in  a  serious  manner,  in  order  that,  if  these  are  the  very 
thoughts  which  have  occupied  his  mind,  they  may  giv^e 
way,  as  if  arraigned  by  name  ;  or,  if  they  are  not,  and  he 
is  wearied  with  listening,  then  that,  when  he  hears  us 
speaking  of  them  as  if  they  were  (since  in  truth  we  know 
not)  in  an  unexpected  and  unusual  way,  as  I  have  stated, 
his  attention  be  restored  from  weariness.  But  let  it  be 
short,  especially  seeing  it  is  inserted  out  of  order,  lest 
the  medicine  even  increase  the  disease  of  weariness  which 
we  wish  to  relieve;  and  we  should  do  right  to  hasten 
forward  what  remains,  and  to  promise  and  hold  out  a  nearer 
end. 

20.  But  if  the  omitting  some  other  employment,  on  xiv. 
which  as  more  necessary,  your  mind  was  now  set,  hath 
broken  your  spirit,  and  therefore  sorrowing  you  catechize 
without  pleasure ;  you  ought  to  reflect,  that,  excepting  that 
we  know,  that,  in  all  our  dealings  with  men,  we  are  to  deal 
mercifully,  and  out  of  the  purest  charity;  with  this  one 
exception,  it  is  quite  matter  of  uncertainty  to  us,  what  is 
more  useful  to  be  done,  or  what  again  more  fitting  to  be 
postponed,  or  altogether  omitted.  For  in  that  we  know  not 
of  what  sort  with  God  are  the  deserts  of  men,  for  whose 
good  we  are  acting;  what  may  be  expedient  for  them  at  a 
given  time,  this  we  cannot  be  said  to  understand,  but  rather 
to  guess,  with  none,  or  very  slight,  and  very  uncertain  con- 
jecture to  guide  us.  Wherefore  it  is  indeed  fitting  that  we 
order  what  things  we  have  to  do  according  to  our  ability; 

p2 


212  Pain  at  men^s  sin  eased  by  a  convert,  useful  for  learning. 

DE     then  if  we  are  enabled  to  effect  them  in  the  manner  in  which 

CHI-"  ^^6  have  proposed,  let  us  be  glad,  not  that  it  hath  been  our 

zANnis  will,  but  that  it  hath  been  God's  will  that  they  be  so  effected; 

RUDI-    ,  .^  .  ,  T  1        1  1  c 

BUS.  but  it  any  necessity  happen  to  disturb  that  order  ot  ours,  let 
us  readily  submit  to  be  bowed  that  we  be  not  broken,  and 
let  us  make  that  order  ours,  which  God  hath  preferred  to 
ours.  For  it  is  more  just  that  we  follow  His  will,  than  He 
ours.  Seeing  that,  as  respects  order  of  proceeding,  which 
we  wish  to  maintain  according  to  our  own  will,  that  surely 
is  to  be  approved  in  which  such  things  as  are  more  excellent 
come  first.  Why  then  do  we  feel  pained  that  the  Lord 
God,  Who  is  so  much  more  excellent,  should  come  before  us 
men,  so  as  out  of  very  love  for  our  own  order  to  wish  to 
violate  order .?  For  no  one  orders  for  the  better  what  to  do, 
unless  it  be  he  who  is  prepared  rather  to  leave  undone  what 
he  is  by  the  Divine  power  prevented  from  doing,  than  eager 
to  do  what  his  own  thoughts,  which  are  human,  design.  For 
Prov.  many  are  the  tliougJds  in  the  heart  of  a  man,  hut  the 
'        counsel  of  the  Lord  ahideth  for  ever. 

21.  But  if  our  mind,  disturbed  by  some  cause  of  offence, 
be  unable  to  deliver  a  calm  and  pleasant  discourse;  so  great 
ought  our  love  to  be  towards  those  for  whom  Christ  died,  will- 
ing by  the  price  of  His  own  blood  to  redeem  them  from  the 
death  of  the  errors  of  this  world;  that  this  very  fact,  that 
word  is  brought  us  in  our  sorrow,  that  there  is  at  hand  one 
who  desires  to  become  a  Christian,  ought  to  avail  to  console 
and  dis.sipate  that  sorrow,  as  joy  caused  by  gains  is  wont  to 
soothe  grief  for  losses.  For  we  are  not  pained  by  the 
offence  of  any  but  only  as  we  either  believe  or  see  him  to  be 
perishing  himself,  or  made  the  occasion  that  some  weak  one 
perish.  Let  then  him  who  comes  to  us  to  be  admitted,  in 
that  he  leads  us  to  hope  that  he  may  go  forward,  wipe  off  the 
sorrow  for  him  who  fails  us.  Because  even  if  that  fear 
Mat.23  suggest  itself  to  us,  lest  our  disciple  be  made  a  child  of  Hell, 
^^-  seeing  that  many  such  are  before  our  eyes,  from  whom  arise 
those  offences  by  which  we  are  concerned,  this  ought  not  to 
go  to  keep  us  back,  but  rather  to  excite  us  and  spur  us  on, 
so  far  forth  as  we  admonish  him  whom  we  are  instructing, 
that  he  shun  to  follow  those  who  are  Christians,  not  in  very 
truth,  but  in  name  only :  nor  be  so  moved  by  their  numbers, 


Our  own  sin  Uyhiened  hij  charity  of  catechising.      213 
as  either  to  wish  to  follow  them,  or  to  be  unwilling  to  follow     df, 

.         GATE- 

Christ  on  their  account;  and  cither  be  unwilling  to  be  in    chi- 
the  Church  of  God,  where  thev  are,  or  wish  to  be  there  such  zandis 
as  they  are.     And,  I  know  not  how  it  is,  in  admonitions  or    bus. 
this  sort,   that  discourse   is  ever   more  glowing   which  has 
fuel  furnished  it  by  a  present  sense  of  ]iain  ;  so  that,  so  far 
are  we  from  being  rendered  more  dull,  that  this  very  thing 
makes  us  utter  with  more  enkindled  and  vehement  feelings, 
what  in  time  of  greater  security  we  should  speak  with  cold- 
ness rather  and  tardiness;    and  causes    us    to  rejoice  that 
opportunity  is  given  us,  that  the  feelings  of  our  minds  pass 
not  away  without  bearing  fruit. 

22.  But  if  for  any  fault  or  sin  of  our  own   sorrow  hath 
taken  possession  of  us,  let  us  not  only  remember  that '  thePf-^^j 
sacrifice  of  God  is  a  troubled  spirit,'  but  also  that  saying, 
that  like  as  itater  que)ichet]i  Jire,  so  alms  sin,  and  that  /Ecclus. 
will  have  mercy,  says  He,  rather  than  sacrifice.     As  there- Hos.  6, 
fore,  if  we  were  in  danger  from  fire,  we  should  certainly  run  ' 
to  obtain  water,  that  it  might  be  quenched,  and  should  be 
thankful  if  one  offered  it  to  us  near  at  hand,  so  if  from  our 
own  stack  any  flame  of  sin  hath  risen  up,  and  we  are  thereby 
troubled,   when    occasion    has    been    given    us    for    a    most 
charitable  work,  let  us  rejoice  as  if  a  fountain  were  offered 
us,  whereby  to  extinguish  the  flame  which  had  burst  forth. 
Unless  haply  we  are  so  foolish,  as  to  believe  that  we  ought 
to  be  more  ready  to  run  with  bread,  to  fill  the  belly  of  him 
that  is  hungry,  than  with  the  word  of  God,  to  instruct  the 
mind  of  him  that  eateth  it.     And  there  is  this  further,  that, 
if  it  would  merely  benefit  us  if  we  did  it,  and  not  injure  us 
in  any  way  to  leave  it  undone,  we  might  despise  a  remedy 
offered  us  at  an  unhappy  moment,  when  now  the  salvation 
not  of  our  neighbour,  but  of  ourself,  was  in  danger.     But 
when  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  that  so  threatening  voice 
is  heard,  Thou  nicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou  shouldest  Mat.25, 
give  my  money  to  tlie  exchangers:    what  madness,  I  pray^^"^^- 
you,  is  it,  because  our  sin  torments  us,  therefore  to  wish  to 
sin  again  is  not  giving  the  Lord's  money  to  one  who  wishes 
and  seeks  to  receive  it.-'    When    by   these   and   such    like 
thoughts  and  considerations  the  mist  of  irksomeness  vvhich 
overshadows  has  been  dispelled,  the  attention  is  fitted  to  the 


214  J  specimen  to  he  given.   Different  speech  for  divers  cases. 

DE     work  of  catechizing,  so  that  the  hearer  pleasantly  drinks  in 

^^cnf-'  what  bursts  forth  readily  and  cheerfully  out  of  the  rich  fulness 

zANDis  of  love.     And  this  it  is  not  so  much  I  that  say  to  you,  as 

BUS.'  tlie  \o\e,  itself  says  to  us  all,  which  hath  been  shed  abroad  in 
our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  Which  hath  been  given  us. 

XV.  23.  But  perhaps,  what  before  I  made  any  promise  I  was 
under  no  obligation  to  render,  you  now  demand  as  a  debt, 
that  I  consent  to  unfold  and  submit  to  your  view  some  dis- 
course by  way  of  example,  as  if  I  were  myself  catechizing. 
Now  befoi'e  I  do  this,  I  wish  you  to  bear  in  mind,  that  the 
mental  effort  is  other,  when  one  is  dictating  with  a  future 
reader  in  one's  thoughts,  than  what  it  is  when  one  is  speak- 
ing with  the  presence  of  a  hearer  to  draw  one's  attention; 
and  in  this  latter  case  again,  that  it  is  different  when  one  is 
admonishing  privately,  with  no  other  person  near  to  form 
a  judgment  of  us,  from  that,  when  one  is  teaching  openly, 
surrounded  by  an  auditory  of  persons  who  hold  very  different 
opinions:  then  again,  when  we  thus  teach,  there  is  a  difference 
whether  one  is  being  taught,  and  the  rest  stand  by  as 
listeners  judging  or  attesting  what  they  well  know,  or  all  in 
common  be  expecting  what  we  shall  set  before  them;  and 
then  again  in  this  very  case,  whether  it  be,  as  it  were,  a 
private  meeting  for  the  purpose  of  mutual  conference,  or  the 
people  in  silence  and  attention  be  looking  to  an  individual 
to  speak  from  a  higher  position;  and  it  makes  much  differ- 
ence also,  when  we  are  thus  speaking  whether  there  be  few 
present  or  many,  learned  or  unlearned,  or  made  up  of  both  ; 
citizens  or  rustics,  or  both  together,  or  again,  a  people  mingled 
of  all  classes.  For  it  cannot  be,  but  that  they  affect  in  different 
ways  the  man  who  has  to  speak  and  address  them,  and  that 
both  the  discourse  which  is  delivered  carries  as  it  were  a 
certain  stamp  of  feature  expressive  of  the  feeling  of  the  mind 
from  which  it  issues,  and  according  to  this  same  difference 
affects  the  hearers  in  different  ways,  they  again  in  their  turn 
by  their  very  presence  affecting  each  other  in  different  ways. 
But  since  we  are  now  sj)eaking  of  instructing  the  unlearned, 
I  can  testify  to  you  of  myself,  that  I  feel  differently  when 
\  see  standing  before  me  to  be  catechized,  an  educated  man, 
a  dull  man,  a  citizen,  a  stranger,  a  rich,  poor,  private,  noble, 
inauj  one  set  in  some  office  of  authority,  a  person  of  this  or 


Man's  praise  not  to  he  sought.     The  supposed  hearer.  215 
that  nation,  of  this  or  that  age  or  sex,  coming  from  this  or     de 

GATE" 

that  school,  coming  from  this  or  that  common  error,  and    chi- 
accordingly  as  I  feel  differently  moved,  does  my  discourse  ^^^^^ 
set  out,  advance,  and  conclude.     And  because,  when  all  have    bus. 
a  claim  on  us  for  the  same  love,  yet  is  not  the  same  medicine 
to  be  used  for  all;  so  love  itself  in  like  manner  is  in  travail 
with  some,  is  made  weak  together  with  others,  some  it  seeks 
to  edify,  others  it  trembles  to  cause  to  offend,  to  some  it  stoops, 
to  others  it  carries  itself  erect,  to  some  it  is  gentle,  to  others 
severe,  to  none  as  an  enemy,  to  all  as  a  mother.     And  he  who 
has  not  tried  what  I  say  with  the  same  feeling  of  love,  when 
he  sees  us,  because  some  little   ability  bestowed    upon  us 
affords  pleasure,  become  known  with  praise  in  the  mouth  of 
the  multitude,  hence  thinks  us  happy:  but  may  God,  into 
Whose  presence  the  groaning  of  them  that  are  in  bondage  p^  ^g 
enters,  behold  our  humiliation  and  labour,  and  pardon  us  all  ii- 
our  sins.     Wherefore  if  any  thing  in  us  has  pleased  yon,  so  is. 
as  to  make  you  seek  from  us  some  directions  for  your  dis- 
course, you  would  be  better  able  to  learn  thoroughly  by 
seeing  and  hearing  us  when  actually  so  employed,  than  by 
reading  when  we  thus  dictate. 

24.  But  let  us  suppose  one  come  to  us,  who  wishes  to  be    xvi. 
a  Christian,  one  of  the  class  of  ordinary  persons,  yet  not  a 
rustic,  but  a  citizen,  such  of  whom  you  must  necessarily  meet 
with  many  in  Carthage,  and  that,  upon  being  asked  whether  it 
be  for  the  sake  of  any  advantage  in  this  present  life,  or  for  the 
sake  of  that  rest  which  is  hoped  for  after  this  life,  that  he 
desires  to  become  a  Christian,  he  have  answered  that  it  is  for 
the  sake  of  rest  hereafter,  we    might   perhaps    proceed   to 
instruct  him  in  some  such  address  as  this:  "  Thanks  be  to  God, 
brother:  I   heartily  give  you  joy,  and  am  glad  on  your  behalf, 
that  in  the  so  great  and  so  dangerous  storms  of  this  present 
world  you  have  come  to  think  on  some  true  and   assured 
safety.     For  even  in  this  life  men  endure  great  labours  seek- 
ing rest  and  safety,  but  through  evil  lusts  find  them  not.    For 
they  seek  to  rest  in  things  which  are  unquiet  and  which  abide 
not,  and  because  as  time  passes  on,  these  are  withdrawn  from 
them  and  pass  away,  therefore  are  they  disturbed  by  fears 
and  griefs,  nor  suffered  to  remain   at  rest.     For  whether  a 
man  seek  to  rest  in  riches,  he  is  rendered  proud  rather  than 


CATE 
CHI 


216      Vanity  of  earthly  honours,  richest  and  pleasures. 

DE     secure.     See  we  not  how  many  have  lost  them  on  a  sudden, 

how   many    also   have    perished    because    of  them,    either 

zANDis  through  desiring  to  possess  them,  or  through  being  overcome 

BUS.    and  spoiled  of  them  by  men  more  covetous  than  themselves. 

And  even  if  they  continued  with  a  man  through  his  whole 

life,  and  never  deserted  their  lover,  yet  would  he  desert  them 

at  his  death.     P'or  what  is  the  life  of  man,  even  if  he  gTow 

to  be  old  ?     Or,  when  men  wish  for  old  age  for  themselves, 

what  else  do  they  wish  for,  but  lengthened  infirmity  ?     So 

also  the  honours  of  this  world,  what  are  they  but  puff,  and 

emptiness,  and  peril  of  falling  ?     For  thus  says  holy  Scrip- 

Isa.  40,  ture.  All  Jiesh  is  grass,  and  the  brightness  of  man  as  the 

^~^'    flower  of  grass.     The  grass  is  vAthered,  the  Jiower  fallen, 

hut  the  word  cf  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever.     Wherefore  he 

who  desires  true  rest  and  true  happiness,  ought  to  remove 

his  hope  from  things  that  are  mortal  and  pass  away,  and  to 

set  it  upon  the  word  of  God,  so  that  cleaving  to  that  which 

abides  for  ever,  he  also  himself  may  with  it  abide  for  ever. 

25.  "  There  are  also  men  who  neither  seek  to  be  rich,  nor 
go  about  to  obtain  the  vain  splendours  of  the  honours  of 
office  ;  but  who  seek  to  have  their  pleasure  and  rest  in 
places  of  feasting  and  foi-nications,  and  in  theatres  and  spec- 
tacles of  frivolity,  such  as  in  great  cities  they  have  without 
cost.  But  so  these  also  either  consume  in  luxury  their  poor 
means,  and  then  afterwards  through  want  break  out  into 
thefts  and  burglaries,  and  some  even  into  open  robberies  ; 
and  so  on  a  sudden  are  filled  with  many  and  great  fears,  and 
they  wlio  a  little  before  were  singing  gaily  in  the  tavern,  are 
now  dreaming  of  the  wailings  of  the  prison.  But  so  eagerly 
are  their  minds  set  on  tlie  games,  that  they  become  like  unto 
devils,  by  their  cries  exciting  men  to  wound  one  another,  and 
to  have  violent  conflicts  with  those  who  have  never  harmed 
them,  seeking  to  gratify  thereby  a  maddened  people,  and 
then,  if  they  perceive  them  to  be  peaceably-minded,  they  hate 
and  persecute  them,  and  demand  by  their  cries  that  they  be 
beaten  with  clubs,  as  if  they  had  combined  to  deceive  them, 
and  this  iniquity  they  compel  even  the  Judge,  who  is  the 
avenger  of  all  iniquity,  to  commit:  but  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
they  perceive  them  practising  fearful  acts  of  hatred  against 
one  another,  whether  tliey  be  what  are  called  Sintas,  or  actors 


Those  truly  blessed  tvho  become  Christians  for  rest  above.  217 

or  buffoons,  or  charioteers,  or  hunters,  wretches  whom  they     de 

C  ATE" 

cause  to  contend  and  fight,  not  only  men  with  men,  but  also    ^hi- 
men  with  beasts;  the  greater  the  hatred  with  which  they^ANDis 
perceive  them  to  rage  one  against  another,   the  more  they    bus. 


like  them,  and  are  pleased  with  them,  and  applaud  them 
when  thus  set  on,  and  set  them  on  by  their  very  plaudits, 
the  very  spectators  madly  raging  one  against  another,  each 
in  behalf  of  some  one,  even  more  than  those  whose  madness 
they  madly  are  provoking,  and  in  their  madness  desire  to  be 
spectators  of.  How  then  can  the  mind  retain  the  soundness 
of  peace,  which  thus  feeds  on  strifes  and  contests  ?  For  such 
as  the  food  is  which  is  taken  in,  such  will  be  the  state  of 
health  which  is  consequent  on  it.  Finally,  although  frantic 
joys  are  not  joys,  yet  let  them  be  what  they  will,  and  delight 
how  much  soever  they  may,  the  boastfulness  of  riches,  and 
the  swelling  of  honours,  the  riotous  expenditure  of  the 
tavern,  and  the  contests  of  the  theatres,  the  impurity  of  for- 
nication, and  the  lust  of  the  baths,  all  these  things  one  slight 
fever  takes  away,  and  withdraws  from  men  even  yet  con- 
tinuing in  life  all  their  false  happiness  :  there  remains  a  void 
and  wounded  conscience,  about  to  feel  that  God  as  a  Judge, 
whom  it  would  not  have  as  a  Protector,  and  to  find  a  stern 
Lord,  in  Him  whom  it  would  not  seek  and  love  as  a  gracious 
Father.  But  thou,  in  that  thou  seekest  the  true  rest  which  is 
promised  to  Christians,  after  this  life,  shalt  even  have  among 
the  most  bitter  troubles  of  this  life,  taste  of  its  sweetness  and 
pleasantness,  if  only  thou  love  His  commandments.  Who 
hath  promised  thee  that  rest.  For  you  will  soon  feel  that 
the  fruits  of  righteousness  are  sweeter  than  those  of  iniquity, 
and  that  a  man  has  more  true  and  pleasant  joy  in  a  good 
conscience  in  the  midst  of  troubles,  than  in  an  evil  conscience 
in  the  midst  of  delights,  seeing  that  you  have  not  come  to  be 
joined  to  the  Church  of  God,  with  the  view  of  seeking  any 
temporal  advantage  from  it. 

26.  "  For  there  are  those  who  therefore  wish  to  be  Chris-  xvii. 
lians  either  that  they  may  obUge  men,  from  whom  they 
expect  temporal  advantages;  or  because  they  are  unwilling 
to  offend  those  whom  they  fear.  But  such  are  rej^robale ; 
and,  although  for  a  time  the  Church  bears  them,  as  the 
threshing-floor  the  chaff  even  until  the  time  of  winnowing: 


218      Heavenly  rest  must  he  our  aim,  not  earthly  good. 
DE     such  if  they  amend  not  themselves,  and  begin  to  be  Chris- 


CATE 


Hj/  tians  in  order  to  that  future  eternal  rest,  shall  in  the  end  be 
zANDis  separated.     Nor  let  them  flatter  themselves,  because  that  in 


BUDI 


BUS.    the  threshing-floor  they  may  be  together  with  the  wheat  of 


Matt. 3,  God:  seeing  that  they  shall  not  be  together  with  it  in  the 
barn,  but  are  designed  for  the  fire  which  is  their  due.  There 
are  also  others  of  better  hope  indeed,  yet  in  no  less  danger ; 
such  as  already  fear  God,  and  do  not  mock  the  Christian 
name,  nor  enter  the  Church  of  God  with  feigned  heart,  but 
who  expect  happiness  in  this  life,  who  look  to  be  more  happy 
in  earthly  things,  than  those  who  do  not  worship  God:  and 
therefore  when  they  see  certain  wicked  and  impious  persons 
prevailing  and  excelling  in  that  worldly  prosperity,  and 
themselves  either  in  a  less  degree  possessing,  or  else  losing 
these  things,  they  are  disturbed,  as  if  their  worship  of  God 
were  without  cause,  and  readily  fall  away  from  the  faith. 

27.  "  But  he  who  seeks  to  become  a  Christian  in  order  to 
that  eternal  blessedness  and  perpetual  rest,  which  after  this 
life,  it  is  promised,  shall  be  for  the  Saints,  that  he  go 
not  into  fire  everlasting  with  the  devil,  but  enter  with  Christ 

Mat.25, into    His   everlasting   kingdom,   he    truly   is    a   Christian; 

34. 41.  watchful  in  every  trial,  that  he  be  not  corrupted  by  prosperity, 
and  that  he  be  not  overcome  by  adversity;  both  sober  and 
temperate  in  the  abundance  of  worldly  goods,  and  strong 
and  patient  in  tribulations.  And  such  an  one  will  go  forward 
and  come  at  last  to  such  a  mind,  as  to  love  God  more  than 
he  fears  hell;  so  that,  although  God  were  to  say  to  him. 
Enjoy  the  pleasures  of  the  flesh  for  ever,  and  sin  as  much  as 
you  can,  you  shall  neither  die  nor  be  sent  into  hell,  only  you 
shall  not  be  with  Me,  he  would  be  greatly  afraid,  and 
altogether  refuse  to  sin,  not  now  to  avoid  falling  into  that 
which  he  once  feared,  but  to  avoid  offending  Him  Whom  he 

iCor.  2  so  loves,  in  Whom  alone  is  rest,  which  eye  hath  not  seen, 

9-  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man, 

what  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him. 

28.  "  Concerning  which  rest  Scripture  signifies,  and  is  not 
silent,  how  that  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  from  the 

Gen.  2,  time  that  God  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth  and  all  things 

^~^'     that  are  in  them,  in  six  days  He  worked,  and  on  the  seventh 

day  rested.     For  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  Omnipotent  even 


God^s  Rest  m  His  Saints.     All  things  created  good.     219 

in  one  moment  of  time  to  create  all  things.     For  He  had     de 
not  laboured,  that  He  should  require  rest,  for  He  spake,  and   ^^^' 
they  were  made;  He  commanded,  and  they  were  created; ^^^ois 
but  to  signify,  that  after  six  ages  of  this  present  world,  in    bus. 


the  seventh  age,  as  though  on  the  seventh  day,  he  will  Ps.  148, 
hereafter  rest  in  His  Saints,  in  that  they  also  will  rest  in 
Him  after  all  the  good  works,  wherein  they  have  served  Him, 
which  Himself  vvorketh  in  them,  Who  calls  them,  and  charges 
them,  and  puts  away  their  past  sins,  and  justifies  him  who 
before  was  ungodly.  But  as,  when  they,  of  His  gift,  work 
what  is  good,  He  is  rightly  said  Himself  to  work  in  them ; 
so  when  they  rest  in  Him,  He  is  rightly  said  Himself  to  rest. 
For  as  far  as  concerns  Himself,  He,  in  that  He  feels  not 
labour,  seeks  not  for  cessation.  For  He  created  all  things 
by  His  Word ;  and  His  Word  is  Christ  Himself,  in  Whom 
the  Angels  and  all  the  spirits  of  heaven  most  pure  do  rest 
in  holy  silence.  But  man  fallen  by  sin,  lost  that  rest  which 
he  possessed  in  His  Godhead,  and  receives  it  again  in  His 
Manhood :  and  therefore  in  due  time,  when  He  Himself 
knew  it  fitting  to  be  done.  He  was  made  Man,  and  born  of  a 
woman.  From  the  flesh  assuredly  He  could  receive  no 
defilement,  being  about  rather  Himself  to  cleanse  the  flesh. 
His  future  coming  the  ancient  Saints  by  the  revelation  of  the 
Spirit  knew  and  prophesied  of:  and  so  were  saved  by 
believing  that  He  will  come,  as  we  are  saved  by  believing 
that  He  is  come:  that  we  might  love  God  Wlio  hath  so 
loved  us,  as  to  send  His  only  Son,  that  He,  clothed  in  the 
humiliation  of  our  mortal  nature,  might  die  both  by  sinners 
and  for  sinners.  For  now  long  ago  from  the  earliest  ages, 
the  depth  of  this  mystery  ceases  not  to  be  prefigured  and 
prophesied  of. 

29.  "  Seeing  that  Almighty  €Jod,  Who  is  both  good,  and  xviii. 
just,  and  merciful.  Who  made  all  things  good,  whether  they 
be  great  or  small,  whether  they  be  high  or  low,  whether 
they  be  the  things  which  are  seen,  as  are  the  heavens,  the 
earth, and  the  sea;  and  in  the  heavens  the  sun  and  the  moon 
and  the  rest  of  the  stars,  and  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  sea, 
trees  and  plants  and  animals  each  after  their  kind,  and  all 
bodies  whether  celestial  or  terrestrial;  or  whether  they  be  the 
things  which  are  not  seen,  as  are  spirits  by  which  bodies  are 


220       Slate  of  Paradise.      God's  good  purpose  for  man. 

DE     fraught  with  motion  and  life  ;  He  made  man  also  after  His 

CHI-'  °^'"  if^iage,  that,  as  He  Himself  by  His  Almighty  power  rules 

zANDisover  the   wliole  creation,  so  man  by  his  understanding,  by 

BUS.    which  also  he  knows  and  worships  his  Maker,  might  rule  over 

all  animals  of  the  earth.     And  He  made  woman  also  as  a 

helpmate    for    him,    not    for    carnal    concupiscence:     since 

neither  did  they  then  possess  corruptible  bodies,  before  that 

mortality  came  upon  them  as  the  punishment  of  sin  ;  but  that 

both  the  man  might  have  glory  of  the  woman  in  going  before 

her  to  God,  and  might  be  to  her  an  example  of  sanctity  and 

piety,  as  he  himself  was  the  glory  of  God  in   following  His 

wisdom. 

30.  "  Therefore  he  set  them  in  a  certain  place  of  perpetual 
blessedness,  which  Scripture  calls  Paradise ;  and  gave  them 
a  command,  which  if  they  transgressed  not,  they  were  to  con- 
tinue ever  in   that  blessedness  of  immortality  ;  but  if  they 
transgressed  it,  they  were  to  pay  the  penalties  of  mortality. 
God  however  knew  before  that  they  would  transgress;  but,  in 
that  He  is  the  Creator  and  Author  of  all  good.  He  the  rather 
created   them,    seeing   that    He    created    beasts   also,   that 
He   might  fill    the    earth    with    earthly  good   things.     And 
assuredly  man,  even  a  siniier,  is  better  than  the  beast ;  and 
His    command,   which    they   were    not   about    to   obey.  He 
the  rather  gave  them,  that  they  might  be  without  excuse,  when 
He  began  to  execute  judgment  upon  them.      For  whatsoever 
man   doeth,  he   findeth  God  in    all    His  doings  worthy  of 
praise;  if  He  do  well,  he  findeth  Him  worthy  of  praise  for 
His  righteous  rewards,  if  he  sin,  he  findeth  Him  worthy  of 
praise  for  His  righteous  punishments ;  if  he  confess  his  sins 
and  return  to  a  right  fife,  he  findeth  Him  worthy  of  praise  for 
His  merciful   indulgence    towards   him.     Why  then  should 
God  not  create  man,  although  knowing  before  that  he  would 
sin,  whom  standing   firm  He  might   crown,  falling  correct, 
arising  assist.  Himself  at  all  times  and  in  all  ciixumstances 
glorious  in  His  goodness,  justice,  clemency.?  especially  in 
that    he    foresaw    this  also,   that   from    the   lineage    of  his 
mortality  there  would  be  born  Saints,  who  should  not  seek 
their  own,  but 'give  glory  to  their  Creator,  and  being,  through 
the  worshipping  of  Him,  freed  from  all  corruption,  should 
merit  to  live  for  ever,  and  to  live  in  blessedness  with  the  holy 


Free  uill  a  good,  and,  though  abused,  turned  to  good.   ^'2 1 
Angels.     For  He  Who  gave  to  men  freedom  of  choice,  that     de 


CATE- 
CHI- 


they  might  serve  God,  not,  as  slaves,  of  compulsion,  but,  as 

free  men,  voluntarily,  gave  it  also  to  Angels,  and  therefore  zandis 

neither  did  that  Angel,  who  with  other  spirits  his  followers  in    bus. 

his  pride,  deserted  the  service  of  God,  and  became  a  devil, 

in  any  sort  harm  God,  but  himself     For  God  knew  how  to '  rather^ 

correct  the  souls'  which  deserted  Him,  and  out  of  their  just  j-ee  Ke- 

miserv  to  furnish  the  inferior  parts  of  His  creation  with  most*''j^^*' 

'  .         1.2.C.14, 

fitting   and    suitable   laws  in  His  marvellous  dispensation,  cited  at 
Therefore  neither  did  the  devil  in  any  sort  harm  God,  either  in  *  inning 
that  he  fell  himself,  or  in  that  he  seduced  man  to  his  death;  of  this 
nor  did  man  himself  in  any  sort  take  away  from  the  truth,  orp_  isT. 
power,  or  blessedness  of  his  Creator,  in  that,  when  his  wife 
had  been  seduced  by  the  devil,  he  of  his  own  will  consented 
unto  her  to  do  that  which  God  had  forbidden.     For  by  the 
most  just  laws  of  God  all  were  condemned,  God  shewing 
Himself  glorious  in  the  justice  of  His  retribution,  they  being  Gen.  2, 
put  to  shame  by  the  disgrace  of  their  punishment,  that  so 
both  man  turning  away  from  his  Creator  might  be  subdued 
and  made  subject  to  the  devil,  and  the  devil  might  be  set 
forth  for  man  hereafter  returning  to  his  Creator  to  overcome; 
in  order  that  whosoever  should  continue  with  the  devil  even 
to   the  end,  might  \\ith   him  go   into  eternal   punishment; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  whosoever  should  humble  themselves 
before   God,  and  by  His  grace  overcome  the  devil,  might 
merit  eternal  rewards. 

31.  "  Neither  ought  this  to  move  us,  that  many  continue  xix. 
with  the  devil,  and  few  follow  God,  seeing  that  the  wheat 
also,  in  compaiison  of  the  chaff",  is  very  much  less  in  number-.  ^Butler, 
But  as  the  husbandman  knows  what  to  do  with  a  vast  heap   ^^^  'j^ 
of  chaff,  so  is  the  multitude  of  sinners  nothing  in  the  eye  of  c  5. 
God,  Who  knows  what  to  do  with  them,  so  as  in  no  way  to 
disturb   and  defile  the  government  of  His  kingdom.     Nor 
must  we  therefore  think  that  the  devil  hath  prevailed,  be- 
cause he  hath  taken  with  him  many,  that  with  them  he  be 
overcome  by  a  few.     Thus  two   cities,  one   of  the  wicked,, 
the  other  of  the  Saints,  are  carried  down  from  the  beginning 
of  the  human  race   even   to    the  end    of  the    world ;    now 
united  in  their  bodies,  but  separated  in  their  wills,  but  in 
the    day    of  Judgment    destined   to  be    separated   in    their 


222  Exattiple  of  mercy  and  judgment  in  the  Flood.  Its  types. 

DE     bodies    also.      For   all  men   who  love  pride   and  temporal 

CHI-'  I'ule,  with  vaniglorying  and  pomp  of  arrogance,  and  all  spiints 

zANDis^yliQ  delight  in  such  things,  and  seek  their  own  glory  in  the 

RUDI-    ,  .  ,  .       ,  ,       .  ,   .  ,,     „  11 

BUS.  having  mankind  as  their  subjects,  are  all  lound  together  in 
one  fellowship,  nay  although  they  often  strive  one  with 
another  for  these  things,  yet  are  they  cast  headlong  into  the 
same  abyss  by  like  weight  of  desire,  and  united  to  one 
another  by  similarity  in  habits  and  deserts.  And  again, 
all  men  and  all  spirits  who  humbly  seek  the  glory  of  God, 
not  their  own,  and  religiously  follow  Him,  belong  to  one 
fellowship.  And  yet  God  is  most  full  of  mercy,  and  is  long- 
suffering  with  ungodly  men,  and  affords  them  place  for 
repentance  and  amendment. 

32.  "  For  in  that  also  He  destroyed  by  a  flood  all  men, 
except  one  just  man  and  his  family,  who  He  willed  should 
be  saved  by  the  ark,  He  knew  assuredly  that  they  would  not 
amend  themselves ;  nevertheless,  whiles  during  a  hundred 
years  the  ark  was  built,  herein  certainly  was  still  preached 

Gen.  6,  to  them  the  wrath  of  God  about  to  come  upon  them  ;  and  if 
they  would  return  to  God,  He  would  spare  them,  as  He 
spared  in  after  times  the   city   of  Nineveh  upon   its   doing 

Jonahs. penance,  when  by  His  Prophet  He  had  foretold  their 
coming  destruction.  But  this  God  does,  granting  opportunity 
for  repentance  even  to  them  who  He  knows  will  go  on  and 
continue  in  their  sin,  in  order  by  His  own  example  to 
exercise  and  instruct  us  in  patience  ;  that  we  may  understand 
with  how  great  long-suffering  we  ought  to  bear  with  the  bad, 
seeing  that  we  know  not  what  kind  of  men  they  will  hereafter 
be,  since  He  spares  them  and  suffers  them  to  live,  from 
Whom  nothing  future  is  hidden.  And  yet  further  in  that 
Sacrament  of  the  Flood,  wherein  the  just  were  delivered  by  the 
Wood,  the  future  Church  was  prophesied  of,  which  Christ 
its  King  and  God  hath  b}'  the  mystery  of  His  Cross  upheld 
and  kept  from  the  drowning  of  this  world.  For  God  was 
not  ignorant,  that  even  from  them  who  had  been  preserved 
in  the  ark,  evil  men  would  be  born,  who  should  a  second 
time  fill  the  face  of  the  earth  with  their  iniquities,  yet 
notwithstanding  He  both  set  forth  a  pattern  of  the  future 
Judgment,  and  foretold  the  setting  free  of  His  Saints  by  the 
Sacrament  of  the  Wood.     For  even  after  these  things  evil 


Sainis  sought  heavenly  things,  common  Jews  earthly.   223 

ceased  not  to  spring  up  again  through  pride  and  hists  and     de 
unlawful  impieties,  when  men  having  deserted  their  Creator,    chi- 
not  only  fell  as  low  as  the  creatui-e  which  God  had  created,  z^ndis 

•^  .        ,  .  '     RUDI- 

so  as  to  worship  in  the  place  of  God  that  which  God  had  bus. 
made ;  but  they  also  bowed  down  their  souls  even  to  the 
works  of  men's  hands,  and  to  the  devices  of  craftsmen,  that 
herein  the  devil  and  evil  spirits  might  triumph  over  them 
more  shamefully,  who  take  pleasure  in  that  themselves 
in  such  vain  devices  receive  adoration  and  worship,  feeding 
their  own  errors  by  the  errors  of  mankind. 

33.   "  Nor   were  there   wanting  then  just  men,    such    as 

sought  God  devoutly  and  overcame  the  pride  of  the  devil, 

citizens  of  that  holy  City,  whom  the  coming  humiliation  of 

their  King  Christ,   revealed  to   them  by  the  Spirit,  healed. 

From  among  whom  Abraham  the  devout  and  faithful  servant 

of  God    was    chosen,  that    to  him   should  be    shewed  the 

Sacrament  of  the  Son  of  God,    that   so  in    following  his 

faith,  all  the  faithful  of  all  nations  might  be  called  in  future 

ages  his  children.     From  him  was  born  a  People  who  should 

worship  the  One  true  God,  Who  made  heaven  and  earth,  at 

a  time  when    all  other  nations   served  idols  and  demons. 

And  manifestly  in  this  People  was  the  future  Church  much 

more  clearly  prefigured.     For  in  it  there  was  a  multitude 

who    were    carnal,  and   who  worshipped  God  in   order  to 

obtain  blessings  such  as  may  be  seen  ;    but  in  it  also  there 

were    a   few,   whose  thoughts   were   of  a   future  rest,  their 

desires  set  on  a  heavenly  country,  to  whom  was  revealed  in 

prophecy  the  future  humiliation  of  God,  our  King  and  Lord 

Jesus    Christ,   in  order  that  by   that    faith    they  might   be 

healed  from  all  pride  and  haughtiness.     But  of  these  Saints, 

who  lived  before  the  time  of  the  birth  of  our  Lord,  not  only 

their  discourse,  but  their  life  also,  their  marriages,  their  sons, 

their  actions,  were  a  prophecy  of  this  present  time,  in  which 

through     faith    in    the    Passion    of  Christ,    the    Church    is 

gathered  together  from  among  the  nations.     By  the  hands 

of  those  holy  Patriarchs  and  Prophets  were  ministered  to 

the    carnal    People    of  Israel,  who   afterwards  were   called 

Jews,    both    these    visible    blessings    which    they    carnally 

desired  of  the  Lord,  and  such  chastisements  of  punishments 

for  the  body  as  might  for  a  time  affright  them,  as  was  fitting 


224      Salvation  IhrougJt  Christ  he/ore  He  came.     Types. 


DE  for  their  hardness  of  heart.  And  yet,  in  all  these,  spiritual 
;hi-"  mysteries  were  signified,  such  as  related  to  Christ  and  His 
^I'ls  Church  ;  of  which  Church  these  very  Saints  also  were 
BUS.    members,  although  in  this  life  they  were  before  that  Christ 


our  Lord  was  born  according  to  the  flesh.  For  He  Himself, 
the  only-begotten  Son  of  God,  The  Word  of  the  Father, 
equal  and  coeternal  with  the  Father,  by  Whom  all  things 
were  made,  was  made  Man  for  us,  that  of  the  Church,  as  of 
the  whole  body,  Ho  might  be  the  Head.  But  as  at  the  time 
of  the  birth  of  the  whole  man,  although  the  hand  be  put 
forth  first  in  the  birth,  yet  is  it  united  and  joined  together 
with  the  whole  body  under  the  head,  as  certain  also  among 
the  Patriarchs  themselves,  to  signify  this  very  thing,  were 
Gen. 25, born  when  the  hand  had  been  sent  forth   first:    so  all  the 

QC     fir    *?Q 

27^30.'  Saints  who   were  upon  earth  before  the  birth  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  although  born  before,  yet  to  that  one  Body,  of 
which  He  is  the  Head,  they  were  united  under  the  Head. 
XX.        34.  "  This  People  then  having  gone  down  into  Egypt  were 
in  subjection  to  a  very  cruel  King;   and   taught  by  their 
grievous  labours,  sought  for  God  to  be  their  Deliverer ;  and 
there  was  sent  unto  them  one  from  among  the  people  them- 
selves, God's  holy  servant  Moses,  who  in  the  might  of  God 
terrifying   by    miracles   the    then    ungodly    nation    of    the 
Egyptians,  led  out  thence  the  People  of  God  through  the 
Red  Sea,  where  the  water  divided  and  made  a  way  for  them 
to  pass  through;  but  when  the  Egyptians  pursued  them,  the 
waters   returned    upon   them,   and  overwhelmed  them,  and 
they  perished.     So,  in  like  manner  as  by  the  flood  the  earth 
by  water  was  cleansed  from  the  wickedness  of  sinners,  who 
were  then  in  that  overflowing  of  waters  blotted  out,  and  the 
Just  escaped  by  the   Wood:    so  when   the  People   of  God 
went  out   of  Egypt,  they  found   a  path    through   the  very 
waters   by  which    theii*  enemies  were   swallowed  up.     Nor 
was  the  Sacrament  of  the  Wood  wanting  there  also.     For 
Moses  smote  with  a  rod,  that  so  that  miracle  might  come  to 
pass.     Now  both  these  things  are  a  sign  of  holy  Baptism,  in 
which  the  faithful  pass  into  a  new  life,  and  their  sins,  as  it 
were   their  enemies,   are   blotted    out   and  die.     But   more 
openly  was  the  Passion   of  Christ  prefigui*ed  among  that 
People,  in   that  they  were   commanded  to   slay  and   eat  a 


The  Tmic  given  the  Jens  as  carnal.  Siyns  of  higher  Truth.  225 

lamb,  and  with  part  of  his  blood  to  mark  their  door-posts,     "e 
and  to  celebrate  this  every  year,  and  to  call  it  the  Lord's    chi- 
Passover-     Sm'ely   most  clearly   does  prophecy   say   of  our  z^ndis 
Lord  Jesus   Christ,  that,   He  icas   led   as   a   lamb  to   the    bus. 


.'Slaughter.     With  the  Sign  of  Whose  Passion  and  of  Whose  1^-^3,7. 
Cross  thou  art  to-day  to  be  signed  in  thy  forehead,  as  on  the 
door-post,  and  all  Christian  people  are  thus  signed. 

35.  "  After  this,  that  People  were  led  during  forty  years  Numb. 
through  the  Wilderness ;  they  also  received  the  Law  written  De'ut.29, 
by  the  Finger  of  God,  by  which  word  the   Holy  Spirit  is^- 
signified,  as  is  most  clearly  shewn  in  the  Gospel.     For  God  21, 12; 
is  not  limited  by  any  bodily  form,  nor  are  we  to  conceive  of^^'  ^^'^ 
parts  and  fingers  in  Him  in  the  same  manner  as  we  see  20. 
them  in   ourselves ;    but  because  through    the    Holy  Spirit 
God's  gifts  are  divided  to  the  Saints,  in  order  that,  being- 
endued  with   different  powers  they  yet   may    not   separate 
from  the  bond  of  love,  and  that  iu  fingers  especially  is  seen  a 
certain  division,  and  yet  no  cutting  off  from  unity ;  whether 
it  be  for  this,  or  for  whatsoever  other  cause,  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  called  the  Finger  of  God,  yet  must  we  not,  when  we  hear 
this,  have  in  our  thoughts  the  form  of  a  human  body.     This 
People,  then,  received  the  Law  written  by  the  Finger  of  God, 
and  that  in  tables  of  stone,  to  signify  the  hardness  of  their 
hearts,  in  that  they  were  not  about  to  fulfil  the  Law ;    seeing 
that   through    desiring   temporal  gifts  at   the    hand  of  the 
Lord,  they  were  held  by  carnal  fear  rather  than  by  spiritual 
love;  but  the  Law,  nothing  save  charity  can  fulfil.     Therefore 
were  they  laden  with  many  visible  sacraments,  that  so  they 
might  be  weighed  down  by  a  servile  yoke,  in  observances  of 
meats;  and  in  sacrifices  of  animals,  and  numberless  other 
things ;  which  yet  were  signs  of  spiritual  things  relating  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Church ;  which  at  that  time 
a  few  Saints  both  understood  so  as  to  gain  from  them  the 
fruit  of  salvation,  and  observed  as  was  suited  to  the  times, 
whereas  the  multitude  of  carnal  men  merely  observed,  and 
did  not  understand  them. 

36.  "  Thus  through  many  and  various  signs  of  future  things, 
all  which  things  it  would  take  time  to  mention,  and  which 
we  now  see  fulfilled  in  the  Church,  that  People  were  led 
to  the  Land  of  Promise,  wherein  to  reign  after  a  temporal 

Q 


2'26  King  David  a  type  of  Christ;  Bahyloji,  of  the  world. 

DE     and    carnal   foshion  according  as  was  llieir   desire;    which 

CHI-    ^'*^''y  earthly  kingdom  nolwilhslanding  bore  an  image  of  an 

zAxnisiieavenlv  Kingdom.     There  was  built  Jerusalem,  that  most 

RTTDI-  . 

BUS.    famous  City  of  God,  serving  in  bondage  as  a  sign  of  that 
Gal.  4,  free  City  which  is  called  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem,  which  is 

25.  26.  J  7 

a  Hebrew  word,  and  by  interpretation  the  'Vision  of  Peace.' 
The  citizens  of  which  are  all  sanctified  men,  who  have  been, 
and  who  are,  and  who  hereafter  shall  be  ;  and  all  sanctified 
spirits,  even  all  whosoever  in  the  highest  heavens  obey  God 
with  godly  devotion,  and  follow  not  the  impious  pride  of  the 
devil  and  his  angels.  The  King  of  this  City  is  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Word  of  God,  by  Whom  the  highest  Angels 
are  ruled,  and  the  Word  taking  to  Himself  Man,  that  by  Him 
men  also  might  be  ruled,  who  all  together  with  Him  shall 
reign  in  eternal  peace.  To  prefigure  this  King  in  that 
earthly  kingdom  of  the  people  of  Israel  king  David  was 
especially  set  fortl),  of  whose  seed  according  to  the  flesh 
should  come  our  very  and  true  King,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
IJoni.  9,  Who  is  orer  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Many  things  in  that 
^'  Land  of  Promise  were  done  to  be  a  figure  of  Christ  W^ho 

should  come,  and  of  the  Church,  which  you  will  be  able  to 
learn  by  degrees  in  the  sacred  Books  themselves. 
x\i.       37.  "Again,  some  generations  after,  God  shewed  another 
type,  relating  greatly  to  the  matter  of  which  we  are  speaking. 
For  that  city  was  brought  into  captivity,  and  a  great  portion 
led  away  into  Babylon.    But  as  Jerusalem  signifies  the  city  and 
fellowship  of  the  Saints,  so  does  Babylon  signify  the  city  and 
fellowship  of  the  wicked,  being  by  interpretation  '  confusion.' 
Concerning    which    two    cities    from    the   beginning  of   the 
human  race  even  to  the  end  of  the  world  moving  on,  the  one 
blended  with  the  other,  in  all  changes  of  times,  and  hereafter 
in  the  last  Judgment  appointed  to  be   separated,  we  have 
Jer.  29,  already   spoken  a  little  above.     That  captivity  then  of  the 
city  of  Jerusalem,  and  that  People  led  away  to  Babylon,  are 
commanded  to  go  into  .slavery  by  the  Lord,  through  Jeremiah, 
a  Prophet  of  that  time.      And   there  were  found  kings   of 
Dan.  2   Babylon,  under  whom  they  were  in  bondage,  who  by  occa- 
f^'  ?'   sion  of  their  ca])tivity,  moved  by  certain  miracles,  learned  to 
2(i.'    '    know,  and  worshipped,  and  counnanded  to  be  worshipped, 
the  One  true  God,  Who  framed  the  whole  creation.     And 


The  C/iurch  hath  outuard peace  by  secular  Potcers.    2*27 

they  were  also  orflered  both  to  ]May  for  those  by  whom  they     de 
were  l^ept  captives,  and  in  their  jieace  to  hope  for  peace,  to  *^^''''^- 
beget  cl)iklreii,  and  to  build  houses,  and  to  plant  gardens  zandis 
and  vineyards.     But  after  seventy  years  there  is  promised    bJs!" 
them    delivery   from   that  cajitivity.     But    all  this  signified  Jer.  25, 
under  a  figure  that  the  Church  of  Christ  in  all  its  Saints, 
who   are   citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  was  to  be   in 
bondage  under  the  kings  of  this  world.     For  the  teaching 
also  of  the  Apostle  says,  that  every  soul  he  subject  to  the'S.om. 
liiyher  powers^  and  that  there  be  rendered  all  t/iiiigs  to  all     ' 
ine)i,  tribute  to  u-hom  tribute  is  due,  custom  to  ivhom  custo)n ; 
'  and  all  other  things  which,  saving  our  duty  of  worship  to 
God,  we  render  to  the  princes  of  the  order  of  human  society: 
since  the  Lord  Himself,  that  He  might  give  us  an  example  ofMat.  17, 
this  sound  teaching,  refused  not  to  vouchsafe  to  pay  tribute     '"'' 
for  that  individual  Manhood'  wherein  he  was  clothed.     Still  "capiie 
further,  Christian  servants  and  good  believers  are  commanded  *'^'"'""' 
to  serve  their  temporal  masters  faithfully  and  with  willing 
minds,  whom  hereafter  they  will  judge,  if  even  to  the  last 
they  shall  find  them  unrighteous,  or  with  whom  they  shall 
reign  together  in  common,  if  they  too  shall  turn   unto  the 
true  God.     Yet  all   are   commanded   to   be   subject  to   the 
powers  that  are  of  man  and  of  this  earth,  until  at  the  end  ol 
an  appointed  time,  which  is  signified  by  the  seventy  years, 
the  Church  be  set  free  from  the  confusion  of  this  world,  as 
Jerusalem  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon.     By  occasion  of 
which  captivity  the  kings  of  the  earth  themselves,  having 
deserted  their  idols,  in  whose  behalf  they  used  to  persecute 
the   Christians,  have  learned  to  know,  and  do  worship,  the 
one  true  God  and  the  Lord  Christ;   for  whom   the  Apostle 
Paul  orders  ])rayer  to  be  made,  even  when  they  persecuted 
the  Church.     For  he  thus  says,  /  beseech  therefore  that  first  I'^ima, 
of  all  supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,  and  givinrj  of  '    ' 
thanks,  be  made  for  kings,  for  all  men,  and  all  that  are  in 
high  station,  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life 
with  all  godliness  and  love.     Thus  by  these  very  persons 
peace  has  been  given  to  the  Church,  although  it  be  only 
temporal,  temporal  quiet  to  build  up  houses  after  a  spiritual 
manner,  and  to  plant  gardens  and  vineyards.     For  see,  you 
yourself,  at  this  very  instant,  we  are  by  this  discourse  building 

q2 


CI 


228        The  Capiivitij  a  Type.     Five  Ages  of  Prophecy. 

up  and  planting.     And  this  is  doing  all  over  the  world,  with 
'^^^''  peaceable  allowance  of  Christian  kings,  as  the  same  Apostle 
ziNDis  says,  Ye  are  God's  husbandry.,  ye  are  God's  building. 
BUDi-       gg^  i  ^^-^^  j^^£jg^.  seventy  years,  the  number  which  Jeremiah 

BUS.  _  _  J     J  J 

iCor.3  iiacl  prophesied  of  in  a  mystery,  to  prefigure  the  end  of  times, 
^-  to  the  end  that  the  figure  itself  might  be  made  perfect,  there 

was  in  Jerusalem  a  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  of  God:  but  in 
that  the  whole  was  done  in  a  figure,  there  was  no  sure  peace 
and  liberty  given  to  the  Jews.     Therefore  they  were  after- 
wards conquered  by  the  Romans,  and  made  tributary.     In 
truth  from  that  very  period  at  which  they  received  the  Land  of 
Promise,   and  began    to  have    kings,  that    they  might   not 
suppose  that  the  promise   of  Christ  as  their  Deliverer  was 
fulfilled  in  the  person  of  any  of  their  kings,  Christ  was  in 
many  prophecies  prophesied  of  more  ojienly  ;  not  only  by 
David  himself  in  the  book  of  Psalms,  but  by  the  rest  both 
great  and  holy  Prophets,  even    to  the  time    of  their  going 
captive  to  Babylonia  ;  and  in  the  very  captivity  there  were 
Prophets  wlio  prophesied  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Deliverer  of  all.     And  after  that  the  seventy  years 
were  past,  and  the  Temple  was  restored,  the  Jews  suffered  at 
the  hands  of  the  kings  of  the  Gentiles  so  great  oppression 
and  distress,  that  they  might  understand  that  their  Deliverer 
was  not  yet  come,  concerning  Whom  they  understood  not 
that  He  should  deliver  them  after  a  spiritual  manner, but  longed 
for  Him  in  order  to  a  carnal  deliverance, 
xxii.        ^^-  "  Now  when  five  ages  of  the  world  were  accomplished, 
of  which  the  first  is  fi-om  the  beginning  of  the  human  race, 
Gen.  6,  that  is,  from  Adam,  who  was  the  first  man  created,  down  to 
^^'        Noe,  who  made  the  ark  at  the  time  of  the  flood:  after  this 
Gen.  17,  the  second  extends  down  to  Abraham,  who  was  called  the 
-^^^      Father  of  all  nations,  which  should  follow  his  faith,  but  who 
12,  16.   yet  in  the  way  of  descent  from  his  own  flesh,  was  the  Father 
of  the  future  Jewish  People,  which  one  People,  before  the 
Christian  Faith  was  embraced  by  the  Gentiles,  alone  among 
all  those  in  all   the   earth  worshipped  the  One  True  God,  of 
which  very  People  according  to  the  flesh  our  Saviour  Christ 
should  come.     For  these  distinct  periods  of  two  ages  are 
very  prominent  to  the  old  Books,  but  those  of  the  other  three 
are  declared  likewise  in  the  Gospel,  where  the  descent  ac- 


The  sixth  Age,  that  of  the  neic  creation  of  max.     229 
cording  to  the  flesh  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  stated.     For     de 

1        C  A  T  F 

the  third  is  from  Abraham  down  to  kinsj  David:  the  fourth 


CHI- 

iNDIS 

RUDI- 


from  David  down  to  that  captivity  in  which  the  People  of  z^ndis 

,  .  .  RUDI 

God  passed  into  Babylon;  the   fifth  from  that  passmg  into    B^g 
Babylon  down  to  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  from  Matt,  i, 
the  time  of  Whose  coming  is  the  sixth  age;  that  now  that 
spiritual  grace,  which  then  was  known  to  a  few  Patriarchs 
and  Prophets,  might  be  made  manifest  to  all  nations:  that  no 
man  might  worship  God  except  freely^,  not  seeking  at  Hisi  gratis 
hands  such  rewards  for  the  service  as  are  seen,  and  happiness 
in  the  present  life,  but  only  life  eternal,  in  which  to  enjoy 
God  Himself:  in  order  that  in  this  sixth  age  man's  mind  may 
be  renewed  after  the  image  of  God,  as  on  the  sixth  day  man  Gen.  i, 
w^as  created  after  the  image  of  God.     For  then  also  is  the^''* 
Law  fulfilled,  when,  not  through  desire  of  temporal  things, 
but  through  love  of  Him  Who  hath  commanded,  all  things 
wliatsoever  He  commanded  are  done.     But  who  but  must 
desire  earnestly  to  love  in  return  a  most  just  and  merciful 
God,  Who  so  first  loved  men,  that  were  most  unjust  and 
proud,  as  for  their  sake  to  send  His  only  Son,  by  Whom  He 
made  all  things:  Who  being  made  Man,  not  by  any  change 
of  Himself,  but  by  taking  unto  Himself  Man,  might  not  only 
live  with  them,  but  also  be  slain  for  them  and  by  them? 

40.  "  Therefore  making  known  the  New  Testament  of  our 
eternal  inheritance,  wherein  man  renewed  by  the  grace  of 
God  might  live  a  new  life,  that  is,  a  spiritual  life ;  that  He 
might  shew  the  first  to  be  old,  wherein  a  carnal  people,  in 
the  character  of  the  old  man,  (excepting  a  few  Patriarchs  and 
Prophets  who  understood,  and  certain  hidden  Saints,)  living 
after  a  carnal  manner  desired  carnal  rewards  at  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  God,  and  received  them  as  a  figure  of  spiritual 
good  things :.  thei'efore  the  Lord  Christ  being  made  Man, 
despised  all  the  good  things  of  the  earth,  in  order  to  shew  us 
that  they  are  to  be  despised:  and  endured  all  the  evils  of  the 
earth  which  He  enjoined  us  are  to  be  endured:  that  neither 
happiness  might  be  sought  in  the  one,  nor  unhappiness  feared 
in  the  other.  For  being  born  of  a  mother,  who,  (although 
she  had  conceived  undefiled  by  man,  and  continued  ever 
undefiled,  virgin  in  her  conception,  virgin  in  her  bringing 
forth,  virgin  in  her   death,)   yet  had  been  espoused  to  a 


230  Humiliation  of  Christ.  Resurrection.  Sending  the  Spirit. 
nE     carpenter,  He  extinmiished  all  the  pride  of  nobility  of  birth 

CATE-         .  .  .  '  . 

CHI-    after  the  flesh.     And  in  that  He  was  born  also  in  the  city  of 
zANDis  Bethlehem,   which  amon^   all   the   cities    of  Judah    was  so 

RUDI-  ... 

BUS.  small,  that  it  is  at  this  day  called  a  village,  it  was  not  His 
will  that  any  should  gloiy  in  the  greatness  of  any  earthly 
city.  Also  He  was  made  poor,  Whose  are  all  things,  and  by 
Whom  all  things  were  made,  that  no  one,  who  believed  in 
Him,  might  dare  to  be  elated  on  account  of  earthly  riches. 
He  would  not  be  made  a  King  by  men;  because  He  was 
shewing  the  way  of  humility  to  wretched  beings,  whom  pride 
had  separated  from  Him,  although  all  creation  bear  witness 
to  His  ever  eternal  reign.  He  was  hungry.  Who  feeds  all 
men:  He  was  thirsty,  by  Whom  is  created  every  thing  that  is 
drunk,  and  Who  is  spiritually  the  bread  of  the  hungry,  and 
the  fountain  of  the  thirsty:  He  was  wearied  with  His  earthly 
journey,  Who  hath  made  Himself  the  way  for  us  to  heaven: 
He  was,  as  it  were,  dumb  and  deaf  before  His  revilcrs,  by 
Whom  the  dumb  spake,  and  the  deaf  heard :  He  was  bound, 
Who  loosed  from  the  bands  of  infirmities:  He  was  scourged, 
Who  drave  out  of  men's  bodies  the  scourges  of  all  pains: 
' '  ciu-  Wq  vvas  put  to  the  torment  of  the  Cross',  Who  put  an  end  to 
•i  <  cru-  all  our  torments";  He  died,  Who  raised  the  dead.  But  He 
ciatus,  m-Qj;e  jiiso  never  more  to  die,  that  no  one  from  Him  might 
learn  so  to  despise  death,  as  if  he  were  never  hereafter  to 
live. 
x;x.iii.  41."  Then  having  confirmed  the  Disciples,  and  having  con- 
versed with  them  during  forty  days,  in  the  sight  of  these 
same  He  ascended  up  into  heaven :  and  when  fifty  days  were 
accomplished  after  His  resurrection.  He  sent  to  them  the 
Holy  Spirit,  (for  so  He  had  promised,)  by  Whom  having  love 
shed  abroad  in  their  hearts,  they  might  fulfil  the  law  not  only 
without  feeling  it  a  burden,  but  even  with  gladness  of  heart. 
Now  this  Law  was  given  to  the  Jews  in  ten  Commandments, 
which  they  call  the  Decalogue.  And  these  again  are  reduced 
Mat.22,  to  two,  that  we  love  God  wilh  all  our  heart,  with  all  our 
soul,  and  with  all  our  mind,  and  that  we  love  our  neighbour 
as  ourselves.  For  that  on  these  two  Commandments  hang 
;dl  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  our  Lord  Himself  hath  both 
said  in  the  Gospel,  and  by  His  own  example  shewn.  For  in 
the  ease  likewise  of  the  Peoj)le   of  Israel,  from  the  day  on 


Old  Law,and  Pentecost,  typeoJtheNew.  First  conversions.  -23 1 
which  Ihcy  first  celebrated  the  Passover  in   a  figure,  killing     de 


CATE- 
CHI- 


and  eating  the  lamb,  with  whose  blood  their  door-posts  were 
marked  as  a  safeguard:  from  this  very  day  then  the  fiftieth  zandis 
day  was  fulfilled,  and  they  received  the  Law  written  by  the    r^s. 
Finffer  of  God,  by  which  word  we  have  already  said  that  the  Ex.12. 

Ex    19 

Holy  Spirit  is  signified :   so  after  the  Passion  and  Resurrec-  i/fg.  ' 
tion  of  the  Lord,  which  is  the  true  Passover,  on  the  fiftieth  see  §.35. 
day  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself  was  sent  to  the  Disciples,  now 
no  longer  by  tables  of  stone  signifying  the  hardness  of  their 
hearts;  but  when  they  were  assembled  together  in  one  place 
at  Jerusalem  itself,  there  was  on   a  sudden   a  sound  from 
heaven,  as  of  the  rushing  of  a  mighty  blast,  and  there  appeared 
unto  them  tongues  divided  as  of  fire,  and  they  began  to  speak 
with  tongues,  so  that  all  who  had  come  to  them  recognised 
each   his  own   tongue,  (for  to  that  city  there  were  wont   to 
assemble  Jews  from  every  land,  wheresoever  they  had  been 
dispersed,  and  had  learnt  the  different  tongues  of  the  different  f^^^' 
nations.)     After  this,  preaching  Christ  with  all  confidence, 
they  worked  many  signs  in    His  Name,  insomuch  that,   as 
Peter  passed  by  a  certain  dead  man,  his  shadow  touched  ^j'*^  ^' 
him,  and  he  arose  again. 

42.  But  when  the  Jews  saw  that  so  great  signs  were  being 
done  in  His  Name,  Whom,  partly  through  envy,  and  partly 
through  ignorance,  they  had  crucified,  some  were  provoked 
to  persecute  the  Apostles  who  preached  Him;  others, however, 
wondering  the  more  at  that  very  thing,  that  in  His  Name, 
Whom  they  had  mocked  as  borne  down  and  overcome  by 
themselves,  so  great  miracles  were  being  done,  repenting, 
were  converted,  and  believed  on  Him,  to  the  number  of  some 
thousands  of  the  Jews.     These  were  no  longer  desiring  at 
the  hand  of  God  temporal  benefits  and  an  earthly  kingdom, 
nor  looking  for  Christ,  their  promised  King,  after  a  carnal 
manner:  but   understanding  in  the  way  of  immortality,  and 
loving  Him  Who  had  endured  so  great  things  in  the  way  of 
mortality  for  them  at  their  own  hands,  and  had  forgiven  them 
their  sins  even  to  the  .sin  of  His  own  bloodshedding,  and  by 
the  example  of  His  resurrection  had  held  forth  immortality 
as  what  they  were  to  hope  for  and  desire  of  Him.     Therefore 
now,  mortifying   the   earthly   desires    of  the  old  man,  and 
burning  with  the  newness  of  spiritual  life,  according  as  the 


232  Persecuiio?fs.   Paul  converted.   Collection  for  i lie  Saints. 

DE     Lord  in  the  Gospel  had  enjoined,  they  sold  all  that  they  had, 

CHI-    ^^'^  ^^^^d   the   prices   of  their  properties   at  the   feet  of  the 

ZANDisy\^postles,  that  they  miaht  distribute  to  each  as  each  had  need, 

RUDT-         \      .     .  .        ^  . 

BUS.    and  hvmg  in  Christian  love  and  concord,  they  said  not  that 


Acts  2,  any  thing  was  their  own,  but  they  had  all  things  common,  and 

,  ■  ''"  'were  of  one  soul  and  of  one  heart  towards  God.     Afterwards 

32—35.  themselves  also   suffered  persecution  in  the  flesh  from  the 

Acts  8,  Jews,  their  carnal  fellow-citizens,  and  were  dispersed  abroad, 

that  so  by  their  being  dispersed  the  name  of  Christ  might  be 

preached  more  widely,  and  themselves  likewise  imitate  the 

patience  of  their  Lord:  in  that  He  Who  had  meekly  suffered 

' '  eos.'  them',  commanded  them  to  become  meek  and  to  suffer  for 

SeeHeb.  ^^.        ' 

12,  3.     His  sake. 

43.  "  Of  the  number  of  these  persecutors  of  the  Saints  was 
the  Apostle   Paul,   who    also    raged   extremely  against  the 
Christians :   but  afterwards,  believing  and  being  made   an 
Apostle,  he  was  sent  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles, 
enduring  more  grievous  things  for  the  name  of  Christ  than 
he  had  done  against  the  name  of  Christ.     But  when  he  was 
founding    Churches    throughout   all    the   nations    where    he 
preached    the    Gospel,    he    earnestly    enjoined   them,    that, 
(since  they,  coming  from  the  worship  of  idols,  and  unskilled 
to  worship  the   one   true  God,  could  not  easily  serve  God 
with  selling  and  making  distribution  of  their  property,)  they 
should  make  collections  for  those  poor  ones  of  the  Saints  who 
were    in    the    Churches    of  Judaea   which   had  believed   in 
Christ;  thus  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  appointed  the  one 
to  be,  as  it  were,  soldiers,  the  others,  as  it  were,  tributaries  of 
PS'  11^)  the  provinces:  placing  Christ  in  the  midst  as  a  corner-stone, 
Is.  28,    (according  as  had  been  foretold  of  Him  by  the  Prophet,)  in 
l*^-         Whom  both,  as  walls  coming  together  from  different  points, 
that  is  to  say,  from  the  Jews  and  from  the  Gentiles,  might 
be   united  in  true   kindred  affection.     But  afterwards  more 
grievous  and  frequent  persecutions  arose  from  the  nations 
who  believed  not  against  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  day  by 
day  was  the  Lord's  saying  fulfilled,  when   He  prophesied. 
Mat.  10,  Beliold,  I  send  you  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves. 
xxiv.       "^4-  "I^i^t  ihal  vine  which  was  spreading  abroad  her  fruitful 
branches  throughout    the   whole  world,  as   had   been  pro- 
phesied of  her,  and  as  the  Lord  Himself  had  foretold,  made 


Heresies  and  Schisms.     ClirisCs  Comiiiy  lo  Jmhjment.  -233 

larger  shoots,   the  more  richly  she   was  watered   with    the     de 
blood    of    the    inartjrs.      And    as    throughout     all     lands  *^^JJ;' 
countless  numbers  died  for  the  truth  of  the  faith,  the  very  zandis 
persecuting  kingdoms   gave   way,  and   bowed    the   neck    of    gus." 
pride,  and  turned  themselves  to  know  and  worship  Christ. 
But  it   was  fitting  that   this  same  vine,  as  had  been  often  J.,hni5, 
foretold  by  the  Lord,  should  be  pruned,  and  the  unfruitful  ~' 
branches  cut  off  from  it,  by  which  heresies  and  schisms  in 
different  places  were  caused  under  the  name  of  Christ,  by 
men  who   sought  not   His  glory,  but  their  own,  by  whose 
differences  the  Church  might  be  more  and  more  exercised, 
and  both  its  doctrine  and  its  patience  be  proved  and  made 
clear. 

45.  "  All  these  things  therefore,  as  we  read  of  them  fore- 
told so  long  before,  so  also  do  we  perceive  them  accom- 
plished; and  as  the  first  Christians,  in  that  they  as  yet  saw 
not  the  coming  to  pass  of  these  things,  were  by  miracles 
moved  to  believe;  so  we,  in  that  all  these  things  have  been 
so  fulfilled,  as  we  read  them  in  the  Books,  which  were 
written  long  before  these  things  vvere  fulfilled,  wherein  all 
things  were  spoken  of  as  future,  and  are  now  seen  as  present, 
are  built  up  unto  faith,  to  believe,  enduring  and  abiding  in 
the  Lord,  that  those  things  also  which  remain  will  without 
any  doubt  come  to  pass.  Seeing  tb.at  we  still  read  of  future 
tribulations  in  the  same  Scriptures,  and  of  that  last  day,  the 
Day  of  Judgment,  wherein  all  the  citizens  of  both  these 
cities  will  receive  again  their  bodies  and  arise,  and  give  an 
account  of  their  life  before  the  Judgment-seat  of  Christ  the 
Judge.  For  He  will  come  in  the  brightness  of  His  power, 
Who  before  deigned  to  come  in  the  humiliation  of  His 
humanity,  and  will  separate  all  the  godly  from  the  ungodly, 
not  only  from  them  who  altogether  would  not  believe  in 
Him,  but  from  them  also  who  believed  in  Him  in  vain  and 
without  fruit ;  about  to  give  to  the  one  an  eternal  kingdom 
with  Himself,  to  the  others  eternal  punishment  with  the 
devil.  But  as  no  joy  springing  from  temporal  things  can  be 
found  in  any  way  like  the  Joy  of  Eternal  Life,  which 
the  Saints  are  hereafter  to  receive  ;  so  no  torment  of  temporal 
punishments  can  be  compared  to  the  eternal  torments  of  the 
wicked. 


234        Resurrection  both  of  the  Just  and  the  Unjust. 

DE         46.  "  Wherefore,    brother,   strengthen    yourself    in    His 
CATE-  ]sj^|^g    jjud    iijj.    ]]eli)    in   AVhom   you  believe,  against  the 

CHI-  '  ''  ■>        u 

zANDis  tongues  of  tliem  who  make  a  mock  at  our  faith,  by  whose 
Bug.'  mouth  the  devil  speaketh  seducing  words,  chiefly  seeking  to 

^xvT  make  a  mock  at  faith  in  the  resurrection.     But  do  you,  of 

yourself,  believe  that  you  will  be,  now  that  you  have  been, 

seeing  that,  whereas  before  you  were  not,  you  now  see  that 

you  are.     For  where  was  that  bulk  ot"  body,  and  that  form 

and  knitting-together  of  limbs  a  few  years  ago,  before  you 

were   born,    or   even    before    you    were    conceived   in   your 

mother's  womb.''   where  was  this  bulk  and  this  stature  of  your 

body  ?     Came  it  not  forth  to  light  from  the  hidden  secrets 

of  this  creation,  the  Lord  fiod  invisibly  forming  it,  and  rose 

np  to  this  greatness  and  figure,  by  the  determinate  increase 

which  each  age  ministered .?     How  then  is  it  at  all  matter  of 

difliculty  with  God,  Who  in  a  moment  draws  together  the 

very  piles  of  the  clouds  out  of  His  secret  place,  and  rovers 

the  heavens  in  an  instant  of  time,  to  restore  that  quantity  of 

thy  body  as  it  was,  in  that  He  was  able  to  make  it  as  it  was 

not?     Let  thy  belief  therefore  be  strong  and  imshakcn,  that 

things  which  seem,  as  though  they  perished,  to  be  withdrawn 

from  human  eyes,  are  safe  and  entire  to  the  omnipotence  of 

God;  Who  when  He  shall  so  will,  will  renew  them  without 

any   delay   or  difficulty,   that  is,   such   only   as   his   Justice 

judges  meet  to  be  renewed:  in  order  that  men  may  give  an 

account  of  their  actions  in  these  very  bodies  in  which  they 

performed  them;  and  in  these  may  deserve  either  the  change 

unto  heavenly  incorruption  according  to  the  deserts  of  their 

godliness,    or    a    condition    of  body    subject    to    corruption 

according  to  the  deserts  of  their  unrighteousness,  not  such  as 

death  may   bring  to  dissolution,  but    such    as    may    afford 

material  for  eternal  pains. 

47.  "  Flee  therefore  by  faith  unmoveable  and  a  good 
life,  flee,  brother,  those  torments,  wherein  neither  do  the 
tormentors  fail,  nor  the  tormented  die;  to  whom  it  is  never- 
ending  death,  to  be  unable,  in  the  midst  of  torments,  to 
die.  And  go  on  to  glow  with  love  and  desire  of  the  life 
eternal  of  the  Saints,  wherein  neither  action  will  be  attended 
with  toil,  nor  rest  with  sloth;  wherein  will  be  the  praise  of 
God  continuing  and  unfailing;   no   irksome   feeling  in   the 


Faith  to  end  in  sight.   Temptations  to  leave  the  Church.  235 

mind,  no  sense  of  fatigue  in  the  body,  no  want,  either  of     df. 
your  own  for  you  to  desire  relief,  or  of  your  neighbour's  for    ^^^^ 
you  to  hasten  to  administer  it.     God   will  be  all  the  delight  zandis 
and  fulness  of  that  holy  City,  in   ITim  and  of  Him  living  in    bus. 
wisdom  and  blessedness.     For  we  shall  be  made,  as,  accord- 
ing to    His    promise,   we  hope   and  look   for,  equal  to   the 
Angels  of  God,  and  equally  with  them  have  the  enjoyment Luke20, 
of  that  Trinity  then   by  sight,  in  Which  we  now  walk   by2Cor.5, 
faith.     For  we  believe  what  we  see   not,  that  hy  the    very  7. 
merits  of  this  our  fiiith  we  may  deserve  to  see  also,  and  to 
cleave  to,  that  which  we  believe ;  that  so  the  equality  of  the 
Father,  Son,  and   Holy  Spirit,  and   the   Unity   of  the   very 
Trinity,   in  what  manner  these  three   are  One   God  ;  these 
things,  we   may  now   no   longer  cause   to   be   heard  in   the 
words  of  Faitli,  and  in  syllables  of  loud  utterance,  but  may 
in   that   silence   drink   them   in   by  most  pure  and  glowing 
contemplation. 

48.  "  These  things  keep  fixed  in  thy  heart,  and  call  upon 
that  God  in  Whom  thou  believest,  that  He  defend  thee 
against  the  temptations  of  the  devil:  and  be  on  thy  guard, 
lest  that  enemy  creep  upon  thee  secretly  from  any  quarter, 
who  for  a  most  malicious  comfort  in  his  own  damnation 
seeks  for  others  with  whom  he  may  be  condemned.  For  he 
dares  to  tempt  the  Christian,  not  by  means  of  them  only, 
who  hate  the  Christian  name,  and  grieve  that  the  world  hath 
been  overspread  by  that  Name,  and  who  wish  still  to  be 
servants  of  idols,  and  of  the  curious  superstitions  of  demons; 
but  by  means  of  those  also  whom  a  little  above  we  men- 
tioned, as  cut  off  from  the  unity  of  the  Church,  as  when  the 
vine  is  pruned,  who  are  called  heretics  or  schismatics,  does 
he  attempt  at  times  the  very  same  tiling.  Notwithstanding 
at  times  also  he  attempts  it,  and  endeavours  to  seduce  men 
by  means  of  the  Jews.  But  especially  is  this  to  be  guarded 
against,  that  each  man  be  not  tempted  and  deceived  by 
means  of  men  who  are  in  the  Catholic  Church  itself,  whom 
it  bears  like  the  chaff  until  the  time  of  its  winnowing.  For 
on  this  account  is  God  long-suffering  towards  them,  both 
that  Ho  may  by  means  of  their  frowardncss  confirm,  by 
exercising,  the  laiih  and  wisdom  of  His  elect,  and  because 
of  their  number  many  go  forward,  and  taking  pity  upon  their 


'236  Tetnplaiiuit  from  .si/nn  rs-  u-ithiii  (lie  Church. 


DE     own   souls  are  turned  with   great  earnestness  to  do  things 
CHI-    pleasing  to  God.     For  not  all  by  reason  of  the  longsufFermg 
zANDTSof  God  treasure  up   unto  themselves  wrath  in   the   day  of 
BUS,    wrath   of  His   righteous  judgment;    but   many   this    same 
longsuff'ering    of  the    Almighty    leads    to    most   wholesome 
sorrow  of  repentance.     And  until  this  take  place,  by  means 
of  them  is  tried  not   only  the   longsuffering  of  them   who 
already  hold  the  right  way,  but  also  their  pity.     You  are 
about  therefore  to  see  many  drunkards,  covetous,  deceivers, 
gamesters,  adulterers,  fornicators,  men  who  bind  on  them- 
selves sacrilegious   charms,  given  up   to  enchanters,  astro- 
logers, diviners,  using  all  kinds  of  impious  acts.     You  will 
notice   also  that   the    very  crowds  fill  the  churches  on  the 
festival-days  of  the  Christians,  which  fill  the  theatres  also  on 
the  solemn  days  of  the  Pagans :  and  as  you  see  these  things, 
you  will  be  tempted  to  imitate  them.     And  why  say  I,  you 
will  see,  what  even  now  assuredly  you  are  aware  of?     For 
you  are  not  ignorant,  that  many  who  are  called  Christians 
are  workers  of  all  these  evil  works,   which  I  have  briefly 
noticed.       And    at   times,    perhaps,  you    are    not    unaware 
that   men,  whom    you    know    to    be    called   Christians,    do 
more   grievous   things   than   these.     But  if  the    mind    with 
which  you  have  come  be  this,  to  do  these  things  as  if  safe,  you 
are  in  much  error:  nor  will  the  name  of  Christ  profit  you, 
when  He  shall  have  begun  to  execute  most  severe  Judgment, 
Who  before  deigned  to  aid  us  with  the  greatest  mercy.     For 
He   Himself  foretold  these  things,  and  thus  speaks  in  the 
Matt.  7,  Gospel ;   Not  every  one  ihat  saith   unto  3fe,   Lord,  Lord, 
shall  enter  into  the  Lvingdom  of  Heaven,  but  he  that  doeth 
the  will  of  My  Father.     Many  shall  say  unto  Me  in  that 
day.  Lord,  Lord,  in  Thy  Name  we  have  eaten  and  drunken. 
To   all  therefore   who   continue  in  such  works  the   end   is 
condemnation.     When    therefore   you   shall   see   many  not 
only  doing  these  things,  but  even  defending  and  counselling 
them,  keep  thyself  close  to  the  law  of  God,  and  follow  not 
those  that  transgress  it.     For  not  according  to  their  under- 
standing, but  according  to  His  truth,  thou  shalt  be  judged. 

49.  "  Unite  yourself  to  the  good,  whom  you  see  love  with 
you  your  King.  For  you  will  find  many,  if  yon  also  begin 
to  be  such  yourself     For  if  at  spectacles  you  used  to  wish 


All  trust  to  be  in  God.     Ceremoiitj  to  be  explained.     '237 

to  be  with  them,  and  to  cleave  to  them  who  joined  with  you  j^e 
in  loving  charioteer,  or  lumter,  or  player  of  any  kind;  how  '^chi-" 
much  more  ought  you  to  be  pleased  to  be  united  to  those,  zandis 
who  join  with  you  in  loving  God,  Who  never  will  put  any  bus. 
man  that  loves  Him  to  the  blush  of  shame,  in  that  not  only 
is  He  incapable  of  being  overcome,  but  He  will  also  render 
them  that  love  Him  unconquerable.  And  yet  not  even  in 
good  men  themselves,  who  either  go  before  you,  or  go  with 
you  to  God,  ought  you  to  place  your  hope,  seeing  that 
neither  ought  you  to  place  it  in  your  own  self,  however  great 
progress  you  may  malce,  but  in  Him  Who  by  justifying  you 
maketh  them  and  you  such.  For  thou  art  sure  of  God,  in 
that  He  changes  not;  but  of  man,  no  one  is  wisely  sure. 
But  if  we  ought  to  love  those  who  are  not  yet  just,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  so,  with  how  much  greater  warmth  of 
affection  are  they  to  be  loved,  who  are  already  so?  But  it 
is  one  thing  to  love  man,  another  thing  to  place  our  hope  in 
man  :  and  the  difference  is  so  great,  as  that  God  commands 
the  one,  forbids  the  other.  But  if  you  shall  suffer  any  either 
insults  or  troubles  for  the  name  of  Christ,  and  not  fall  from 
the  faith,  nor  err  from  the  good  way,  you  will  receive  a 
greater  reward ;  but  they  who  in  these  things  yield  to  the 
devil,  lose  even  the  less.  But  be  thou  humble  before  God, 
that  he  suffer  thee  not  to  be  tempted  beyond  thy  strength." 

50.  After  this   discourse   he   is  to  be    asked    whether   he  xxvi. 
believe  these  things,  and  desire  to  observe  them.     And  upon 
his  replying  that  he  does,  then  must  he  be  duly  signed,  and 
treated  after  the  manner  of  the   Church.     Concerning  the 
Sacrament  indeed''  which  he  is  receiving,  when  it  hath  been 
well  impressed  upon  him,  that  things  visible  are  indeed  signs 
of  things  invisible,   but  that  in    them   the    things  invisible 
themselves  are  honoured:  and  that  that  kind'   consecrated '' spe- 
by  prayer  is  not  so  to  be  esteemed  of,  as  it  is  esteemed  of  in  '"'^™" 
any  ordinary  use,  it  is  to  be  mentioned  what  signifies  also 
the  language^  which  he  has  heard,  and  what  in  him  That ''-e- the 

form  of 
words 
*  'sane.'      Ben.    suggests    '  salis,'     mother's  womh.''      Of  the   ceremonies  used. 
'  of  salt,'  (which  is  the  meaning,  but     used    in    making    a     catechumen,    see 
cannot  well  he  the  rearUng,)  quoting     Martene,b.  i.  c.  i.  art.  6&7.     Rituale 
Conf.  i.  §.11.     "  And  now  was  I  signed     Itomanum  de  Sacr.  Bapt.  Goar,  Euch. 
with  the  sign  of  His  Cross,  and   sea-     Gr.  p.  334. 
soned    with    His   salt,  even  from    my 


238    Caution  for  i9ite7'pretatioiis.     A  shorter  Catechisitig. 

DE     doth  season,  the  likeness  of  Which  that  matter  bears.     After- 
CHI-"  ^'^^I'^^s  takinj^  occasion  from  this  we  must  admonish  him,  that 
zANDisjf  lie   hear  any  thing  even  in  the   Scriptures  which   has   a 
BUS.    carnal  sound,  although   he  understand   it  not,  yet  that  he 
believe    that    something    spiritual    is    signified,    relating    to 
holiness  of  conduct,  and  a   future   life.     This  however  he 
learns  thus  briefly,  that,  whatever  he  shall  hear  out  of  the 
Canonical  books,  which  he  is  not  able  to  refer  to  the  love  of 
eternity  and  of  truth  and  of  holiness,  and  to  the  love  of  our 
neighbour,  this  he  believes  to  have  been   spoken  or  done 
under  a  figure ;   and  that  he  endeavour  so  to  understand  it, 
as  to  refer  ii  to  that  twofold  love.     So  also  that  he  under- 
stand not  his  '  neighbour'  after  a  carnal  sense,  but  every  one 
who  may  be  with  himself  in  that  hoi}'  City,  whether  already 
so,  or  whether  he  be  not  yet  seen  :  and  that  he  despair  of  no 
man's  amendment,  whom  he  sees  living  through  the  long- 
Rom.  2,  suffering  of  God   for   no   other   end,  as  the   Apostle    says, 
except  tliis,  that  he  be  brought  to  rejientance. 

51.  If  this  discourse  a])pear  to  you  long,  in  which  I  have 
supposed  myself  instructing  an  unlearned  man,  it  is  in  your 
power  to  state  these  things  more  briefly;  longer  however 
than  this  I  think  not  it  ought  to  be ;  although  it  makes  a 
great  difference  what  the  case  itself  at  the  time  may  suggest, 
and  what  our  auditors  actually  present  may  shew,  that  they 
not  only  endure,  but  even  desire.  When  however  it  is 
necessary  to  be  quick,  observe  how  easily  the  whole  matter 
may  be  set  forth.  Again,  suppose  one  to  come,  who  wishes 
to  be  a  Christian;  then  that  upon  being  questioned,  he  have 
given  the  same  answer  as  the  former;  seeing  that  even  if  he 
do  not  make  this  answer,  we  must  say  that  he  ought  to  have 
made  it;  upon  this  we  must  put  together  all  else  we  have 
to  say  in  the  manner  following. 

52.  '  Truly,  brother,  that  is  great  and  true  blessedness  which 
is  promised  to  the  Saints  in  another  life:  whilst  all  visible 
things  pass  away,  and  all  the  pomp  of  this  world,  and  its 
overcarefulness,  will  perish,  and  are  drawing  with  them  to 
destruction  those  who  love  them.  From  which  destruction, 
that  is,  from  eternal  jninishment,  God  in  II is  mercy  willing 
to  deliver  men,  if  they  be  not  their  own  enemies,  and  resist 
not  the  mercy  of  their  Creator,  sent  His  only-begotten  Son, 


Fall  and  Redemption  of  I\fan.     Gift  of  t lie  Spirit.     239 
tliat  is,  His  Word  coequal  witli  Himself,  by  Which  He  made      db 


CATE- 
CHI- 


all  things.  And  He,  conlinning  indeed  in  His  own  Divinity, 
and  dejiarting  not  from  the  Father,  neither  changed  in  any  7:andis 
thing,  yet  by  taking  unto  Himselr  Man,  ana  appearing  unto  bus. 
men  in  mortal  flesh,  came  to  men :  and  as  by  one  man  who 
was  first  created,  that  is,  Adam,  death  entered  into  the  human 
race,  in  that  he  consented  unto  his  wife,  when  she  was  seduced 
by  the  devil,  to  transgress  together  the  commandment  of 
God;  so  by  one  Man,  Who  is  also  God,  the  Son  of  God, 
Jesus  Christ,  all  past  sins  being  blotted  out,  all  that  believe 
in  Him  might  enter  into  eternal  life. 

53.  '  For  all  things  which  you  now  see  taking  place  in  thexxvii. 
Church  of  God,  and  in  the  Name  of  Christ  throughout  the 
whole  world,  were  already  foretold  ages  before,  and  as  we 
read  of  them,  so  do  we  see  them,  and  are  thence  built  up 
unto  faith.  At  one  time  there  came  a  flood  over  the  whole 
earth,  that  sinners  might  be  blotted  out;  and  yet  they  who 
esca]ied  in  the  arli,  shev\  ed  a  sacrament  of  the  future  Church, 
which  now  is  floating  on  the  waves  of  this  world,  and  by  the 
wood  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  delivered  from  being  over- 
whelmed. It  was  prophesied  to  Abraham,  a  faithful  servant 
of  God,  one  single  man,  that  of  him  should  be  born  a  People, 
who  should  worshi])  the  one  God,  among  the  rest  of  the 
nations  who  worshipped  idols;  and  all  things  which  were 
foretold  to  happen  to  that  People,  came  to  pass  even  as 
they  were  foretold.  For  Christ  also.  Who  is  King  of  all 
Saints,  and  God,  was  prophesied  of  among  that  People,  as 
about  to  come  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  himself,  according  to 
the  flesh,  which  He  took  to  Himself,  that  all  might  be  sons 
likewise  of  Abraham  who  should  follow  his  faith:  Christ  was 
born  of  Mary,  a  virgin,  who  was  of  that  race.  It  was  foretold 
by  the  Prophets  that  He  should  suffer  on  the  Cross  by  that 
very  People  of  the  Jews,  of  whose  race  according  to  the  flesh 
He  came:  and  so  it  was  done.  It  was  foretold  that  He 
should  rise  again  :  He  rose  again,  and,  according  to  the  very 
predictions  of  the  Prophets,  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and 
sent  to  His  disciples  the  Holy  S])irit.  It  was  foretold  not 
only  by  the  Prophets,  but  also  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  that  His  Church  should  be  over  the  whole  world, 
spread  abroad  by  martyrdoms  and  sufferings  of  the  Saints : 


240  Prophecy  fuljillecl  a  pledge  of  the  future.    Temptations. 
uE     and  foretold  then,  when  as  yet  His  Name  was  both  hidden 


CATE- 
CHI 


UUDI- 
BUS. 


from  the  nations,  and  made  a  mock  at,  where  known;  and 
zANDis  yet  in  the  might  of  His  miracles,  whether  those  which  of 
Himself,  or  which  through  His  servants  He  wrought,  whilst 
these  things  are  being  proclaimed  and  believed,  we  now  see 
what  was  foretold  fulfilled,  and  the  very  kings  of  the  earth, 
who  before  persecuted  Christians,  brought  into  subjection  to 
the  yoke  of  Christ.  It  was  foretold  also  that  schisms  and 
heresies  would  go  forth  out  of  His  Church,  and  in  His  name, 
in  places  where  they  were  able,  would  seek  their  own  glory, 
not  Christ's,     And  these  things  have  been  fulfilled. 

54.  '  Whether  then  will  not  those  things  which  remain 
come  to  pass  ?  It  is  clear  that,  as  they  being  foretold  came 
to  pass,  so  also  will  these  things:  whatsoever  afflictions  of 
the  righteous  yet  remain,  and  the  day  of  Judgment,  which 
will  separate  all  the  ungodly  from  the  righteous  in  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead:  and  not  only  them  that  are  without  the 
Church,  but  also  the  chaff  of  the  Church  itself,  which  she 
must  endure  with  all  long-suffering  until  the  last  winnowing, 
will  it  separate  unto  the  fire  which  is  their  due.  But  they 
who  make  a  mock  at  the  resurrection,  as  thinking  that  this 
flesh,  in  that  it  becomes  corrupt,  cannot  rise  again,  will  rise 
again  in  it  to  punishment:  and  God  will  shew  them,  how  that 
He  Who  could  make  their  bodies  before  they  were,  can  in  a 
moment  restore  them  as  they  were.  But  all  the  faithful,  about 
to  reign  with  Christ,  shall  so  rise  again  in  the  same  body,  as 
to  deserve  also  to  be  changed  unto  angelic  incorruption;  that 
they  may  be  made  equal  to  the  Angels  of  God,  as  the  Lord 

Luke20,  Himself  promised  ;  and  may  praise  Him  without  any  failing, 
^"         and  without  any  weariness,  ever  living  in  Him,  and  of  Him, 

with  such  joy  and  blessedness,  as  can  neither  be  spoken  of, 

nor  thought  of  by  man. 

55.  '  Do  you  therefore,  believing  these  things,  beware  of 
temptations,  (because  the  devil  seeks  them  who  may  perish 
with  him,)  that  not  only  by  means  of  those  who  are  without 
the  Church,  whether  they  be  Pagans,  or  Jews,  or  Heretics, 
that  enemy  deceive  thee  not;  but  also  that  you  follow  not 
those  whom  you  shall  see  in  the  very  Catholic  Church  living 
ill,  either  without  moderation  in  the  pleasures  of  the  belly 
and  the  throat,  or  unchaste,  or  given  up  to  vain,  over-curious. 


Unite  uith  the  good;  love  sinners;  hale  their  sitis.    241 

oi'  unlawful  acts,  whether  they  be  of  the  nature  of  spectacles,     de 
or  charms,  or  divinations  by  means  of  devils,  or  living  in  the    ^hi- 
pomp  and  arrogance  of  covetousness  and  pride,  or  in  any  life  ^a'^o^s 
which  the  law  condemns  and  punishes:  but  rather  that  you    bus. 
join  yourself  to  the  good,  whom  you  will  easily  discover,  if 
you  also  begin  to  be  such;  that  together  you  may  worship 
and   love    God  without   looking    for   reward;    because    He 
Himself  will  be   all   our  reward,  to  enjoy  in  that  life   His 
goodness  and  beauty.     But  He  is  to  be  loved,  not  in  the 
same  manner  as  any  thing  which  is  seen  with   the  eyes,  but 
as  wisdom  is  loved,  and  truth,  and  holiness,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  charity,  and  if  there  be  any  thing  else  which  we 
call  of  this  sort,  not  after  the  manner  in  which  these  things 
exist  among  men,  but  as  they  exist  in  the  very  well-spring  of 
incorruptible    and    unchangeable    Wisdom.       Whomsoever 
therefore  you  shall  see  love  these  things,  join  thyself  to  thein, 
that  through  Christ,  Who  was  made  Man,  that  He  might  be 
the  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  thou  mayest  be  re- 
conciled to  God.     But  perverse  men,  although   they  enter 
the  walls  of  the  Church,  yet  think  not  that  they  will  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  because  when  their  time  comes 
they  will  be   separated,  if  they  change  not  for  the   better. 
Follow  therefore  good  men,  bear  with  evil  men,  love  all ; 
since  vou  know  not  what  he  will  be  to-morrow,  who  to>dav  is 
evil.     Yet  love  not  their  unrighteousness,  but  therefore  love 
themselves,  that  they  may  lay  hold  of  righteousness;  because 
not  only  is  the  love  of  God  commanded  us,  but  the  love  of 
our  neighbour  also,  on  which  two  commandments  hangs  the  Mat.22, 
whole  Law  and  the  Prophets.     Which  no  man   fulfils,  but 
he  only  who  hath  received  the  Gift,  the  Holy  Spirit,  WIjo  is 
assuredly  coequal  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  seeing  that 
this  very  Trinity  is  God ;  in  Which  God  is  to  be  placed  all 
our  hope.     For  in  man  it  must  not  be  placed,  let  him  be 
of  what  sort   soever  he    will.     For  He    by  Whom    we    are 
justified,  is   one   thing;    they,  with  whom   we  are  justified, 
are  another.     But  the  devil  tempts  not  only  through  lusts, 
but  also  through  terrors  of  insults,  and  of  pains,  and  of  death 
itself.      But   whatever    a    man    shall    have    suffered   for  the 
name  of  Christ,  and  for  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  and  shall 
have  endured  continuing  firm,  the  greater  reward  shall  be 

R 


242       God  helps  those  tcJto  are  humble  and  merciful. 

DE     given  him ;  but  if  he  shall  yield  to  the  devil,  he  shall  be 

CHI-'  condemned  with  him.     But  works  of  mercy,  together  with 

zAMDis  godly  humility,  obtain  from   the  Lord,  that  He  suffer  not 

BUS.    His   servants   to  be  tempted   more  than  they  are  able  to 

bear. 


S.  AUGUSTINE 

OF 

CONTINENCE. 


St.  Augustine  speaks  of  his  work  on  Continence  in  Ep.  262,  ad  Darium 
Comitem.  Possidius  Ind.  c.  10.  mentions  it,  and  it  is  cited  in  the  Col- 
lectanea of  Bede  or  Florus,  and  by  Eugypias.  Erasmus  is  therefore 
wrong  in  ascribing  it  to  Hugo  ou  the  ground  of  the  style,  which  is  not 
unlike  that  of  the  earlier  discourses.  It  is  evidently  a  discourse,  and  pro- 
bably for  that  reason  unnoticed  in  the  Retractations.  The  Maniclijean 
heresy  is  impugned  after  the  manner  of  his  early  works.     Ah.  from  Ben. 


1,  It  is  difficult  to  treat  of  the  virtue  of  the  soul,  which  is     de 


called  Continence,  in  a  manner  fully  suitable  and  worthy;  ^^en-' 
but  He,  Whose  great  gift  this  virtue  is,  will  help  our  little-    tia. 
ness  under  the  burden  of  so  great  a  weight.     For  He,  Who      i. 
bestows  it  upon  His  faithful  ones  when  they  are  continent, 
Himself  gives  discourse  of  it  to   His  ministers  when  they 
speak.     Lastly,  of  so   great  a   matter   purposing   to   speak 
what  Himself  shall  grant,  in  the  first  place  we  say  and  prove 
that  Continence  is  the  gift  of  God.     We  have  it  written  in  Wisd.8, 
the  Book  of  Wisdom,  that  no  one  can  be  continent,  unless  ^^" 
God  grant  it.     But  the  Lord,  concerning  that  greater  and 
more  glorious  Continence  itself,  whereby  there  is  continence 
from  the  marriage  bond,  says.  Not  all  can  receive  this  saying,  Mat.i9, 
hut  they  to  ichom  it  is  given.     And  since  marriage  chastity  ^^* 
also  itself  cannot  be  guarded,   unless  there  be  Continence 
from  unlawful  intercourse,  the  Apostle  declared  both  to  be 
the  gift  of  God,  when  He  spake  of  botli  lives,  that  is,  both 
that  of  marriage  and  that  without  marriage,  saying,  /  would  i  Cor. 
that  all  men  were  so  as  myself;   but  each  hath  his  oun  gift  '^  '' 
from  God;  one  in  this  manner,  another  in  that  manner. 

2.  And  lest  it  should  seem  that  necessary  Continence  was 
to  be  hoped  for  from  the  Lord  only  in  respect  of  the  lust  of 
the  lower  parts  of  the  flesh,  it  is  also  sung  in  the  Psalm; 
Set,  O  Lord,  a  watch  to  my  mouth,  and  a  door  of  Conti-Ps.iu, 
nence  around  my  lips.     But  in  this  witness  of  the  divine^' 

r2 


244  Every  action  is  first  a  word  in  the  heart. 

DE     speech,  if  we  understand   '  mouth'   as  we  ought  to    under- 
NEN-   stand  it,  we  perceive  how  great  a  gift  of  God  Continence 

_l^ll_  there  set  is.  Forsooth  it  is  little  to  contain  the  mouth  of  the 
body,  lest  any  thing  burst  forth  thence,  which  is  not  for 
the  better,  through  the  sound  of  the  voice.  For  there  is, 
within,  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  where  he,  who  spake  these 
words,  and  wrote  them  for  us  to  speak,  desired  of  the  Lord 
that  the  watch  and  door  of  Continence  should  be  set  for 
him.  For  many  things  we  say  not  with  the  mouth  of  the 
body,  and  cry  aloud  with  the  heart:  but  there  goes  forth 
from  the  mouth  of  the  body  no  word  of  any  thing,  whereof 
there  is  silence  in  the  heart.  Therefore  what  flows  not  forth 
thence,  sounds  not  abroad:  but  what  flows  forth  thence,  if  it 
be  evil,  although  it  move  not  the  tongue,  defiles  the  soul. 
Therefore  Continence  must  be  set  there,  where  the  conscience 
even  of  them  who  are  silent  speaks.  For  it  is  brought  to  pass 
by  means  of  the  door  of  Continence,  that  there  go  not  forth 
thence  that,  which,  even  when  the  lips  of  the  flesh  are  closed, 
pollutes  the  life  of  him  that  hath  the  thought, 
ii,  3.  Lastly,  to  shew  more  plainly  the  inner  mouth,  which 

Ps.  141,  by  these  words  he  meant,  after  having  said,  Set  a  watch,  O 
Lord,  to  mil  month,  and  a  door  of  Continence  around  my 
lips,  he  added  straightway,  Cause  not  my  heart  to/all  aside 
into  evil  tvords.  The  falling  aside  of  the  heart,  what  is  it 
but  the  consent  ?  For  he  hath  not  yet  spoken,  whosoever  in 
his  heart  hath  with  no  falling  aside  of  the  heart  consented 
unto  suggestions  that  meet  him  of  each  several  thing  that  is 
seen.  But,  if  he  hath  consented,  he  hath  already  spoken  in 
his  heart,  although  he  hath  not  uttered  sound  by  the  mouth ; 
although  he  hath  not  done  with  hand  or  any  part  whatever 
of  the  body,  yet  hath  he  done  what  in  his  thought  he  hath 
already  determined  that  he  is  to  do:  guilty  by  the  divine 
laws,  although  hidden  to  human  senses;  the  word  having 
been  spoken  in  the  heart,  no  deed  having  been  committed 
through  the  body.  But  in  no  case  would  he  have  moved 
the  limb  without,  in  a  deed,  the  beginning  of  which  deed 
had  not  gone  before  within  in  word.     For  it  is  no  lie  that  is 

Ecclus.  written,  that  The  beginning  of  every  tcork  is  a  tvord.     For- 

Lxxi  sooth  men  do  many  thmgs  with  mouth  closed,  tongue  quiet, 
voice  bridled  ;  but  yet  they  do  nothing  by  work  of  the  body. 


Our  Lord  speaks  of  what  comes  from  themouth  of  the  heart.  245 
which   they   have   not   before    spoken    in    the   heart.     And     de 

1        1   •  •  .^  •  •  •  J  •  CONTI- 

through  this  since  there  are  many  sms  m   inward  sayings  j^^,^,. 
which  are  not  in  outward  deeds,  whereas  there  are  none  in    Jta. 
outward  deeds,  which  do  not  go  before  in  inward  savings, 
there  will  be  purity  of  innocence  from  both,  if  the  door  of 
Continence  be  set  around  the  inward  lips, 

4.  For  which  cause  our  Lord  Himself  also  with  His  own 
mouth  saith.  Cleanse  what  are  within,  and  what  are  iniihout  ^lat.23, 

.  26. 

will  be  clean.  And,  also,  in  another  place,  when  He  was 
refuting  the  foolish  speeches  of  the  Jews,  in  that  they  spake 
evil  against  His  disciples  eating  with  unwashen  hands;  iVo/Mat.15, 
what  entereth  into  the  month,  said  He,  dejileth  the  man: 
but  ichat  Cometh  forth  out  of  the  mouth,  that  defileth  the 
man.  Which  sentence,  if  the  whole  of  it  be  taken  of 
the  mouth  of  the  body,  is  absurd.  For  neither  doth 
vomit  defile  him,  whom  food  defdeth  not.  Forsooth  food 
entereth  into  the  mouth,  vomit  proceedetli  forth  out  of 
the  mouth.  But  without  doubt  the  former  words  relate 
to  the  mouth  of  the  flesh,  where  He  says.  Not  uhat 
entereth  into  the  mouth  defileth  the  >wrt«,  butthe  latter  words 
to  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  where  He  saith,  But  what  pro- Mat.  15, 

1  7—20 

ceedelh  forth  out  of  the  mouth,  this  defileth  the  man. 
Lastly,  when  the  Apostle  Peter  sought  of  Him  an  ex- 
planation of  this  as  of  a  parable.  He  answered.  Are  ye  also 
yet  without  understanding^  understand  ye  not,  that  ?vhat- 
soever  entereth  into  the  mouth,  goeth  into  the  belly,  and  is 
cast  out  into  the  draught?  Here  surely  we  perceive  the 
mouth  of  the  flesh,  into  which  the  food  enters.  But  in  what 
He  next  adds,  in  order  that  we  might  recognise  the  mouth 
of  the  heart,  the  slowness  of  our  heart  would  not  follow,  did 
not  the  Truth  deign  to  walk  even  with  the  slow.  For  He 
saith.  But  tvhat  things  go  forth  from  the  mouth,  go  out  of 
the  heart ;  as  though  He  should  say.  When  you  hear  it  said 
from  the  mouth,  understand  *  from  the  heart.'  I  say  both, 
but  I  set  forth  one  by  the  other.  The  inner  man  hath  an 
inner  mouth,  and  this  the  inner  ear  discerns :  what  things 
go  forth  from  this  mouth,  go  out  of  the  heart,  and  they  defile 
the  man.  Then  having  left  the  term  mouth,  which  may  be 
understood  also  of  the  body,  He  shews  more  openly  what 
He  is  saying.      For  from  the  heart  go  out,  saith  He,  evil 


246      The  heart  duly  kept  consents  not  to  ill  thoughts. 

DB     thoughts,    murders,   adulteries,  fornications,    thefts,    false 
NEN-'  tt^itness,  hlasphemies;  these  are  what  dejile  the  man.    There 
'^^■^-    is  surely  no  one  of  those  evils,  which  can  be  committed  also 
by  the  members  of  the  body,  but  that  the  evil  thoughts  go 
before  and  defile  the  man,  although  something  hinder  the 
sinful  and  wicked  deeds  of  the  body  from  following.     For  if, 
because  power  is  not  given,  the  hand  is  free  from  the  murder 
of  a  man,  is  the  heart   of  the  murderer  forsooth  therefore 
clean  from  sin  ?    Or  if  she  be  chaste,  whom  one  unchaste 
wishes  to  commit  adultery  with,  hath  he  on  that  account  failed 
to  commit  adtdtery  with  her  in  his  heart  ?   Or  if  the  harlot  be 
not  found  in  the  brothel,  doth  he,  who  seeks  her,  on  that 
account  fail  to  commit  fornication  in  his  heart?     Or  if  time 
and  place  be  wanting  to  one  who  wishes  to  hurt  his  neigh- 
bour by  a  lie,  hath   he   on  that   account  failed   already  to 
speak  false  witness  with   his  inner  mouth  ?     Or  if  any  one 
fearing  men,  dare  not  utter  aloud  blasphemy  with  tongue  of 
flesh,  is  he  on  this  account  guiltless  of  this  crime,  who  saith 
Ps- 1^,  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God.     Thus  all  the  other  evil  deeds 
of  men,  which  no  motion  of  the  body  performs,  of  which  no 
sense  of  the  body  is  conscious,  have  their  own  secret  criminals, 
who  are  also  polluted  by  consent  alone  in  thought,  that  is, 
by  evil   words  of  the   inner   mouth.      Into   which  he   (the 
Psalmist)  fearing  lest  his  heart  should  fall  aside,  asks  of  the 
Lord  that  the  door  of  Continence  be  set  around  the  lips  of 
this  mouth,  to  contain  the  heart,  that  it  fall  not  aside  into 
evil  words :  but  contain  it,  by  not  suffering  thought  to  pro- 
ceed to  consent :  for  thus,  according  to  the  precept  of  the 
Rom.  6,  Apostle,  sin  reigneth  not  in  our  mortal  body,  nor  do  we  yield 
■     '   oiu*  members  as  weapons  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin.     From 
fulfilling  which  precept  they  are  surely  far  removed,  who  on 
this  account  turn  not  their  members  to  sin,  because  no  power 
is  allowed  them :  and  if  this  be  present,  straightway  by  the 
motions  of  their  members,  as  of  weapons,  they  shew,  who 
reigneth  in  them  within.     Wherefore,  so  far  as  is  in  them- 
selves, they  yield  their  members  weapons  of  unrighteou.sness 
unto  sin ;    because  this  is  what  they   wish,  which  for  this 
reason  they  yield  not,  because  they  are  not  able. 

5.  And  on  this  account  that,  which,  the  parts  that  beget 
being  bridled  by  modesty,  is  most  chiefly  and  properly  to  be 


Evil  lust  within  noiv  repressed  hy  Continence.        247 

called  Continence,  is  violated   by  no   transgression,   if  the     de 
higher  Continence,  concerning  which  we  have  been  some    nen-' 
time  speaking,  be  preserved  in  the  heart.     For  this  reason    t^^- 
the  Lord,  after  He  had  said,  For  from  the  heart  go  forth  evil 
thoughts,  then  went  on  to  add  what  it  is  that  belongs  to  evil 
thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  and  the  rest.    He  spake  not  of 
all;  but,  having  named  certain  by  way  of  instance,  He  taught 
that  we  are  to  understand  others  also.     Of  which  there  is  no 
one  that  can  take  place,  unless  an  evil  thought  have  gone 
before,  whereby  that  is  prepared  within,  which  is  done  without, 
and  going  forth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  heart  already  defiles 
the  man,  although,  through  no  power  being  granted,  it  be  not 
done  without  by  means  of  the  members  of  the  body.     When 
therefore  a  door  of  Continence  hath  been  set  in  the  mouth  of 
the  heart,  whence  go  out  all  that  defile  the  man,  if  nothing 
such  be  permitted  to  go  out  thence,  there  followeth  a  purity, 
wherein  now  the  conscience  may  rejoice;  although  there  be 
not  as  yet  that   perfection,  wherein   Continence   shall  not 
strive  with  vice.    But  now,  so  long  as  thejlesh  luslelh  against  Gal.  5, 
the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  it  is  enough  for  ^ '' 
us  not  to  consent  unto  the  evils  which  we  feel  in  us.     But, 
when  that  consent  takes  place,  then  there  goeth  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  heart  what  defilath  the  man.    But  when  through 
Continence  consent  is  withheld,  the  evil  of  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  against  which  the  lust  of  the  spirit  fights,  is  not  suffered 
to  harm. 

6.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  fight  well,  which  now  is,  when     iii. 
the  strife'  of  death  is  resisted ;  another  thing  not  to  have  an  !  (read- 

,  "  ing  vu- 

adversary,  which  will  then  be,  when  death,  the  last  enemy,  kh) 
shall  be   destroyed.      For  Continence    also   itself,  when   itj.  ^^ 
curbs  and  restrains  lusts,  at  once  both  seeks  the  good  unto  ib.  26. 
the  immortality  of  which  we  aim,  and  rejects  the  evil  with 
which  in  this  mortality  we  contend.    Of  the  one  it  is  forsooth 
the  lover  and  beholder,  but  of  the  other  both  the  enemy  and 
witness :  both  seeking  what  becomes,  and  fleeing  what  misbe- 
comes.    Assuredly  Continence  would  not  labour  in  curbing 
lusts,  if  we  had  no  wishes  contrary  to  what  is  becoming,  if 
there  were  no  opposition  on  the  part  of  evil  lust  unto  our 
good  will.     The  Apostle  cries  aloud,  1  know,  saith  he,  that  Rom.  7, 
there  dwelletli  not  in  me,  that  is  in  my  Jlesli,  good.     For  to 


248  The  Ixixv  detects,  yrace  alone  conquers  sin. 

DE     will  lieth  near  to  me,  hut  to  accomplish  yood  I  Jind  not. 

NEN-  For  now  good  can  be  done,  so  far  as  that  there  be  no  assent 

TiA.    given  unto  evil  hist :  but  good  will  be  accomplished,  when 

the  evil  lust  itself  shall  come  to  an  end.     And  also  the  same 

Rom.  7,  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  cries  aloud,  1  take  pleasure  toqelher 

22. 23.         .  . 

with  the  late  of  God  after  the  inner  man:  hut  J  see  another 
law  in  my  mernhers,  ivarring  against  the  law  of  my  mind. 

7.  This  conflict  none  experience  in  themselves,  save  such 
as  war  on  the  side  of  the  virtues,  and  war  down  the  vices: 
nor  doth  any  thing  storm  the  evil  of  lust,  save  the  good  of 
Continence.  But  there  are,  who,  being  utterly  ignorant  of 
the  law  of  God,  account  not  evil  lusts  among  their  enemies, 
and  through  wretched  blindness  being  slaves  to  them,  over 
and  above  think  themselves  also  blessed,  by  satisfying  them 
rather  than  taming  them.  But  whoso  through  the  Law  have 
Rom.  3,  come  to  know  them,  {For  through  the  Law  is  the  knowledge 

Of) 

Rom.  7  ^f  *''^'  ^"^^5  Lust,  saith  he,  I  knew  not,  unless  the  Law 

7.  should  say,   Thou  shall  not  lust  after,)  and  yet  are  over- 

come by  their  assault,  because  they  live  under  the  Law, 
whereby  what  is  good  is  commanded,  but  not  also  given : 
they  live  not  under  Grace,  which  gives  through  the  Holy 
Spirit  what  is  commanded  through  the  Law  :  unto  these  the 
Law  therefore  entered,  that  in  them  the  offence  might  abound. 

Rom.  5,  The  prohibition  increased  the  lust,  and  made  it  unconquered: 
that  there  might  be  transgression   also,  which  without  the 

Rom.  4,  Law  was  not,  although  there  w  as  sin,  For  where  there  is  not 

15  '  n 

Law,  neither  is  there  transgression.  Thus  the  Law,  Grace 
not  helping,   forbidding    sin,  became   over   and  above   the 

1  Cor.    strength  of  sin :  whence  the  Apostle  saith.  The  Law  is  the 

'     ■   strength  of  sin.     Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  man's 

weakness  even  from  the  good  Law  added  strength  to  evil, 

whilst  it  trusts  to  fulfil  the  Law  itself  of  its  own  strength. 

Rom.  Forsooth  being  ignorant  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  which 
'  He  gives  unto  the  weak,  and  wishing  to  establish  his  own, 
of  which  the  weak  is  void,  he  was  not  made  subject  to  the 
righteousness  of  God,  reprobate  and  proud.  But  if  ihe  Law, 
as  a  schoolmaster,  lead  unto  Grace  one  made  an  offender,  as 
though  for  this  purpose  more  grievously  wounded,  that  he 
may  desire  a  Physician;  against  the  baneful  sweetness, 
whereby  lust  prevailed,  the   Lord    gives  a  sweetness   that 


Life  of  grace  a  deadly  warfare  against  lust.         249 

worketh  good,  that  by  it  Continence  may  the  more  delight,     de 
and  our  land  giveih  Iier fruit,  whereby  the  soldier  is  fed,  who    j^,j,jj. 
by  the  help  of  the  Lord  wars  down  sin. 


TIA. 


8.  Such  soldiers  the  Apostolic  trumpet  enkindles  for  battle  jo"     ' 
with  that  sound,  llierefore  let  noty  saith  he,  sin  reign  in  yourUom.  6, 
mortal  hodij  to  obey  its  lusts;  nor  yield  your  members  weajions  j^' 

of  unrighteousness  imto  sin;  but  yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as 
living  in  place  of  dead,  and  your  members  ueapons  of  righte- 
ousness unto  God.  For  sin  shall  not  rule  over  you.  For  ye  are 
not  under  the  Law,  but  under  Grace.  And  in  another  place, 
Therefore,  saith  he,  brethren,  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  Rom.  8, 

'  ^  22.  13. 

to  live  after  the  flesh.  For  if  ye  shall  live  after  the  flesh,  yei^\ 
shall  die;  but  if  by  the  Spirit  ye  shall  mortify  the  deeds  of 
the  flesh,  ye  shall  live.  For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Sjjirit 
of  God,  these  are  sons  of  God.  This  therefore  is  the  business 
in  hand,  so  long  as  this  our  mortal  life  under  Grace  lasts, 
that  sin,  that  is  the  lust  of  sin,  (for  this  he  in  this  place  calls 
by  the  name  of  sin,)  reign  not  in  this  our  mortal  body.  But 
it  is  then  shewn  to  reign,  if  obedience  be  yielded  to  its 
desires.  There  is  therefore  in  us  lust  of  sin,  which  must  not 
be  suffered  to  reign;  there  are  its  desires,  which  we  must  not 
obey,  lest  obeying  it  reign  over  us.  Wherefore  let  not  lust 
usurp  our  members,  but  let  Continence  claim  them  for 
herself;  that  they  be  weapons  of  righteousness  unto  God, 
that  they  be  not  weapons  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin;  for 
thus  sin  shall  not  rule  over  us.  For  we  are  not  under  the 
Law,  which  indeed  commandeth  what  is  good  yet  giveth  it 
not:  but  we  are  under  Grace,  which,  making  us  to  love  that 
which  the  Law  commands,  is  able  to  rule  over  the  free. 

9.  And  also,  when  he  exhorts  us,  that  we  live  not  after 
the  flesh,  lest  we  die,  but  that  by  the  Spirit  we  mortify  the 
deeds  of  the  flesh,  that  we  may  live  ;  surely  the  trumpet 
which  sounds,  shews  the  war  in  which  we  are  engaged, 
and  enkindles  us  to  contend  keenly,  and  to  do  our  enemies 

to  deaths  that  we  be  not  done  to  death  by  them.  But  who  *  morti 
those  enemies  are,  it  hath  set  forth  plainly  enough.  For 
those  are  they,  whom  it  willed  should  be  done  to  death  by 
us,  that  is  to  say,  the  works  of  the  flesh.  For  so  it  saith, 
But  if  by  the  Spirit  ye  shall  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flesh, 
ye  shall  live.     And  in  order  that  we  may  know  what  these 


250       fVorks  of  the  Spirit  and  of  the  flesh  contrasted. 

DE  are,  let  us  hear  the  same  in  Hke  manner  writing  unto  the 
j^gjj/  Galatians,  and  saying,  But  the  works  of  the  flesh  are 
TiA.    manifest,  which  are,  fornications,  itncleannesses,  luxuries, 

19—21  ^^^^"^^'Z/j  witchcrafts,  hatreds,  contentions,  emulations, 
ivrailis,  strifes,  heresies,  etivyings,  drunkennesses,  reveUings, 
and  such  like ;  of  tvhich  I  foretel  to  you,  as  I  have 
foretold,  that  they  tvlio  do  such  things  shall  not  possess  the 
kingdom  of  God.  For  the  very  war  there  also  was  he  shew- 
ing, that  he  should  speak  of  these,  and  unto  the  death-doing 
of  these  enemies  was  he  calling  up  the  soldiers  of  Christ  by 
the  same  heavenly  and  spiritual  trumpet.     For  he  had  said 

Gal.  5,  above,  But  I  say,  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  perform  ye  not 
~  ^'  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  For  the  flesh  lustetk  against  the 
Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flicsh.  For  these  are 
opposed  one  to  the  other,  that  ye  do  not  what  ye  uould. 
But  if  ye  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  Law. 
Therefore  being  set  under  Grace,  he  would  have  them  have 
that  conflict  against  the  works  of  the  flesh.  And  in  order  to 
point  out  these  works  of  the  flesh,  he  added  what  I  have 
mentioned  above.  But  the  ivorks  of  the  flesh  are  manifest, 
which  are,  fornications,  and  the  rest,  whether  what  he 
mentioned,  or  whether  what  he  admonished  were  to  be 
understood,  chiefly  as  he  added,  and  such  like.  Lastlj^,  in 
this  battle,  against  what  is   in  a  manner  the  carnal  army 

Gal.  5,  leading  forth  as  it  were  another  spiritual  line,  But  the  fruit 

22  23  .... 

"  '     '    of  the  Spirit  is,  saith  he,  charity,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering. 


kindness,  goodness,  faith,  gentleness,  continence ;  against 
such  there  is  no  law.  He  saith  not  '  against  these,'  lest  they 
should  be  thought  to  be  alone  :  although  even  were  he  to  say 
this,  we  ought  to  understand  all,  whatever  goods  of  the  same 
kind  we  could  think  of:  but  he  saith,  against  such,  that  is  to 
say,  both  these  and  whatsoever  are  such  like.  However,  in 
that  among  the  goods  of  which  he  made  mention,  he  set 
Continence  in  the  last"  place,  (concerning  which  we  have 
now  undertaken  to  treat,  and  on  account  of  which  we  have 
already  said  much,)  he  willed  thai  it  should  in  an  especial 
manner  cleave  to  our  minds.  Forsooth  this  same  is  of  great 
avail  in  this  case,  wherein  the  Spirit  lusteth  against  the  flesh ; 
forasmuch  as  in  a  certain  way  it  crucifies  the  lusts  of  the 
»  Vulg.  adds,  '  patientia,  modestia,  castitas.' 


Living  after  man  in  any  icay  is  carnal.  251 

flesh.     Whence,  after  the  Apostle  had  thus  spoken,  he  added     de 
straightway,  But  they  tvlio  are  Jesus  Cltrisfs  have  crncijied    j^en- 
their  own  flesh,  with  the  passions  and  lusts.     This  is  the    '^^^' 
acting  of  Continence:  thus  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  done  to  24. '   * 
death.     But  they  do   to    death    those,   whom    falUng  away 
from    Continence    hist    draweth    into    consent   to    do    such 
woi'ks. 

10.  But  in  order  that  we  fall  not  away  from  Continence,    iv. 
we    ought  to   watch   specially   against  those   snares  of  the 
suggestions  of  the  devil,  that  we  presume  not  of  our  own 
strength.     For,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  setteth  his  hope  m  Jer.  17, 
man.     And  who  is  he,  but  man  ?    We  cannot  therefore  truly 

say  that  he  setteth  not  his  hope  in  man,  who  setteth  it  in 
himself.  For  this  also,  to  '  live  after  man,'  what  is  it  but  to 
'  live  after  the  flesh  ?'  Whoso  therefore  is  tempted  by  such 
a  suggestion,  let  him  hear,  and,  if  he  have  any  Christian 
feeling,  let  him  tremble.  Let  him  hear,  I  say,  //"  ye  shall 
live  after  tliejiesh,  ye  shall  die. 

11.  But  some  one  will  say  to  me  that  it  is  one  thing  to 
live  after  man,  another  thing  to  live  after  the  flesh  ;  because 
man  forsooth  is  a  rational  creature,  and  there  is  in  him 
a  rational  soul,  whereby  he  differs  from  the  beast :  but 
the  flesh  is  the  lowest  and  earthly  part  of  man,  and  thus  to 
live  after  it  is  faulty :  and  for  this  reason,  he  who  lives  after 
man,  assuredly  lives  not  after  the  flesh,  but  rather  after  that 
part  of  man,  whereby  he  is  man,  that  is,  after  the  spirit  of  the 
mind  whereby  he  excels  the  beasts.  But  this  discussion  is 
perhaps  of  some  force  in  the  schools  of  philosophers :  but 
we,  in  order  to  understand  the  Apostle  of  Christ,  ought  to 
observe  in  what  manner  the  Christian  books  are  used  to 
speak  ;  at  any  rate  it  is  the  belief  of  all  of  us,  to  whom  to  live 
is  Christ,  that  Man  was  taken  unto  Himself  by  the  Word  of 
God,  not  surely  without  a  rational  soul,  as  certain  heretics 

will  have  it;  and  yet  we  read,  The  Word  was  made  flesh.  John  i, 
What  is  to  be  here  understood  by  '  flesh,'  but  Man  ?  And  all  L^^-g  3^ 
flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God.  What  can  be  under-  c 
stood,  but  all  men  ?  Unto  Thee  shall  all  flesh  come.  Ps.65,2. 
What  is  it,  but  all  men  ?  Thou  hast  given  unto  Him  power  Johni7, 
over  all  flesh.  What  is  it,  but  all  men  ?  Of  the  works  of  the  Rom.  3, 
Law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified.    What  is  it,  but  no  man  shall  ^O- 


CONTI 

NEN 


252         Living  to  self  is  forbidden  as  living  to  man. 

DE     be  justified  ?    And  this  the  same  Apostle  in  another  place 
j^^^- confessing  more  plainly  saith,  3Ian  shall  not  be  Justified  of 
TiA.    the  works  of  the  Law.     The  Corinthians  also  he  rebukes, 
^^^-  2>  saying,  Are  ye  not  carnal.,  and  walk  after  man  ?    After  he 

1  Cor. 3,  had  called  them  carnal,  he  saith  not,  ye  walk  after  the  flesh, 
^'         but  after  man,  forasmuch  as  by  this  also  what  would  he  have 

understood,  but  after  the  flesh  ?  For  surely  if  to  walk,  that 
is,  to  live,  after  the  flesh  deserved  blame,  but  after  man 
deserved  praise,  he  would  not  say  by  way  of  rebuke,  ye 
walk  after  man.  Let  man  recognise  the  reproach  ;  let  him 
change  his  purpose,  let  him  shun  destruction.  Hear  thou 
man  :  walk  not  thou  after  man,  but  after  Him  Who  made  man. 
Fall  not  thou  away  from  Him  Who  made  thee,  even  unto 

2  Cor. 3,  thyself.     For  a  man  said,  who  yet  lived  not  after  man,  Not 
^-         that  we  are  sufficient  to  think  any  thing  from  ourselves, 

as  though  of  ourselves :  but  our  sufficiency  is  of  God.     Con- 
sider if  he  lived  after  man,  who   spake  these  things  with 
truth.     Therefore  the  Apostle,  admonishing  man  not  to  live 
after  man,  restores  man  to  God.     But  whoso  liveth  not  after 
man,  but  after  God,  assuredly  liveth  not  even  after  himself, 
because  himself  also  is  a  man.     But  he   is  therefore   said 
also  to  live  after  the  flesh,  wdien  he  so  lives  ;    because  also 
when  the  flesh  alone  hath  been  named,  man  is  understood, 
as  we  have  already  shewn:  just  as  when  the  soul  alone  hath 
Rom.     been  named,  man  is  understood  :    whence  it  is   said,    Let 
^^>  ^'    every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher  pnivers,  that  is,  every 
Gen.46,man;    and.  Seventy-five  soids  went  down  into  Egypt  ivith 
^'^'        Jacob.,  that  is,  seventy-five  men.     Therefore  live  thou  not 
after  thyself,  O  man  :    thou  hadst  thence  perished,  but  thou 
wast  sought.     Live  not  then,  I  say,  after  thyself,  O  man ; 
thou  hadst  thence  perished,  but  thou  wast  found.     Accuse 
not  thou  the  nature  of  the  flesh,  when  you  hear  it  said, 
Horn.  8,  If  ye  shall  live  after  the  flesh,  ye   shall   die.     For  thus 
^^'        could  it  be  said,  and  most  truly  could  it,  If  ye  shall  live 
after  yourselves,  ye  shall  die.     For  the  devil  hath  not  flesh, 
John  8   and  yet,  because  he  would  live  after  himself,  he  abode  not  in 
44-         the  truth.     What  wonder  therefore,  if,  living  after  himself, 
when  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  oivn,  which  the 
Truth  spake  truly  of  him. 
-o  ^"         12.  When,  therefore,  you  hear  it  said,  Sin  shall  not  reign 

-ttom.  6,  *^ 

14. 


Continence  is  of  God's  Spirit.     It  forbears  excuses.    2^3 

over  you ;    have  not   thou   confidence  of  thyself,   that  sin     de 
reign  not  over  thee,  but  of  Him,  unto  Whom  a  certain  Saint   men-' 
saith   in    prayer,    Direct  my  paths  after   Thy    Word.,   and   tia. 
let  no  iniquity  have  dominion  over  me.     For  lest  haply,  Ps.ii9, 
after   that   we    had   heard,   sin   shall   not  reign  over   you, 
we  should  lift  up  ourselves,  and  lay  this  to  our  own  strength, 
straightway  the  Apostle  saw  this,  and  added.  For  ye  are  not 
under  the  Law^  but  under  Grace.     Therefore,  Grace  causeth 
that  sin  reign  not  over  you.     Do  not  thou,  therefore,  have 
confidence  of  thyself,  lest  it  thence  reign  much  more  over 
thee.     And,  when  we  hear  it  said,  Ifhy  the  S/ririt  y^  shallUom.8, 
mortify  the  deeds  of  the  Jlesh,  ye  shall  live,  let  us  not  lay     " 
this  so  great  good  unto  our  own  spirit,  as  though  of  itself  it 
can  do  this.     For,  in  order  that  we  should  not  entertain  that 
carnal  sense,  the  spirit  being  dead  rather  than  that  which 
putteth  others  to  death,  straightway  he  added.  For  as  many  Rom.  8, 
as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  these  are  sons  of  God.^^' 
Therefore  that  by  our  spirit  we  may  mortify  the  works  of  the 
flesh,  we  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  Who  gives  Continence, 
whereby  to  curb,  tame,  overcome  lust. 

13.  In  this  so  great  conflict,  wherein  man  under  Grace 
lives,  and  when,  being  aided,  he  fights  well,  rejoices  in  the 
Lord  with  trembling,  there  yet  are  not  wanting  even  to  valiant 
warriors,  and  mortifiers  however  unconquered  of  the  works 
of  the  flesh,  some  wounds  of  sins,  for  the  healing  of  which 
they  may  say  daily,  Forgive  us  our  debts:  against  the  same  Matt. 6, 
vices,  and  against  the  devil  the  prince  and  king  of  vices,  * 
striving  with  much  greater  watchfulness  and  keenness  by 
the  very  prayer,  that  his  deadly  suggestions  a.vail  not  aught, 
whereby  he  further  urges  the  sinner  to  excuse  rather 
than  accuse  his  own  sins ;  and  thus  those  wounds  not  only 
be  not  healed,  but  also,  although  they  were  not  deadly,  yet 
may  be  pressed  home  to  grievous  and  fatal  harm.  And  here 
therefore  there  is  need  of  a  more  cautious  Continence, 
whereby  to  restrain  the  proud  appetite  of  man ;  whereby 
he  is  self-pleased,  and  unwilling  to  be  found  worthy  of 
blame,  and  disdains,  when  he  sins,  to  be  convicted  that  he 
himself  has  sinned;  not  with  healthful  humility  taking  upon 
him  to  accuse  himself,  but  rather  with  fatal  arrogance  seeking 
to  find  an  excuse.     In  order  to  restrain  this  pride,  he,  whose 


254  Excuses  useless  before  God.  Those  of  fatalism  blasphemous. 
DE     words  I  have  already  set  down  above,  and,  as  I  could,  com- 

C  O  N  T I  - 

NEN-  iTiended,  sought  Continence  from  the  Lord.  Toi",  after  that  he 
__I£^i_had  said,  Set.,  O  Lord,  a  watch  to  my  mouth,  and  a  door  of 
3  4_  '  Continence  around  my  lips.  Make  not  my  heart  to  fall 
aside  unto  evil  words;  explaining  more  clearly  whereof  he 
spake  this,  he  saith,  to  make  excuses  in  sins.  For  what  more 
evil  than  these  words,  whereby  the  evil  man  denies  that  he 
is  evil,  although  convicted  of  an  evil  work,  which  he  cannot 
deny.  And  since  he  cannot  hide  the  deed,  or  say  that  it  is 
well  done,  and  still  sees  that  it  is  clear  that  it  was  done  by 
him,  he  seeks  to  refer  to  another  what  he  hath  done,  as 
though  he  could  remove  thence  what  he  hath  deserved. 
Being  unwilling  that  himself  be  guilty,  he  rather  adds  to  his 
guilt,  and  by  excusing,  not  accusing,  his  own  sins,  he  knows 
not  that  he  is  putting  from  him,  not  punishment,  but  pardon. 
For  before  human  judges,  forasmuch  as  they  may  be  deceived, 
it  seems  to  profit  somewhat  for  the  time,  to  cleanse  as  it  were 
what  hath  been  done  amiss  by  any  deceit  whatever;  but 
before  God,  Who  cannot  be  deceived,  we  are  to  use,  not 
a  deceitful  defence,  but  a  true  confession  of  sins. 

14.  And  some  indeed,  who  are  used  to  excuse  their  own 
sins,  complain  that  they  are  driven  to  sin  by  fate,  as  though 
the  stars  had  decreed  this,  and  heaven  had  first  sinned  by 
decreeing  such,  in  order  that  man  should  after  sin  by  com- 
mitting such,  and  thus  had  rather  impute  their  sin  to  fortune : 
who  think  that  all  things  are  driven  to  and  fro  by  chance 
accidents,  and  yet  contend  that  this  their  wisdom  and 
assertion  is  not  of  chance  rashness,  but  of  ascertained  reason. 
What  madness  then  is  it,  to  lay  to  reason  their  discussions, 
and  to  make  their  actions  subject  to  accidents!  Others  refer 
to  the  devil  the  whole  of  what  they  do  ill:  and  will  not  have 
even  a  share  with  him,  whereas  they  may  suspect  whether  he  by 
hidden  suggestions  hath  persuaded  them  to  evil,  and  on  the 
other  hand  cannot  doubt  that  they  have  consented  to  those 
suggestions,  from  whatever  source  they  have  come.  There 
are  also  they  who  extend  their  defence  of  self  unto  an  accu- 
sation of  God,  wretched  by  the  divine  judgment,  but  blas- 
phemers by  their  own  madness.  For  against  Him  they  bring 
in  from  a  contrary  principle  a  substance  of  evil  rebelling, 
which  He  could  not  have  resisted,  had  He  not  blended  with 


CONTI- 
NEN- 


Evil  not  self-existent.    Sin  never  really  unpunished.   255 

that  same  that  was  rebelUng  a  portion  of  His  own  Substance  de 
and  Nature,  for  it  to  contaminate  and  corrupt  j  and  they  say 
tliat  they  then  sin  when  the  nature  of  evil  prevails  over  the_£iii_ 
nature  of  God.  This  is  that  most  unclean  madness  of  the 
Manichaeans,  whose  devilish  devices  the  undoubted  truth 
most  easily  overthrows ;  which  confesses  that  the  nature  of 
God  is  incapable  of  contamination  and  corruption.  But 
what  wicked  contamination  and  corruption  do  they  not 
deserve  to  have  believed  of  them,  by  whom  God,  Who  is 
good  in  the  very  highest  degree,  and  in  a  way  that  admits 
not  of  comparison,  is  believed  to  be  capable  of  contamination 
and  corruption  ? 

15.  And  there  are  also  they  who  in  excuse  of  their  sins  so     vi. 

accuse  God,  as  to  say  that  sins  are  pleasing  to  Him.     For,  if 

they  were  displeasing,  say  they,  surely  by  His  most  Almighty 

power  He  would  by  no  means  suffer  them  to  take  place.     As 

though  indeed  God  suffered  sins  to  be  unpunished,  even  in 

the  case  of  those  whom  by  remission  of  sins  He  frees  from 

eternal  punishment!     No   one  forsooth    receives  pardon  of 

more  grievous  punislnnent  due,  unless  he  hath  suffered  some 

punishment,  be  it  what  it  may,  although  far  less  than  what 

was  due:  and  the  fulness  of  mercy  is  so  conveyed,  as  that 

the  justice  also  of  discipline  is  not  abandoned.     For  also  sin, 

which  seems  unavenged,  hath  its  own  attendant  punishment, 

so  that  there  is  no  one  but  by  reason  of  what  he  hath  done 

either  suffers  pain   from  bitterness,  or  suffers  not  through 

blindness.     As  therefore  you  say,  Why  doth  He  permit  those 

things,  if  they  are  displeasing.?  so  I  say,  Why  doth  He  punish 

them,  if  they  are   pleasing?     And   thus,  as  I  confess  that 

those  things  would  not  take  place  at  all,  unless  they  were 

permitted  by  the  Almighty,  so  confess  thou  that  what  are 

punished  by  the  Just  One  ought  not  to  be  done;  in  order 

that,  by  not   doing  what  He  punishes,  we  may   deserve  to 

learn  of  Him,  why  He  permits  to  exist  what  He  punishes. 

For,  as  it  is  \\x\ii&n,  solid  food  is  for  the  perfect,  wherein  Heb.  5, 

they  who  have  made  good  progress  already  understand,  that 

it  pertained  rather  unto  the  Almighty  power  of  God,  to  allow 

the  existence  of  evils  coming  from   the  free   choice  of  the 

will.     So  great  forsooth  is  His  Almighty  goodness,  as  that 

even  of  evil  He  can  make  good,  either  by  pardoning,  or  by 


256      Good  men  still  have  faults.    Man  why  free  to  sin. 

DE     healing,  or  by  fitting   and   turning  unto   the   profit   of  the 
jjgjj.  "pious,  or  even   by  most  justly  taking   vengeance.     For   all 
'^^A.    these  are  good,  and  most  worthy  a  good  and  Almighty  God: 
and  yet  they  are  not  made  save  of  evils.     What  therefore 
better,  what  more   Almighty,  than   He,  Who,  whereas  He 
maketh  no  evil,  even  of  evils  maketh  well?     They  who  have 
Matt. 6,  done  ill  cry  unto  Him,  Forgive  us  our  debts;  He  hears.  He 
pardons.     Their  own  evils  have  hurt  the  sinners;  He  helps 
and  heals  their  sicknesses.     The  enemies  of  His  people  rage; 
of  their  rage  He  makes  martyrs.     Lastly,  also.  He  condemns 
those,  whom  He  judges  worthy  of  condemnation ;  although 
they  suflfer  their  own  evils,  yet  He  doeth  what  is  good.    For 
what  is  just  cannot  but  be  good,  and  assuredly  as  sin  is  un- 
just, so  the  punishment  of  sin  is  just. 

16.  But  God  wanted  not  power  to  make  man  such  as  that 

he  should  not  be  able  to  sin :  but  He  chose  rather  to  make 

icuiad-him  such,  as  that  it  should  lie  in  his  power'  to  sin,  if  he 

jacere .  ^^q^ij.  ^q^    ^q  gj^^^  if  he    would    not;  forbidding  the    one, 

enjoining  the  other;  that  it  might  be  to  him  first  a  good 
desert  not  to  sin,  and  after  a  just  reward  not  to  be  able  to 
sin.     For  such  also  at  the  last  will  He  make  His  Saints,  as 
to  be  without  all  power  to   sin.     Such   forsooth   even   now 
hath  He  His  Angels,  whom  in  Him  we  so  love,  as  to  have 
no  fear  for  any  of  them,  lest  by  sinning  he  become  a  devil. 
And  this  we  presume  not  of  any  just  man  in  this  mortal  life. 
•     But  we  trust  that  all  will  be  such  in  that  immortal  life.     For 
Almighty  God  Who  worketh   good   even   of  our  evils,  what 
good  will  He  give,  when  He  shall  have  set  us  free   from  all 
evils  ?     Much  may  be  said  more  fully  and  more  subtilly  on 
the  good  use  of  evil;   but  this  is  not  what  we  have  under- 
taken in  our  present  discourse,  and  we  must  avoid  in  it  excess 
of  length, 
v'ii-         17.  Now  therefore  let  us  return  to  that,  wherefore  we  have 
said  what  we  have.     We  have  need  of  Continence,  and  we 
know  it  to  be  a  divine  gift,  that  our  heart  fall  not  away  unto 
evil  words,  to  make  excuses  in  sins.     But  what  sin  is  there 
but  that  we  have  need  of  Continence  to   restrain  it  from 
being  committed,  since   it  is  this  very  Continence  which, 
in   case  it   have  been   committed,   restrains    it   from   being 
defended  by  wicked  pride  }    Universally  therefore  we  have 


Peace  the  prize  of  Continence.     All  Natnre  good.     257 
need  of  Continence,  in  order  to  turn  away  from  evil.     But  to     de 

,  .  ,  .  CONTI- 

do    good    seems    to    pertain    to   anotlier  vntue,  that   is,   to   ^en- 
rishteousncss'.       This    the    sacred    Psalm    admonishes    us,    '^^^- 

1    *      -f* 

where  we  read,  Turn  away  from  evil,  and  do  good.     But^jJ^I*"" 
with  what  end  we  do  this,  it  adds  bye  and  bye,  saying,  Seek  Ps.  34, 
peace,  and  ensue  it.     For  we  shall  then  have  perfect  peace, 
when,   our   nature   cleaving  inseparably  to   its   Creator,  we 
shall  have  nothing  of  ourselves  opposed  to  ourselves.     This 
our  Saviour  also  Himself  would  have  us  to  understand,  so 
far  as  seems  to  me,  when  He  said.  Let  your  loins  be  girt,  a»f/L_»k«^'^> 
yoiir  lamps  burning.     AVhat  is  it,   to  gird  the  loins:     To 
restrain  lusts,  which  is  the  work  of  continence.     But  to  have 
lamps  burning  is  to  shine  and  glow  with  good  works,  which 
is  the  work  of  righteousness.     Nor  was  He  here  silent  with 
what  end  we  do  these  things,  adding  and  saying.  And  you'Lukei^, 
like  unto  men  waiting  for  their  Lord,  v:hen  tie  comethfrom 
the   marriage.     But,  when  He   shall   have   come.   He   will 
reward  us,  who  have  kept  ourselves  from  those  things  which 
lust,  and  have  done  those  things  which  charity  hath  bidden 
us  :  that  we   may  reign  in    His  perfect  and   eternal  peace, 
without  anv  strife  of  evil,  and  with  the  highest  delight  of 


good. 

18.  All  we  therefore,  who  be'ieve  in  the  Living  and  True 
God,  Whose  Nature,  being  in  the  highest  sense  good  and 
incapable  of  change,  neither  doth  any  evil,  nor  suffers  any 
evil,  from  Whom  is  every  good,  even  that  which  admits  of 
decrease,  and  Who  admits  not  at  all  of  decrease  in  His  own 
Good,  Which  is  Himself,  when  we  hear  the  Apostle  saying. 
Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  perform  ye  not  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  Gal.  5, 
For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against 
the  flesh :  For  these  are  opposed  one  to  another,  that  ye  do 
not  ichat  ye  icoidd.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  believe,  what  the 
madness  of  the  Manichees  believes,  that  there  are  here 
shewn  two  natures  or  principles  contrary  one  to  another  at 
strife,  the  one  nature  of  good,  the  other  of  evil.  Altogether 
these  two  are  both  good;  both  the  Spirit  is  a  good,  and  the  - 
flesh  a  good:  and  man,  who  is  composed  of  both,  one  ruling, 
the  other  obeying,  is  assuredly  a  good,  but  a  good  capable 
of  change,  which  yet  could  not  be  made  save  by  a  Good 
incapable  of  change,  by  Whom   was  created   every  good, 

s 


258     Sinful  lust  is  not  nature,  but  a  disease  of  nature. 

DE     whether  small  or  great;  but  how  small  soever,  yet  made  by 
^NEN-'  What  is  Great;  and  how  great  soever,  yet  no  way  to  be  com- 
TiA.    pared  with  the  greatness  of  the  Maker.     But  in  this  nature 
of  man,  that  is  good,  and  well  formed  and  ordered  by  One 
That  is  Good,  there  is  now  war,  since  there  is  not  yet  health. 
Let  the  sickness  be  healed,  there  is  peace.     But  that  sick- 
ness fault  hath  deserved,  not  nature  hath  had.     iVnd  this 
fault  indeed  through  the  laver  of  regeneration  the  grace  of 
God  hatli  already  remitted  unto  the  faithful;  but  under  the 
hands  of  the  same  Physician  nature  as  yet  striveth  with  its 
sickness.     But    in   such    a    conflict   victory  will   be    entire 
soundness;  and  that,  soundness  not  for  a  time,  but  for  ever: 
wherein  not  only  this  sickness  is  to  come  to  an  end,  but  also 
none  to  arise  after  it.  Wherefore  the  justman  addresseth  his  soul 
Ps.  103,  and  saith,  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  His 
returns;   Who  becometh  propitious  to  all  thy  iniquities,  Who 
healeth  all  thy  sicknesses.     He  becometh  propitious  to  our 
iniquities,  when  He  pardons  sins:  He  heals  sicknesses  when 
He   restrains    evil    desires.     He    becometh  propitious  unto 
iniquities  by  the  grant  of  forgiveness:  He  heals  sicknesses, 
by  the  grant  of  continence.     The  one  was  done  in  Baptism 
to  persons  confessing;    the  other  is   done   in   the   strife  to 
persons  contending;    wherein  through  His  help  we   are  to 
overcome  our  disease.     Even  now  the  one  is  done,  when  we 
Matt. 6, are  heard,  saying,  Forgive  us  our  debts;  but  the  other,  when 
Jame^i  ^e  are  heard,  saying,  Lead  us  not  into  temptation.   For  every 
14.        one  is  tempted,  saith  the  Apostle  James,  being  drawn  away 
and  enticed  by  his  own  lust.     And  against  this  fault  there  is 
sought  the  help  of  medicine  from  Him,  Who  can  heal  all 
such  sicknesses,  not  by  the  removal  of  a  nature  that  is  alien 
from   us,  but  in  the  renewal  of  our  own  nature.     Whence 
also  the  above-mentioned  Apostle  saith  not.    Every  one  is 
tempted  by  lust,  but  added,  by  his  own :  that  he  who  hears 
Ps.41,4.  tijjg  i^ay  understand,  how  he  ought  to  cry,  I  said,  Lord,  have 
mercy  upon  me,  heal  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against 
Thee.     For  it  would  not  have  needed  healing,  had  it  not 
I  vitias-  corrupted'  itself  by  sinning,  so  that  its  own  flesh  should  lust 
^^  '        against  it,  that  is,  itself  should  be  opposed  to  itself,  on  that 
side,  wherein  in  the  flesh  it  was  made  sick. 
viii.        19.  For  the  flesh  lusts  after  nothing  save  through  the  soul, 


The  spirif  iwf  cof/sentii/f/  fo  sin  saves  the  flesh.        259 

but  the  flesh  is  said  to  lust  against  the  spirit,  when  the  soul     de 
with  fleshly  lust  wrestles  against  the  spirit.     This  whole  are  *^nen-^' 
we :  and  the  flesh  itself,  which  on  the  departure  of  the  soul    fiA. 
dies,  the  lowest  part  of  us  is  not  put  away  as  what  we  ai*e  to 
llee  from,  but  is  laid  aside  as  what  we  are  to  receive  again, 
and,  after  having  received  it, never  ajjain  to  leave.     But  there^  Cor. 

.  .  .    .  15   44. 

is  sown  an  animal  body^  there  shall  rise  again  a  spiritual 
body.     Then  from  that  time  the  flesh  will  not  lust  after  any 
thing  against  the  spirit,  when  as  itself  also  shall  be  called 
spiritual,  forasmuch  as  not  only  without  any  opposition,  but 
also  without  any  need  of  bodily  aliment,  it  shall  be  for  ever 
made  subject  unto  the  spirit,  to  be   quickened  by  Christ. 
Therefore  these  two  things,  which  are  now  opposed  the  one 
to  the  other  within  us,  since  we  exist  in  both,  let  us  pray  and 
endeavour  that  they  may  agree.     For  we  ought  not  to  think 
the  one  of  them  an  enemy,  but  the  fault,  whereby  the  flesh 
lusteth  against  the  spirit:  and  this,  when  healed,  will  itself 
cease  to  exist,  and  either  substance  will  be  safe,  and  no  strife 
between  either.     Let  us  hear  the  Apostle;  I  know,  saith  he,  Rom-  7, 
that  there  dioelleth  not  in  me,  that  is,  in  my  fiesh.,  any  good. 
This  certainly  he  saith;  that  the  fault  of  the  flesh,  in  a  good 
thing,  is  not  good;    and,  when   this    shall    have    ceased  to 
exist,  it  will  be  flesh,  but  it  will  not  be  now  corrupted,  or 
faulty*  flesh.     And  yet  that  this  pertains  to  our  nature  the'^itiata 
same  teacher  shews,  by  saying,  first,  I  knoiv  that  there  dwelleth  tiosa. 
not  i?i  me,  in  order  to  expound  which,  he  added,  that  is,  in 
my  Jlesh,  any  good.     Therefore  he  saith  that  his  flesh   is 
himself.     It  is  not  then  itself  that  is  our  enemy:  and  when 
its  faults  are  resisted,  itself  is  loved,  because  itself  is  cared 
for;  For  no  one  ever  hated  his  own  flesh,  as  the  ApostleEph.  .5, 
himself  saith.  And  in  another  place  he  saith,  So  then  I  myself '^^' 
uith  the  mind  serve  the  Law  of  Ood,  but  with  the  flesh  the  law 
of  sin.     Let  them  hear  that  have  ears.     So  then  I  myself ;^^'^-T^ 
I  with  the  mind,  1  with  the  flesh,  but  with  the  mind  I  serve 
the  Law  of  God,  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of  sin.     How  with 
the  flesh  the  law  of  sin  ?  was  it  at  all  by  consenting  unto 
fleshly  lust?      Far  be  it!   but  by  having  there  motions  of 
desires  which  he  would  not  have,  and  yet  had.     But,  by  not 
consenting  to  them,  with  the  mind  he  served  the  Law  of 
God,  and  kept  his  members  from  becoming  weapons  of  sins. 

s2 


21)0         Neither  good  nor  evil  perfected  till  hereafter. 

DE  20.  There  are  therefore  in  us  evil  desires,  by  consentinf' 

jjKN-    "ot  u"to  which  we  live  not  ill:  there  are  in   us  lusts  of  sins, 

'^'^-    by  obeying  not   which  we  perfect  not  evil,  but  by  having 

Iheni  do  not  as  yet  perfect  good.     The  Apostle  shews  both, 

that  neither  is  good  here  perfected,  where  evil  is  so  lusted 

after,   nor    evil    here    perfected,   whereas    such    lust   is    not 

Eom.  7,  obeyed.     The  one  forsooth  he  shews,  where  he  says.  To  will 
is  present  uilh  i/te,  but  to  perfect  good  is  not;  the  other,  where 

Gal- 5,  he  says,  JValk  in  the  Spirit,  and  perfect  not  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh.  For  neither  in  the  former  place  doth  he  say  that  to 
do  good  is  not  with  him,  but  to  perfect,  wox  here  doth  he 
say.  Have  not  ///.s7.s-  of  the  flesh,  hwi  perfect  not.  Therefore 
there  take  place  in  us  evil  lusts,  when  that  j^leases  which  is 
not  lawful ;  but  they  are  not  perfected,  when  evil  lusts  are 
restrained  by  the  mind  serving  the  Law  of  God,  And  good 
takes  ])lace,  when  that,  which  wrongly  pleases,  takes  not  place 
through  the  good  delight  pTevailing.  But  the  perfection  of 
good  is  not  fuUilled,  so  long  as  by  the  flesh  serving  the  law 
of  sin,  evil  last  entices,  and,  altliough  it  be  restrained,  is  yet 
moved.  For  there  would  be  no  need  for  it  to  be  restrained, 
were  it  not  moved.  There  v/ill  be  at  some  time  also  the 
perfection  of  good,  when  the  destruction  of  evil :  the  one 
will  be  highest,  the  other  will  be  no  more.  And  if  we  think 
tliat  this  is  to  be  hoped  for  in  this  mortal  state,  we  are 
deceived.  For  it  shall  be  then,  when  death  shall  not  be; 
and  it  shall  be  there,  where  shall  be  life  eternal.     For  in  that 

' ssec ulo.  world',  and  in  that  kingdom,  there  shall  be  highest  good,  no 
evil:  when  there  shall  be,  and  where  there  shall  be,  highest 
love  of  wisdom,  no  labour  of  continence.  Therefore  the  flesh 
is  not  evil,  if  it  be  void  of  evil,  that  is,  of  fault,  whereby  man 
was  rendered  faulty,  not  made  ill,  but  himself  making.  For 
on  either  part,  that  is,  both  soul  and  body,  being  made  good 
by  the  good  God,  himself  made  the  evil,  whereby  he  was  made 
evil.     From  the  guilt  of  which  evil  being  already  also  set 

2  indul-  free  through  forgiveness  =,  that  he  may  not  think  what  he  hath 

gentiani  ^^^^^  to  be  light,  he  yet  wars  with  his  own  fault  through 
continence.  But  far  be  it  that  there  be  any  faults  in  such  as 
reign  in  that  peace  which  shall  be  hereafter;  since  in  this  state 
of  war  there  are  lessened  daily  in  such  as  make  progress,  not 
sins    only,    but    the    very    lusts    also,    with    which,    by   not 


Substance  of  the  Flesh  good ;  though  notv  capable  of  evil.  261 
consenting,  we  strive,   and  by  consenting   nnto   wliicli  we     de 

CONII- 
Sin.  NEN- 

21.  That,  therefore,  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  _Z1^ 
that  there  duelleth  not  in  onr  flesh  good,  that  the  law  in  our 
members  is  o])posed  to  the  law  of  the  mind,  is  not  a  min- 
gling of  two  natures  caused  of  contrary  principles,  but  a 
division  of  one  against  itself  caused  through  desert  of  sin. 
We  were  not  so  in  Adam,  before  that  nature,  having  listened 
to  and  followed  its  deceiver,  had  despised  and  offended  its 
Creator  :  that  is,  not  the  former  life  of  man  created,  but  the 
latter  punishment  of  man  condemned.  From  which  con- 
demnation when  set  free  by  Grace,  through  Jesus  Christ, 
being  free  they  contend  with  their  punishment,  having  received 
not  as  yet  full  salvation,  but  already  a  pledge  of  salvation  : 
but  when  not  set  free,  they  are  both  guilty  by  reason  of  sins, 
and  involved  in  punishments.  But  after  this  life  for  the 
guilty  there  will  remain  for  ever  punishment  for  their  crime: 
for  the  free  there  will  no  more  remain  for  ever  either  crime 
or  punishment:  but  the  good  substances,  spirit  and  flesh, 
will  continue  for  ever,  which  God,  Who  is  good,  and  incapable 
of  change,  created  good  although  capable  of  change.  But 
they  will  continue  having  been  changed  for  the  better,  never 
from  this  time  to  be  changed  for  the  worse  :  all  evil  being 
utterly  destroyed,  both  what  man  hath  unjustly  done,  and 
what  he  hath  justly  suff'ered.  And,  these  two  kinds  of  evil 
perishing  utterly,  whereof  the  one  is  of  iniquity  going  before, 
the  other  of  unhappiness  following  after,  the  will  of  man  will 
be  upright  without  any  depravity.  There  it  will  be  clear  and 
plain  to  all,  what  now  many  of  the  faithful  believe,  ievf  under- 
stand, that  evil  is  not  a  substance  :  but  that,  as  a  wound  in  a 
body,  so  in  a  substance,  which  hath  made  itself  faulty,  it  hath 
begun  to  exist,  when  the  disease  hath  commenced,  and 
ceaseth  to  exist  in  it,  when  the  healing  bath  been  perfected. 
Therefore,  all  evil  having  arisen  from  us,  and  having  been 
destroyed  in  us,  our  good  also  having  been  increased  and 
perfected  unto  the  height  of  most  happy  incorruption  and 
immortality,  of  what  kind  shall  either  of  our  substances  be? 
forasmuch  as  now,  in  this  corruption  and  mortality,  when  as 
yet  the  corruptible  body  weigheth  down  the  soul;  and,  what  Wis<l.9, 
the  Ajiostle  saith,  the  body  is  dead  by  reason  of  sin ;    yet  the  ^^m.  8 

10. 


262      Thejiesh,  as  created,  spoken  well  of  hi/  St.  Paul. 

DE     same  himself  beareth  such  witness  unto  our  flesh,  that  is,  to 

^NEN-"  our  lowest  and  earthly  part,  as  to  say,  what  I  made  mention 

TiA.    of  a  little  above,  No  one  ever  hated  his  own  flesh.     And  to 

2^^*  ^'  add  straightway,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  as  also 

Christ  the  Church. 

ix.  22.  I  say  not,  therefore,  with    what  error,  but  with   what 

utter  madness,  do  the  Manichees  attribute  our  flesh  to  some, 

1  see       I  know  not  what,  fabled  '  race  of  darkness','  which  they  will 

Chris^t".  iiave  hath  had  its  own  nature  without  any  beginning  ever 

^•^-       evil:  whereas  the  true  teacher  exhorts  men  to  love  their  own 

wives  by  the  pattern  of  their  own  flesh,  and  exhorts  them 

unto  this  very  thing  by  the  pattern  also  of  Christ  and  the 

Church.     Lastly,  we  must  call  to  mind  the  whole  place  itself 

of  the  Epistle  of  the  Apostle,  relating  greatly  unto  the  matter 

Eph.  5,  in  hand.     Husbands,  saith  he,  love  your  ivives,  as  Christ  also 

^^~^^-  loved  the  Church,  and  delivered  Himself  up  for  it,  that  He 

might  sanctify  it,  cleansing  it  by  the  laver  of  the  water  in 

the  word:  that  He  might  set  forth  unto  Himself  a  glorious 

Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but 

that  it  may  be  holy  and  unspotted.     So,  saith  he,  husbands 

also  ought  to  love  their  own  wives,  as  their  own  bodies. 

Whoso  loveth  his  own  wife,  loveth  himself     Then  he  added, 

Eph.  5,  what  we  have  already  made  mention  of,  For  no  man  ever 

^^'        haled  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  it,  and  cherisheth  it;  as 

also  Christ  the  Church.     What  saith  the  madness  of  most 

impure    impiety    in    answer   to   these   things  ?       What   say 

ye    in    answer    to    these    things,   ye    Manichees;    ye  who 

wish  lo  bring  in   upon  us,  as  if  out  of  the  Epistles  of  the 

Apostles,  two  natures  without  beginning,  one  of  good,  the 

other   of  evil :  and  will  not  listen   to   the  Epistles  of  the 

Apostles,  that  they  may  coiTCct  you  from   that  sacrilegious 

Gal.  5    perverseness  .''     As  ye    read,   The  flesh  lusteth  against  the 

17-        spirit,  and.  There  dwelleth  not  in  my  flesh  any  good;  so 

18.  '   'read  ye,  No  one  ever  hated  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and 

'Rora.  7,  cherisheth  it,  as  also  Christ  the  Church.     As  ye  read,  I  see 

another  law   in  my   members,  opposed  to  the  law   of  my 

inind;  so  read  ye,  As  Christ  loved  the  Church,  so  also  ought 

men  to  love  their  own  wives,  as  their  own  bodies.     Be  not  ye 

crafty  in  the  former  witnesses  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  deaf  in 

this  latter,  and  ye  shall  be  correct  in  both.     For,  if  ye  receive 


23, 


Spirit  (mdFlesh^Hu.sbaNdaHdJVife,Christ  and  (/ieChurc/t.26S 
the  latter  as  right  is,  ve  will   endeavour  to  understand  the      db 

*  CONTI* 

former  also  as  truth  is.  nen- 

23.  The  Apostle  has  made  known  to  us  certain  three  tia. 
unions,  Christ  and  the  Church,  husband  and  wife,  spirit 
and  flesh.  Of  these  the  former  consult  for  the  good  of  the 
latter,  the  latter  wait  upon  the  former.  All  the  things  are 
good,  when,  in  them,  certain  set  over  by  way  of  preeminence, 
certain  made  subject  in  a  becoming  manner,  observe  the 
beauty  of  order.  Husband  and  wife  receive  command  and 
pattern  how  they  ought  to  be  one  with  another.  The  com- 
mand is,  Let  wives  be  subject  unto  their  oum  husbands,  as 'S.^h.  5, 
unto  the  Lord  ;  because  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife;  ~  ' 
and,  Husbands,  love  your  wives.  But  there  is  given  a  pattern, 
unto  wives  from  the  Church,  unto  husbands  from  Christ:  As 
the  Church,  saith  he,  is  sxdiject  tmto  Christ,  so  also  wives 
unto  their  own  husbands  in  all  things.  In  like  manner  also, 
having  given  command  to  husbands  to  love  their  own  wives, 
he  added  a  pattern,  As  Christ  loved  the  Church.  But  hus- 
bands he  exhorted  to  it  from  a  lower  matter  also,  that  is,  from 
their  own  body:  not  only  from  a  higher,  that  is,  from  their 
Lord.  For  he  not  only  saith.  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  as 
Christ  also  loved  the  Church,  which  is  from  an  higher :  but  he 
said  also,  Husbands  ought  to  love  their  own  wives,  as  their  own 
bodies,  which  is  from  a  lower:  because  both  higher  and  lower 
are  all  good.  And  yet  the  woman  received  not  pattern  from  the 
body,  or  flesh,  to  be  so  subject  to  the  husband  as  the  flesh 
to  the  spirit;  but  either  the  Apostle  would  have  understood 
by  consequence,  what  he  omitted  to  state :  or  haply  because 
the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit  in  the  mortal  and  sick 
estate  of  this  life,  therefore  he  would  not  set  the  woman  a 
pattern  of  subjection  from  it.  But  the  men  he  would  for 
this  reason,  because,  although  the  spirit  lusteth  against  the 
flesh,  even  in  this  it  consults  for  the  good  of  the  flesh:  not 
like  as  the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit,  by  such  opposi- 
tion consulteth  neither  for  the  good  of  the  spirit,  nor  for  its 
own.  Yet  the  good  spirit  would  not  consult  for  its  good, 
whether  by  nourishing  and  cherishing  its  nature  by  fore- 
thought, or  by  resisting  its  faults  by  continence,  were  it  not 
that  each  substance  sheweth  God  to  be  the  Creator  of  each, 
even  by  the  seemliness  of  this  its  order.     What  is  it,  therefore, 


264         Real  Flesh  in  Christ  no  evil.     Other  proofs. 

DE     that    with  true    madness   ye   both    boast   yourselves    to  be 
'n^en-"  Christians,  and  with  so  great  perverseness  contend  against 
Ti-^-    the  Christian  Scriptures,  with  eyes  closed,  or  rather  put  out, 
asserting  both   that  Christ  hath  appeared  unto  mortals  in 
false  flesh,  and  that  the  Church  in  the  soul  pertains  to  Christ, 
in  the   body   to    the   devil,    and  that  the   male  and  female 
sex  are  works  of  the  devil,  not  of  God,  and  that  the  flesh  is 
joined  unto   the  spirit,  as  an    evil  substance  unto   a  good 
substance  ? 
X.  24.  If  what  we  have  made  mention  of  out  of  the  Apostolic 

Epistles  seem   to  you  to  fall  short  of  an  answer,  hear  yet 
others,  if  ye  have  ears-     What  saith  the  utterly  mad  Mani- 
chaean   of  the   Flesh  of  Christ?     That  it  was  not  true,  but 
2  Tim.    false.     What  saith  the  blessed  Apostle  to  this  ?    Remember 
''    ■       iliat  Christ  Jesits  rose  again  from  tlie  dead  of  the  seed  of 
David,  according  to  unj  Gospel.     And  Christ  .Jesus  Himself 
Liike24  saith.  Handle  and  see^  that  a  spirit  liatJi  notjiesli  and  bones, 
'^^'         as  ye  see  me  to  have.     How  is  there  truth  in  their  doctrine, 
which  asserts  that  in  the   Flesh  of  Christ  there  was  false- 
hood ?     How  was  there  in  Christ  no  evil,  in  Whom  was  so 
great  a  lie  1     Because  forsooth  to  men  over-clean  true  flesh 
is  an  evil,  and  false  flesh  instead  of  true  is  not  an  evil:  it  is 
an  evil,  true  flesh  of  one  born  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  it  is 
no  evil,  false  tongue  of  one  saying,  Handle,  and  see,  that  a 
spirit  hath  not  ficsii   and  bones,  as  ye  see  one  to  have.     Of 
the    Church    what    saith   tiie   deceiver  of  men  with   deadly 
error?     That  on  the  side  of  souls  it  pertains  unto  Christ,  on 
the  side  of  bodies  unto  the  devil  ?     What  lo  this  saith  ihc 
iCor.6  Teacher  of  the  Genliles  in  faith  and  truth?     Know  ye  noiy 
^■'^-         saith  he,  that  your  bodies  are  members  of  Christ?    Of  the 
sex  of  male  and  female  what  saith   the  son   of  perdition? 
That  either  sex  is  not  of  God,  but  of  the  devil.     What  to 
]  Cor.    ^'iis  saith  the  Vessel  of  Election?    As,  saith  he,  tlte  noman 
n,  12.  jro)n  out  the  man,  so  also  the  man  through  the  icoman:   but 
all  things  of  God.     Of  the  flesh   what  saith    the   unclean 
spirit  through  the  Manicha^an  ?     That  it  is  an  evil  substance, 
and  not  the  creation  of  God,  but   of  an   enemy.     What  to 
1  C'd.    this  saith  the  Holy  Spirit  through  Paul?     For  as  the  body  is 
^^'  '■^"   one,  saith  he,  and  hath  many  numbers,  but  all  the  members 
of  the  body,  being  many,  are  one  body:   so  also  is  Christ. 


Tltejlesh  ?wt  made  an  example,  since  now  imperfect.  265 

And  a  little  after ;     God  hath  set,  saith   he,   iJte  members,     de 
each  one  of  them  in  the  body,  as   He  icilled.     Also  a  little  j^^j^. 
after;    God,  saith  he,  hath  tempered  the  body,  giving  greater    tia. 
honour  unto  that  to  ichich  it  uas  wanting,  that  there  should ^,^  '^g 
be  no  schisms  in   the  bodii,  but  that  the  members  have  thei  Cor. 

12    24. 

self-same  care  one  for  another:  and  whether  one  member  ^^b.^Q. 
suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it:  or  one  member  be 
glorified,  all  the  members  rejoice  icith  it.  How  is  the  flesh 
evil,  when  the  souls  themselves  are  admoiiished  to  imitate 
the  peace  of  its  members  ?  How  is  it  the  creation  of  the 
enemy,  when  the  souls  themselves,  which  rule  the  bodies, 
take  pattern  from  the  members  of  the  body,  not  to  have 
schisms  of  enmities  among  themselves,  in  order  that,  what 
God  hath  granted  unto  the  body  by  nature,  this  themselves 
also  may  love  to  have  by  grace  }  With  good  cause,  writing  to 
the  Romans,  /  beseech  you,  saith  he,  brethren,  by  the  mercyRom. 
of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  sacrifice,  living,  holy,^'^-'  ^• 
pleasing  to  God.  Without  reason  we  contend  that  darkness 
is  not  light,  nor  light  darkness,  if  we  present  a  sacrifice, 
living,  holy,  pleasing  to  God,  of  the  bodies  of  the  '  nation  of 
darkness.' 

25.  But,  say  they,  how  is  the  flesh  by  a  certain  likeness     xi. 
compared  unto  the  Church  ?     What !  doth  the  Church  lust 
against    Christ  .f*     whereas     the     same     Apostle    said,    TTf^Eph.  5, 
Church    is   subject    an  to    Christ.     Clearly    the    Church    is^^- 
subject   unto    Christ ;    because    the    spirit   therefore   lusteth 
against   the   flesh,  that  on   every  side  the  Church   may  be 
made   subject   to   Christ;  but   the   flesh  lusteth  against  the 
spirit,  because   not  as  yet    hath  the   Church  received  that 
peace  which  was  promised  perfect.     And  for  this  reason  the 
Church  is  made  subject  unto  Christ  for  the  pledge  of  salva- 
tion, and  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit  from  the  weak- 
ness of  sickness.     For  neither  were  those  other  than  members 
of  the  Church,  unto    whom    he  thus   spake,    IValk    in   theQs\^5^ 
spirit,  and  fulfil  not  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.     For  the  flesh^^-^"^- 
lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh; 
for  these  are  opposed  the  one  to  the  other;  that  ye  do  not 
what  we  would.     These  things  were  assuredly  spoken  unto 
the  Church,  which  if  it  were  not  made  subject  unto  Christ, 
the  spirit  would  not  in  it  lust  against  the  flesh  through  con- 


266     Carnal  ways  in  the  CJinrcJt,  lusting  against  Christ. 
DE     tirience.     By  reason  of  which  they  were  indeed  able  not  to 


CONTI- 

NEN- 


perfect  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  but  through  the  flesh  lusting 

TiA.    against  the  Spirit  they  were  not  able  to  do  the  things  which 

they  would,  that  is,  not  even  to  have  the  very  lusts  of  the 

flesh.     Lastly,  why  should  we  not  confess  that  in  spiritual 

men  the  Church  is  subject  unto  Christ,  but  in  carnal  men 

yet  lusteth  against  Christ  ?    Did  not  they  lust  against  Christ 

1  Cor.  1, unto  whom  it  was  said,  Is   Christ  divided'^    and,  /  could 

^^'     „  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual,  hut  as  unto  carnal.     I 

1.2.3.  have  given  unto  you  milk  to  drink  as  unto  babes  in  Christ, 

not  meat,  for  ye  were  not  as  yet  able;  but  not  even  now  are 

ye  able:  for  ye  are  still  carnal.    For  whereas  there  is  among 

you  ermdation,   and   strife,   are  ye   not    carnal?    Against 

whom  doth   emulation   and  strife  lust,  but  against  Christ? 

For  these  lusts  of  the  flesh  Christ  healeth  in  His  own,  but 

loveth  in  none.     Whence  the  holy  Church,  so  long  as  it 

hath  such  members,  is  not  yet  without  spot  or  wrinkle.     To 

these  are  added  those  other  sins  also,  for  which  the  daily  cry 

Matt.  6,  of  the  whole  Church  is.  Forgive  us  our  debts :  and,  that  we 

^^*        should  not  think  spiritual  persons  exempt  from   these,  not 

any  one  soever  of  carnal  persons,  nor  any  one  soever  of 

spiritual  persons  themselves,  but  he,  who  lay  on  the  breast 

Johnio  of  the  Lord,  and  whom  He  loved  before  others,  saith,  If  we 

^^'        shall  say  that  we  have  not  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the 

1  8,      truth  is  not  in  us.     But  in  eveiy  sin,  more  in  what  is  greater, 

less  in  what  is  less,  there  is  an  act  of  lust  against  righteous- 

1  Cor. i,riess.     And  of  Christ  it  is  written:    Who  was  made  unto  us 

30 

by  God,  Wisdom,  and  Righteousness,  and  Sanctification, 
and  Redemption .  In  every  sin  therefore  without  doubt  there 
is  an  act  of  lust  against  Christ.  But  when  He,  Who 
Ps.  103,  healeth  all  our  sicknesses,  shall  have  led  His  Church  unto 
the  promised  healing  of  sickness,  then  in  none  of  its  mem- 
bers shall  there  be  any,  even  the  very  least  spot  or  wrinkle. 
Then  in  no  way  shall  the  flesh  lust  against  the  spirit,  and 
therefore  there  shall  be  no  cause  why  the  spirit  also  lust 
against  the  flesh.  Then  all  this  conflict  shall  come  to  an 
end,  then  there  shall  be  the  highest  concord  of  both  sub- 
stances ;  then  to  such  a  degree  shall  no  one  there  be  carnal, 
that  even  the  flesh  itself  shall  be  spiritual.  What  therefore 
each  one  living  after  Christ  doth  with  his  flesh,  whereas  he 


Christ  chaslens  the  Church  an  the  .sjnrit  the  flesh.     '267 

both  lusts  against  its  evil  lust,  which  he  restrains,  hereafter  to     de 
be   healed,  which  he  holds,  not  yet  healed;  and   yet  nou-^^g"* 
rishetli   and  cherisheth  its  good  nature,  since   no  one  ever    tia. 
hated  his  oivii  Jlesh,  this  also  Christ  doth  with  the  Church,  ]^P^i' ^» 
so  far  as  it  is  lawful  to  compare  lesser  with  greater  matters. 
For  He  both  represses  it  with  rebukes,  that  it  burst  not  being 
puffed  up  with  impunity  ;  and  raises  it  up  with  consolations, 
that  it  sink  not  being  weighed  down  with  infirmity.     Hence 
is  that  of  the  Apostle,  For  if  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we\  Cor. 

1  1       o  1 

should  not  be  judged;    hut  tvhen   we  are  judged,  we  are ^^     ' 
rebuked  of  the  Lord,  that  we  be  not  condemned  with  this 
world.     And  that  in  the  Psalm,  After  the  multitude  of  my  Ps.  94, 
griefs  in  mg  heart,   Thy  consolations  have  gladdened   my     ' 
soul.     We  are  therefore  then  to  hope  for  perfect  soundness 
of  our  flesh  without  any  opposition,  when  there  shall  be  sure 
security  of  the  Church  of  Christ  without  any  fear. 

26.  Thus  much  will  suffice  to  have  treated  on  behalf  of  xii, 
true  Continence  against  the  Manichees  deceitfully  continent, 
lest  the  fruitful  and  glorious  labour  of  Continence,  when  it 
restrains  and  curbs  the  lowest  part  of  us,  that  is,  the  body, 
from  immoderate  and  unlawful  pleasures,  be  believed  not 
healthfully  to  chasten,  but  hostilely  to  persecute.  Forsooth 
the  body  is  indeed  different  from  the  nature  of  the  soul,  yet 
is  it  not  alien  from  the  nature  of  man :  for  the  soul  is  not 
made  up  of  body,  but  yet  man  is  made  up  of  soul  and 
body :  and  assuredly,  whom  God  frees,  He  frees  the  whole 
man.  Whence  our  Saviour  Himself  also  took  upon  Him  the 
whole  man,  having  deigned  to  free  in  us  all  that  He  made. 
They  who  hold  contrary  to  this  truth,  what  doth  it  profit 
them,  to  restrain  lusts?  if,  that  is,  they  restrain  any.  What 
in  them  can  be  made  clean  through  Continence,  whose  such 
Continence  is  unclean  ?  and  which  ought  not  to  be  called 
Continence.  Forsooth  to  hold  what  they  hold  is  the  poison 
of  the  devil;  but  Continence  is  the  gift  of  God.  But  as  not 
every  one  who  suffers  any  thing,  or  with  the  greatest  endur- 
ance suffers  any  pain  whatever,  possesses  that  virtue,  which 
in  like  manner  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  is  called  Patience ;  for 
many  endure  many  torments,  in  order  not  to  betray  either 
such  as  are  wickedly  privy  with  them  in  their  crimes,  or 
themselves;  many  in  order  to  satiate  glowing  lusts,  and  to 


268  Some  use  Continence  from  had  motives. 

DE     obtain,  or  not  to  abandon  those  things,  whereunto  they  are 
NEN-    bound  by  chain  of  evil  love  ;  many  on  behalf  of  different 

"^^^^  and  destructive  errors,  whereby  they  are  strongly  lield :  of 
all  of  whom  far  be  it  from  us  to  say  that  they  have  true 
patience  :  thus  not  every  one,  who  contains  in  any  thing,  or 
wiio  marvellously  restrains  even  the  very  lusts  of  the  flesh,  or 
mind,  is  to  be  said  to  possess  that  continence,  of  the  profit 
and  beauty  of  which  we  are  treating.  For  certain,  what 
may  seem  marvellous  to  say,  through  incontinence  contain 
themselves:  as  if  a  woman  were  to  contain  herself  from  her 
husband,  because  she  hath  sworn  this  to  an  adulterer. 
Certain  through  injustice,  as  if  spouse  yield  not  to  spouse 
the  due  of  sexual  intercourse,  because  he  or  she  is  already 
able  to  overcome  such  appetite  of  the  body.  Also  certain 
contain  deceived  by  false  faith,  and  hoping  uhat  is  vain, 
and  following  after  what  is  vain :  among  whom  are  all 
heretics,  and  whosoever  under  the  name  of  religion  are 
deceived  by  any  error:  whose  continence  would  be  true,  if 
their  faith  also  were  true  :  but,  whereas  that  is  not  to  be 
called  faith,  on  this  account,  because  it  is  false;  without 
doubt  that  also  is  unworthy  the  name  of  continence.  For 
what }  are  we  prepared  to  call  continence,  which  we  must 
truly  say  is  the  gift  of  God,  sin.?  Far  be  from  our  hearts  so 
Rom.     hateful  madness.     But  the  blessed  Apostle  saiih,  Every  t/iinff 

'  "  '    i/iaf  is  i}ot  of failli  is  sin.     What  therefore  halh  not  faith,  is 
not  to  be  called  continence. 

27.  There  are  also  they  who,  in  doing  open  service  to 
evil  demons,  contain  from  ])leasures  of  the  body,  that,  through 
their  means,  they  may  satisfy  unlawful  pleasures,  the  violence 
and  glow  whereof  they  contain  not.  Whence  also,  (to  name 
one  case,  and  pass  over  the  rest  in  silence  by  reason  of  the 
length  of  the  discourse,)  certain  come  not  near  even  unto 
their  own  wives,  whilst,  as  thougli  clean,  they  essay  through 
magic  arts  to  gain  access  unto  the  wives  of  others.  O 
marvellous  continence,  nay  rather,  singular  wickedness  and 
uncleanness  !  For,  if  it  were  true  continence,  the  lust  of  the 
flesh  ought  rather  to  contain  from  adultery,  than,  in  order  to 
commit  adultery,  from  marriage.  Forsooth  marriage  conti- 
nence is  wont  to  ease  this  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  to  check  its 
curb  but  thus  far,  that  neither  in  marriage  itself  it  run  riot 


The  icork  of  Conlincnce  for  soul  and  body.  9()t) 

by  immoderate   license,  but  that  a   measure    be   observed,     de 
either  such  as  is  due  to  the  weakness  of  the  spouse,  unto   ^en-" 
whom    the    Apostle    enjoins  not  this,  as   of  command,  but    t^^- 
yields  it  as  of  permission ;  or  such  as  is  suited  for  the  beget-  \    °^- 
ling  of  sons,  which  was  formerly  the  one  alone  occasion  of 
sexual  intercourse  to  both  holy   fathers  and  mothers.     But 
continence  doing  this,  that  is,  moderating,  and  in  a  certain 
way  limiting  in  married  persons  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and 
ordering  in  a  certain  way  within  fixed  limits  its  unquiet  and 
inordinate  motion,  uses  well  the  evil  of  man,  whom  it  makes 
and  wills  to  make  perfect  good:  as  God  uses  even  evil  men, 
for  their  sake  whom  He  ])erfects  in  goodness. 

28.  Far  be  it  therefore  that  we  say  of  continence,  of  xiii. 
which  Scripture  ^M\h,  And  this  very  tiling  was  irisdom,  /oWisd.8, 
know  nhose  gift  it  teas,  that  even  they  possess  it,  who,  by 
containing,  either  serve  errors,  or  overcome  any  lesser  desires 
for  this  purpose,  that  they  may  fulfil  others,  by  the  greatness 
of  which  they  are  overcome.  But  that  continence  which  is 
true,  coming  from  above,  wills  not  to  repress  some  evils  by 
other  evils,  but  to  heal  all  evils  by  goods.  And,  briefly  to 
comprehend  its  mode  of  action,  it  is  the  place  of  conti- 
nence to  keep  watch  to  restrain  and  heal  all  delights  what- 
soever of  lust,  which  are  opposed  to  the  delight  of  wisdom. 
AVhence  without  doubt  they  set  it  within  too  narrow  bounds, 
who  limit  it  to  restraining  the  lusts  of  the  body  alone: 
certainly  they  speak  better,  who  say  that  it  pertains  to  Con- 
tinence to  rule  in  general  lust  or  desire.  Which  desire  is 
set  down  as  a  fault,  nor  is  it  only  of  the  body,  but  also  of  the 
soul.  For,  if  the  desire  of  the  body  be  iu  fornications  and 
drunkennesses;  have  enmities,  strifes,  emulations,  lastly, 
hatreds,  their  exercise  in  the  pleasures  of  the  body,  and  not 
rather  in  the  motions  and  troubled  states  of  the  soul?  Yet 
the  Apostle  called  all  these  works  of  the  flesh,  whether  what 
pertained  to  the  soul,  or  what  pertained  properly  to  the 
flesh,  calling  forsooth  the  man  himself  by  the  name  of  the  Gal.  5, 
flesh.  Forsooth  ihey  are  the  works  of  man,  whatsoever  are2i[""  * 
not  called  works  of  God  ;  forasmuch  as  man,  who  does  these, 
lives  after  himself,  not  after  God,  so  far  as  he  does  these.  But 
there  are  other  works  of  man,  which  are  rather  to  be  called 
works   of  God.     For   it    is  God,  saith  the   Apostle,    Who  P]i'l-  2, 

1  o% 


270       Members  of  sin  mortijip.d.,  io  save  the  real  life. 
DE      worketh  in   you  both  io  will  and  to  do,  accordinq  to  His 


CONTI- 


NEN-    (jood  pleasure.     Whence  also  is  that,  For  as  many  as  are 


TIA, 


led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  these  are  sons  of  God. 


14.  '   '      29.  Thus  the  spirit  of  man,  cleaving  unto  the   Spirit  of 
God,  lusts  against  the  flesh,  that  is,  against  itself:  but  for 
itself,  in  order  that  those  motions,  whether  in  the  flesh  or  in 
the  soul,  after  man,  not  after  God,  which  as  yet  exist  through 
the  sickness  man  hath  gotten,  may  be  restrained  by  conti- 
nence, that  so  health  may  be  gotten  ;  and  man,  not  living 
Gal.  2,   after  man,  may  now  be  able  to  say,  But  I  live,  now  not  I, 
but  there  liveth  in  me  Christ.     For  where  not  I,  there  more 
happily  I :  and,  when  any  evil  motion  after  man  arises,  unto 
which  he,  who  with  the  mind  serves  the  Law  of  God,  con- 
Rom.  7,  sents  not,  let  him  say  that  also,  Now  it  is  not  I  that  do  this. 
To  such  forsooth  are  said  tliose  words,  which  we,  as  partners 
Col.  3,    and  sharers  with  them,  ought  to  listen  to.     Jf  ye  have  risen 
^~^'     together  tvith  Christ,  seek  the  things  thai  are  above,  where 
^  sapite.  Christ   is   sitting  at   the  Right  Hand  of  God:   mind^  the 
things  that  are  above,  not  tvhat  are  npon  earth.     For  ye  are 
dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God:  tvhen  Christ 
your  life  shall  hare  appeared,  then  ye  also  shall  appear  tvith 
Him  in  glory.     Let  us  understand  unto  whom  he  is  speak- 
ing, yea,  rather,  let  us  listen  with  more  attention.     For  what 
more  plain  than  this?  what  more   clear.?    He  is  certainly 
speaking  unto  those,  who  had  risen  again  with   Christ,  not 
yet  surely  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  mind  :  whom  he  calls  dead, 
and  on  this  account  the  more  living :  for  your  life,  saith  he, 
is  hid  uith   Christ  in  God.     Of  such  dead  the  speech  is ; 
But  I  live,  now  not  I,  but  there  liveth  in  me  Christ.     They 
therefore,  whose  life  was  hidden  in  God,  are  admonished  and 
exhorted  to  mortify  their  members,  which  are  upon  the  earth. 
For  this  follows.  Mortify,  therefore,  your  members,  which  are 
II pon  the  earth.    And,lestanythroughexcessofdulness  should 
think  that  such  are  to  mortify  the  members  of  the  body  that 
Col.  3,    are  seen,  straightway  opening  what  it  is  he  saith.  Fornication, 
^'  saith  he,  uncleanness,  passion,  evil  lust,  and  covetousness, 

which  is  idolatry.  But  is  it  so  to  be  believed,  that  they, 
who  were  already  dead,  and  their  life  hidden  with  Christ  in 
God,  were  still  committing  fornication,  were  still  living  in 
unclean  habits  and  works,  were  still  slaves  to  passions  of  evil 


Sin,  though  not  practised,  remains  to  he  mortified.     271 

lust  and  covetousness  ?     What  madman  would  thus  think  of    db 
such  ?     What,  therefore,  would  he  that  they  mortify,  save  the  ^^en-' 
motions  themselves    still    living   in  a    certain    intrusion'  of    tia. 
their  own,  without  the   consent   of  our  mind,  without  the''"*^^" 

p6113i~ 

action  of  the  members  of  the  body?     And  how  are  theytione. 
mortified  by  the  work  of  continence,  save  when  we  consent 
not  to  them  with  the  mind,  nor  are  the  members  of  the  body 
yielded  to  them  as  weapons;  and,  what  is  greater,  and  to  be 
looked  to  with  yet  greater  watchfulness  of  continence,  our 
very  thought  itself,  although  in  a  certain  way  it  be  touched 
by  their  suggestion,  and,  as  it  were,  whisper,  yet  turns  away 
from  these,  that  it  receive  not  delight  from  them,  and  turns 
to  more  delightful  thoughts  of  things  above:  on  this  account 
naming  them  in  discourse,  that  men  abide  not  in  them,  but 
flee  from   them.     And  this  is  brought  to  pass,  if  we  listen 
effeclually,  with  His  help,  Who  through  His  Apostle  gives 
this  command,  Seek  things  that  are  above,  where  Christ  is  Co\.  3, 
sitting  at  the  Bight  Hand  of  God.     Mind  the  things  that  are  '   ' 
above,  not  what  are  on  earth. 

30.  But,  after  that  he  had  made  mention  of  these  evils,  he    xiv. 
added  and  said,  On  account  of  which  cometh  the  ivrath  o/*^°'-  ^' 
God  on  the  sons  of  unbelief.     Surely  it  was  a  wholesome 
alarm,  that   believers  might  not   think   that   they   could  be 
saved  on  account  of  their  faith   alone,  even  although  they 
should  live  in  these  evils:   the  Apostle  James  with  most  clear 
speech  crying  out  against  that  notion,  and  saying.  If  any  James 
say  that  he  have  fiith,  and  have  not  works,  shall  his  faith  be  '     ' 
able  to  save  him?     Whence  also  here  the  Teacher  of  the 
Gentiles  said,  that  on  account  of  these  evils  the  wrath  of 
God  cometh  on  the  sons  of  unbelief.     But  when  he  saith. 
Wherein  ye  also   walked  sometime,  when   ye  were  living  Coi.  3, 
therein  ;  he  shews  sufficiently  that  now  they  were  not  living 
therein.     Forsooth  unto  these  they  had  died,  that  their  life 
might  be  hidden  in  God  with  Christ.     When  then  they  were 
now  not  living  in   them,  they  were   now  bidden   to  mortify 
such.      Forsooth,   themselves    not  living  in    the  same,    the 
things  were  living,  as  J  have  already  shewn  a  little  above, 
and  were  called  their  members,  that  is  to  say,  those   faults 
which  dwelt  in  their  members;  by  a  way  of  speech,  that 
which  is  contained  through  that  which  contains;  as  it  is  said, 


'27'2  Faith  saves  not  nttJtout  putting  down  fust. 

DE     The  whole  Forum  talks  of  it,  when  men  talk  who  are  in  the 

^j!^g^_^' Forum.     In  this  very  way  of  speech  it  is  sung  in  the  Psalm, 
TiA.    Lei  all  the  earth  worship  Thee:  that  is,  all  men  who  are  in 

^^'•^*^'*- the  earth. 

Col.  3,  31.  But  noiv  do  ye  also,  saith  he,  jmt  down  all;  and  he 
makes  mention  of  several  more  evils  of  that  sort.  But  what 
is  it,  that  it  is  not  enough  for  him  to  say,  Do  ye  put  down 
all,  but  that  he  added  the  conjunction  and  said,  ye  also?  save 
that  lest  they  should  not  think  that  they  did  those  evils,  and 
lived  in  them  with  impunity  on  this  account,  because  their 
faith  set  them  free  from  wrath,  which  cometh  upon  the  sons 
of  unbelief,  doing  these  things,  and  living  in  them  without 
faith.  Do  ye  also,  saith  ho,  put  down  those  evils,  on  account 
of  which  cometh  the  wrath  of  God  on  the  children  of  unbe- 
lief; nor  promise  yourselves  impunity  of  them  on  account  of 
merit  of  faith.  But  he  would  not  say,  j^'^d  ye  down,  unto 
those  who  had  already  laid  down  so  far  as  that  they  consented 
not  to  such  faults,  nor  were  yielding  their  members  to  them 
as  weapons  of  sin,  save  that  the  life  of  Saints  stands  in.  this 
past  deed,  and  is  still  engaged  in  this  work,  so  long  as  we 
are  mortal.  For,  so  long  as  the  Spirit  lusteth  against  the 
flesh,  this  business  proceeds  with  great  earnestness,  resistance 
is  offered  unto  evil  delights,  unclean  lusts,  carnal  and  shameful 
motions,  by  the  sweetness  of  holiness,  by  the  love  of  chastity, 
by  spiritual  vigour,  and  by  the  beauty  of  continence;  thus  they 
are  laid  down  by  them  who  are  dead  to  them,  and  who  live 
not  in  them  by  consenting.  Thus,  I  say,  they  are  put  down, 
whilst  they  are  weighed  down  by  continued  continence,  that 
they  rise  not  again.  Whosoever,  as  though  secure,  shall 
cease  from  this  laying  aside  of  them,  straightway  they  will 
assault  the  Citadel  of  the  mind,  and  will  themselves  put  it 
down  thence,  and  will  reduce  it  into  slavery  to  them,  captive 
after  a  base  and  unseemly  fashion.  Then  sin  will  reign  in 
the  mortal  body  of  man  to  obey  its  desires  ;  then  will  it 
_°™-  ^' yield  its  members  weapons  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin:  and 

Mat.  12,  the  last  state  of  that  man  shall  be  worse  than  the  former. 
For  it  is  much  more  tolerable  not  to  have  begun  a  contest  of 
this  kind,  than  after  one  hath  begun  to  have  left  the  conflict, 
and  to  have  become  in  place  of  a  good  warrior,  or  even  in 
place  of  a  conqueror,  a  captive.     Whence  the  Lord  saith  not, 


Rom. 


Glory  of  persevering  Continence  due  to  God.         •2T'i 

whoso  shall  begin,  but  Whoso  shall  persevere  unto  the  end,     de 
he  shall  he  saved.  nen- 

32.  But  whether  keenly  contending,  that  we  be  not  over-    "^i^ 


come,  or  overcoming  divers  times,  or  even  with  unhoped  ^^^  '  ' 
and  unlooked  for  ease,  let  us  give  the  glory  unto  Him  Who 
giveth  continence  vmto  us.  Let  us  remember,  that  a  certain 
just  man  said,  I  shall  never  be  moved:  and  that  it  was  shewed 
him  how  rashly  he  had  said  this,  attributing  as  though  to  his 
own  strength,  what  was  given  to  him  from  above.  But  this 
we  have  learnt  from  his  own  confession:  for  soon  after  he 
added.  Lord,  in  Thy  ivill  Thou  hast  given  strength  to  my^s.so, 
beauty ;  but  Thou  hast  turned  away  Thy  Face,  and  I  was 
troubled.  Through  a  remedial  Providence  he  was  for  a  short 
time  deserted  by  his  Ruler,  in  order  that  he  might  not  himself 
through  deadly  pride  desert  his  Huler.  Therefore,  whether 
here,  where  we  engage  with  our  faults  in  order  to  subdue 
and  make  them  less,  or  there,  as  it  shall  be  in  the  end,  where 
we  shall  be  void  of  every  enemy,  because  of  all  infection ',  it "  peste.' 
is  for  our  health  that  we  are  thus  dealt  with,  in  order  that, 
whoso  glorieth,  he  may  glory  in  the  Lord.  iCor.  i, 

31. 


S.     AUGUSTINE 


ON 


TPIE     GOOD     OF     MARRIAGE. 


This  treatise,  and  the  following,  were  written  against  somewhat  that  still 
remained  of  the  heresy  of  Jovinian.  S.  Aug.  mentions  this  error  in  h.  ii. 
c,  23.  de  Nuptiis  et  Cone.  '  Jovinianus,'  he  says,  '  who  a  few  years  since 
tried  to  found  a  new  heresy,  said  that  the  Catholics  favoured  the  Mani- 
chseans,  hecause  in  opposition  to  him  they  preferred  holy  Virginity  to 
Marriage.  And  in  his  book  on  Heresies,  c.  82.  '  That  heresy  took  its  rise 
from  one  Jovinianus,  a  Monk,  in  our  own  time,  when  we  were  yet  young.' 
And  he  adds  that  it  was  soon  overhorne  and  extinguished,  say  about 
A.D.  390,  having  been  condemned  first  at  Rome,  then  at  Milan.  There 
are  letters  of  Pope  Siricius  on  the  subject  to  the  Church  of  Milan,  and 
the  answer  sent  him  by  the  Synod  of  Milan,  at  which  St.  Ambrose 
presided.  Jerome  had  refuted  Jovinian,  but  was  said  to  have  attempted  the 
defence  of  the  excellency  of  the  virgin  state,  at  the  expense  of  condemning 
marriage.  That  Augustine  might  not  be  subject  to  any  such  complaint 
or  calumny,  before  speaking  of  the  superiority  of  Virginity,  he  thought  it 
well  to  write  on  the  Good  of  Marriage.  This  work  we  learn  to  have 
been  finished  about  the  year  401,  not  only  from  the  order  of  his  Retrac- 
tations, but  also  from  his  books  on  Genesis  after  the  Letter,  beguji  about 
that  year.  For  in  b.  ix.  on  Genesis,  c.  7,  where  he  commends  the  Good 
of  Marriage,  he  says:  '  Now  this  is  threefold,  faithfulness,  offspring,  and 
the  Sacrament.  For  faithfulness,  it  is  observed,  that  there  be  no  lying 
with  other  man  or  woman,  out  of  the  bond  of  wedlock:  for  the  offspring, 
that  it  be  lovingly  welcomed,  kindly  nourished,  religiously  brought  up  : 
for  the  Sacrament,  that  marriage  be  not  severed,  and  that  man  or  woman 
divorced  be  not  joined  to  another  even  for  the  sake  of  offspring.  This  is 
as  it  were  the  rule  of  Marriage,  by  which  rule  either  fruitfulness  is  made 
seemly,  or  the  perversen  ess  of  incontinence  is  brought  to  order.  Upon 
which  since  we  have  sufficiently  discoursed  in  that  book,  wliich  we  lately 
publish?d,  on  the  Good  of  Marriage,  where  we  have  also  distinguished 


Marriage  thejirst  bond  <>f  hia/tait  society.  275 

the  Widow's  continence  and  the  Virgin's  excellency,  according  to   the      jj^ 
worthiness  of  their  degrees,  our  pen  is  not  to  be  now  longer  occupied.'    bono 
This  very  work  is  referred  to  in  Book  I.  on  the  Deserts  and  Remission  '^^^^^' 

•'  GALI. 

of  sins,  c.  29.     Ben.  


NOTICE. 


The  Editors  are,  of  coarse,  aware  of  the  danger  there  is  in  reading  a  treatise 
like  the  following  in  a  spirit  of  idle  curiosity,  and  they  beg  any  reader  who  has 
not  well  assured  himself  that  his  aim  is  right  and  holy  to  abstain  from  perusing 
it.  At  the  same  time  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  something  far  other  than  a 
mere  shrinking  from  subjects  ofteasive  to  modern  delicacy  is  needed,  in  order  to 
purify  the  thoughts  with  respect  to  the  holy  estate  of  Matrimony.  The  mind 
that  will  but  seriously  attend  to  it  in  that  light,  will  certainly  be  strengthened 
against  evil  suggestions  by  seeing  in  the  whole  subject  a  field  of  Christian 
duty. 

It  seemed  further  requisite  to  bring  forward  a  work  calculated  to  remove  the 
imputation  so  falsely  cast  on  the  holy  Fathers,  that  they  regarded  Matrimony  as 
unholy,  and  almost  agreed  with  the  Manichean  view  of  it,  as  a  defilement  and 
degradation  to  the  Christian.  They  did,  it  is  true,  prefer  Virginity  to  Marriage, 
but,  as  St.  Augustine  expressly  states,  as  the  '  better  of  two  good  things,' not  as 
though  one  were  good,  and  the  other  evil. 

In  estimating  the  work  and  the  writer,  the  age  in  which  it  was  written  must 
be  kept  in  view,  and  what  that  age  required  must  not  be  imputed  as  a  fault  to 
him  or  to  his  religion.  And  perhaps  what  was  written  for  another  age  may 
serve  the  more  safely  towards  our  improvement  and  guidance  from  the  very 
circumstance  that  the  style  and  manner  of  antiquity  has  become  a  kind  of  veil, 
which  takes  oiF  somewhat  from  the  strength  and  vividness  of  first  impressions, 
and  leaves  the  mind  more  at  liberty  to  use  what  is  laid  before  it  as  it  will,  than 
a  more  modern  way  of  speaking  would  be  likely  to  do.  Let  that  liberty  be  used 
rightly  and  conscientiously,  and  the  effect  of  reading  will  be  good.     Ed. 


1.  Forasmuch  as  each  man  is  a  part  of  the  human  race,  and  i. 
human  nature  is  something  social,  and  hath  for  a  great  and 
natural  good,  the  power  also  of  friendship  ;  on  this  account 
God  willed  to  create  all  men  out  of  one,  in  order  that  they 
might  be  held  in  their  society  not  only  by  likeness  of  kind, 
but  also  by  bond  of  kindred.  Therefore  the  first  natural 
bond  of  hiunan  society  is  man  and  wife.  Nor  did  God  create 
these  each  by  himself,  and  join  them  together  as  alien  by 
birth  :  but  He  created  the  one  out  of  the  other,  setting  a 
sign  also  of  the  power  of  the  union  in  the  side,  whence  she^^^^^^> 
was  drawn,  was  formed.  For  they  are  joined  one  to  another 
side  by  side,  who  walk  together,  and  look  together  whither  they 

T  2 


•276  Holtj  state  of  Marriage  in  our  first  Parents. 

DE     walk.     Then  follows  the  connexion  of  fellowship  in  children, 

^,Q^j'^_  which  is  the  one  alone  worthy  fruit,  not  of  the  union  of  male 

f^'t.i.  and  female,   but    of  the    sexual   intercourse.     For   it   were 


possible  that  there  should  exist  in  either  sex,  even  without 
such  intercourse,  a  certain  friendly  and  true  union  of  the  one 
ruling,  and  the  other  obeying, 
ii.  2.  Nor  is  it  now  necessary  that  we  enquire,  and  put  forth 

a  definite  opinion  on  that  question,  whence  could  exist  the 
progeny  of  the  first  men,  whom  God  had  blessed,  saying, 

Gen.  ],  Increase,  and  be  ye  muUiplied,  and  Jill  the  earth;  if  they 
had  not  sinned,  whereas  their  bodies  by  sinning  deserved 
the  condition  of  death,  and  there  can  be  no  sexual  intercourse 
save  of  mortal  bodies-  For  there  have  existed  several  and 
different  opinions  on  this  matter;  and  if  we  must  examine, 
which  of  them  be  rather  agreeable  to   the  truth    of  Divine 

'see       Scriptures,  there    is    matter    for    a   lengthened    discussion*. 

Dei  h    Whether,  therefore,  without  intercourse,  in  some  other  way, 

^''^-  had  they  not  sinned,  they  would  have  had  sons,  from  the 
gift  of  the  Almighty  Creator,  Who  was  able  to  create  them- 
selves also  without  parents.  Who  was  able  to  form  the  Flesh 
of  Christ  in  a  virgin  womb,  and  (to  speak  even  to  unbe- 
lievers themselves)  Who  was  able  to  bestow  on  bees 
a  i)rogeny  without  sexual  intercourse ;  or  whether  many 
things  there  were  spoken  by  way  of  mystery  and  figure,  and 
we  are  to  understand  in  another  sense  what  is  written,  Fill 
the  earth,  and  rule  over  it;  that  is,  that  it  should  come  to 
pass  by  fulness  and  perfection  of  life  and  power,  so  that  the 
very  increase  and  multiplication,  whereby  it  is  said.  Increase^ 
and  he  ye  multiplied,  be  understood  to   be  by  advance  of 

Vs.  i.;3,  mind,  and  abundance  of  virtue,  as  it  is  set  in  the  Psalm,  Thou 

.{,  Ixs.  gjffjji  multiply  me  in  my  soul  by  virtue ;  and  that  succession 
of  progeny  was  not  given  unto  man,  save  after  that,  by  reason 
of  sin,  there  was  to  be  hereafter  departure  in  death:  or 
whether  the  body  was  not  made  spiritual  in  the  case  of  these 
men,  but  at  the  first  animal,  in  order  that  by  merit  of 
obedience  it  might  after  become  spiritual,  to  lay  hold  of 
immortality,  not  after  death,  which  by  the  malice  of  the  devil 
entered  into  the  world,  and  was  made  the  punishment  of  sin  ; 
but  after  that  change,  which  the  Apostle  signifies,  when  lie 

1  Thess.  c.g^yg^  'P/ig)i  fie  livinq,  icJio  reinain,  together  tvith  them,  shall 

4,  1".  ' 


Questions.     Marriage  both  for  offspring  and  for  help,   'ill 

he  canyhl  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  Chrisl,  into  the  air,  Ibat     de 
we  may  understand  both    that  those  bodies  of  the   first  pciir^,oj;,j^. 
were  mortal,  in  the  first  forming,  and  yet  that  they  would  not  gali. 
have  died,  had  they  not  sinned,  as  God  had  threatened:  even 
as  if  He  should   threaten  a   wound,  in    that  the  body  was 
capable  of  wounds;  which  yet  would   not  have  happened, 
unless  what  He  had  forbidden  were   done.     Thus,  therefore, 
even    through    sexual    intercourse    there    might    lake    place 
generations  of  such  bodies,  as  up  to  a  certain  point  should 
have  increase,  and  yet  should  not  pass  into  old  age  ;  or  even 
into  old  age,  and  yet  not  into  death  ;   until  the  earth   were 
filled  with  that  multiplication  of  the  blessing.     For  if  to  the 
garments   of  the  Israelites  God  granted  their  proper  state  Deut.29, 
without  any  wearing  away  during  forty  years,  how  much  more^' 
would  He  grant  unto  the  bodies  of  such  as  obeyed  His  com- 
mand a  certain  most  happy  temperament  of  sure  state,  until 
they  should  be  changed  for  the  better,  not  by  death  of  the 
man,  whereby  the  body  is  abandoned  by  the  soul,  but  by  a 
blessed  change  from  mortality  to  immortality,  from  an  animal 
to  a  spiritual  quality.     Of  these  opinions  which  be  true,  or     iii- 
whether  some  other  or  others  yet  may  be  formed  out  of  these 
words,  were  a  long  matter  to  enquire  and  discuss. 

3.  This  we  now  say,  that,  according  to  this  condition  of 
being  born  and  dying,  which  we  know,  and  in  which  we  have 
been  created,  the  maniage  of  male  and  female  is  some  good; 
the  compact  whereof  divine  Scrij^ture  so  commends,  as  that 
neither  is  it  allowed  one  put  away  by  her  husband  to  marry, 
so  long  as  her  husband  lives:  nor  is  it  allowed  one  put  away 
by  his  wife  to  marry  another,  unless  she  who  have  separated 
from  him  be  dead.  Therefore,  concerning  the  good  of 
marriage,  which  the  Lord  also  confirmed  in  the  Gospel,  not 
only  in  that  He  forbade  to  put  away  a  wife,  save  because  of  Mat.  19, 
fornication,  but  also  in  that  He  came  by  invitation  to  a  John  2, 
marriage,  there  is  good  ground  to  inquire  for  what  reason  it^- 
be  a  good.  And  this  seems  not  to  me  to  be  merely  on 
account  of  the  begetting  of  children,  but  also  on  account 
of  the  natural  society  itself  in  a  difference  of  sex.  Other- 
wise it  would  not  any  longer  be  called  marriage  in  the 
case  of  old  persons,  especially  if  either  they  had  lost  sons,  or 
had  given  birth  to  none.     But  now  in  good,  although  aged. 


278         Marriage  keeps  tiatural  desire  within  rule. 

DE     marriage,  albeit  there  hath  withered  away  the  glow  of  full  age 
j,Q°^°_  between  male  and  female,  yet  there  lives  in  full  vigour  the 
QALi.  order  of  charity  between  husband   and  wife :  because,  the 
better  they  are,  the  earlier  they  have  begun  by  mutual  con- 
sent to  contain  from  sexual  intercourse  with  each  other:  not 
that  it  should  be  matter  of  necessity  afterwards  not  to  have 
power  to  do  what  they  would,  but  that  it  should  be  matter 
of  praise  to  have  been  unwilling  at  the  first,  to  do  what  they 
had  power  to  do.     If  therefore   there  be  kept  good  faith  of 
honour,  and  of  services  mutually  due  from  either  sex,  although 
the  members  of  either  be  languishing  and  almost  corpse-like, 
•perhapsyet  of  souls  duly  joined  together,  the  chastity'  continues,  the 
ri*ty?'     piirer  by  how  much  it  is  the  more  proved,  the  safer,  by  how 
much  it  is  the  calmer.     Marriages  have  this  good  also,  that 
carnal   or  youthful  incontinence,  although  it   be   faulty,  is 
brought  unto  an  honest  use  in  the  begetting  of  children,  in 
order  that  out  of  the  evil  of  lust  the  marriage  union  may  bring 
to  pass  some  good.     Next,  in  that  the  lust  of  the   flesh  is 
repressed,  and  rages  in  a  way  more  modestly,  being  tempered 
by  parental   affection.     For   there   is    interposed   a    certain 
gravity  of  glowing  pleasure,  when  in  that  wherein  husband 
and  wife  cleave  to  one  another,  they  have  in  mind  that  they 
be  father  and  mother. 
iv.         4.  There  is   this   further,  that   in    that  very   debt  which 
married  persons  pay  one  to  another,  even  if  they  demand  it 
with   somewhat  too   great  intemperance    and  incontinence, 
yet  they  owe  faith  alike  one  to  another.     Unto  which  faith 
the    Apostle   allows   so   great  right,   as   to   call  it  '  power,' 
1  Cor.    saying.  The  woman  hath  not  power  of  her  own  body,  but  the 
'   '      man ;  again  in  like  manner  also  the  man  hath  not  power  of 
his  own  body,  but  the  woman.     But  the   violation    of  this 
faith  is  called  adultery,  when  either  by  instigation  of  one's 
own  lust,  or  by  consent  of  lust  of  another,  there  is  sexual 
intercourse  on  either  side  with  another  against  the  marriage 
compact:  and  thus  faith  is  broken,  which,  even  in  things 
that  are  of  the  body,  and  mean,  is  a  great  good  of  the  soul : 
and  therefore  it  is  certain  that  it  ought  to  be  preferred  even 
to  the  health  of  the  body,  wherein  even  this  life  of  ours  is 
contained.     For,  although  a  little  chaff  in  comparison    of 
much  gold  is  almost  nothing  ;  yet  faith,  when  it  is  kept  pure 


Good  faith  in  ivedlock.  Sinful  compacts  hotv  to  he  broken.  279 

in  a  matter  of  chaff,  as  in  gold,  is  not  therefore  less  because  de 
it  is  kept  in  a  lesser  matter.  But  when  faith  is  employed  to  conju- 
commit  sin,  it  were  strange  that  we  should  have  to  call  it  "alt. 
faith ;  however  of  what  kind  soever  it  be,  if  also  the  deed  be 
done  against  it,  it  is  the  worse  done ;  save  when  it  is  on 
this  account  abandoned,  that  there  may  be  a  return  unto 
true  and  lawful  faith,  that  is,  that  sin  may  be  amended,  by 
correction  of  perverseness  of  the  will.  As  if  any,  being  unable 
alone  to  rob  a  man,  should  find  a  partner  in  his  iniquity, 
and  make  an  agreement  with  him  to  do  it  together,  and  to 
divide  the  spoil ;  aiid,  after  the  crime  hath  been  committed, 
should  take  off  the  whole  to  himself  alone.  That  other 
grieves  and  complains  that  faith  hath  not  been  kept  with 
him,  but  in  his  very  complaint  he  ought  to  consider,  that  he 
himself  rather  ought  to  have  kept  faith  with  human  society 
in  a  good  life,  not  to  make  unjust  spoil  of  a  man,  if  he  feels 
with  how  great  injustice  it  hath  failed  to  be  kept  with  him- 
self in  a  fellowship  of  sin.  Forsooth  the  former,  being 
faithless  in  both  instances,  must  assuredly  be  judged  the 
more  wicked.  But,  if  he  had  been  displeased  at  what  they 
had  done  ill,  and  had  been  on  this  account  unwilling  to 
divide  the  spoil  with  his  pratner  in  crime,  in  order  that  it 
might  be  restored  to  the  man,  liom  whom  it  had  been  taken, 
not  even  a  faithless  man  would  call  him  faithless.  Thus  a 
woman,  if,  having  broken  her  marriage  faith,  she  keep  faith 
with  her  adulterer,  is  certainly  evil :  but,  if  not  even  with  her 
adulterer,  worse.  Further,  if  she  repent  her  of  her  sin,  and 
returning  to  marriage  chastity,  renounce  all  adulterous  com- 
pacts and  resolutions,  I  count  it  strange  if  even  the  adulterer 
himself  will  think  her  one  who  breaks  faith. 

5.  Also  the  question  is  wont  to  be  asked,  when  a  male     ^'' 
and  female,  neither  the  one  the  husband,  nor  the  other  the 
wife,  of  any  other,  come  together,  not  for  the  begetting  of 
children,  but,  by  reason  of  incontinence,  for  the  mere  sexual 
intercouse,  there  being  between  them  this  faith,  that  neither 
he  do  it  with  any  other  woman,  nor  she  with  any  other  man, 
whether  it  is  to  be  called  marriage*.     And  perhap-;  this  may,  inuptiae 
not  without  reason,  be  called  marriage^,  if  it  shall  be  theaconmi- 
resolution^  of  both  parties  until  the  death  of  one,  and  if  IheJ'i"™- 

,  .  e       ^   ■■,  1  111  1  r-  plaCLl- 

begettmg  of  children,  although  they  came  not  together  forerit. 


280     Etil  of  incontinence  in  Marriage  is  not  oX  Marriage. 

OE  that  cause,  yet  they  shun  uot,  so  as  either  to  be  unwilling 
coNju-to  have  children  born  to  them,  or  even  by  some  evil  work  to 
GALi.  ^gQ  means  that  they  be  not  born.  But,  if  either  both,  or 
one,  of  these  be  wanting,  I  find  not  how  we  can  call  it 
marriage.  For,  if  a  man  should  take  unto  him  any  one  for  a 
time,  until  he  find  another  worthy  either  of  his  honours  or  of 
his  means,  to  marry  as  his  compeer;  in  his  soul  itself  he  is 
an  adulterer,  and  that  not  with  her  whom  he  is  desirous  of 
finding,  but  with  her,  with  whom  he  so  lies,  as  not  to  have 
with  her  the  partnership  of  a  husband.  Whence  she  also 
herself,  knowing  and  willing  this,  certainly  acts  unchastely 
in  having  intercourse  with  him,  with  whom  she  has  not  the 
compact  of  a  wife.  However,  if  slje  keep  to  him  faith  of 
bed,  and  after  he  shall  have  married,  have  no  thought  of 
marriage  herself,  and  prepare  to  contain  herself  altogether 
from  any  such  work,  perhaps  I  should  not  dare  lightly  to 
call  her  an  adulteress ;  but  who  shall  say  that  she  sins  not, 
when  he  is  aware  tliat  she  has  intercourse  with  a  man,  not 
being  his  wife  ?  But  further,  if  from  that  intercourse,  so  far  as 
pertains  to  herself,  she  has  no  wish  but  for  sons,  and  suffers 
unwilling  whatever  she  suffers  beyond  the  cause  of  begetting; 
there  are  many  matrons  to  whom  she  is  to  be  preferred;  who, 
although  they  are  not  adulteresses,  yet  force  their  husbands, 
for  the  most  part  also  wishing  to  exercise  continence,  to  pay 
the  due  of  the  flesh,  not  through  desire  of  children,  but 
through  glow  of  lust  making  an  intemperate  use  of  their  very 
right;  in  whose  marriages,  however,  this  very  thing,  that 
they  are  married,  is  a  good.  For  for  this  purpose  are  they 
married,  that  the  lust  being  brought  under  a  lawful  bond, 
should  not  float  at  large  without  form  and  loose;  having  of 
itself  weakness  of  flesh  that  cannot  be  curbed,  but  of  marriage 
fellowship  of  faith  that  cannot  be  dissolved;  of  itself  encroach- 
ment of  immoderate  intercourse,  of  marriage  a  way  of  chastely 
begetting.  For,  although  it  be  shameful  to  wish  to  use  a 
husband  for  purposes  of  lust,  yet  it  is  honourable  to  be 
unwilling  to  have  intercourse  save  with  an  husband,  and  not 

"^''  to  give  birth  to  children  save  from  a  husband.  There  are 
also  men  incontinent  to  that  degree,  that  they  spare  not 
their  wives  even  when  pregnant.  Therefore  whatever  that 
is    immodest,    shameless,    base,    married    persons    do    one 


What  compliance  due  from  the  married  to  each  other.  281 
with    anotlur,  is    the   sin   of  the  persons,  not    the    fault  of     de 

BONO 

niarnagc.  conju- 

6.  Further,  in  the  very  case  of  the  more  immoderate  '^^''^- 
requirement  of  the  due  of  the  flesh,  which  the  Apostle 
enjoins  not  on  them  by  way  of  command,  but  allows  to  them 
by  way  of  leave,  that  they  have  intercourse  also  beside  the 
cause  of  begetting  children  ;  although  evil  habits  impel  them 
to  such  intercourse,  yet  marriage  guards  them  from  adultery 
or  fornication.  For  neither  is  that  committed  because  of 
marriage,  but  is  pardoned  because  of  marriage.  Therefore 
married  persons  owe  one  another  not  only  the  faith  of  their 
sexual  intercourse  itself,  for  the  begetting  of  children,  which 
is  the  first  fellowship  of  the  human  kind  in  this  mortal 
state  ;  but  also,  in  a  way,  a  mutual  service  of  sustaining '  one  'excipi- 
another's  weakness,  in  order  to  shun  unlawful  intercourse: 
so  that,  although  perpetual  continence  be  pleasing  to  one 
of  them,  he  may  not,  save  with  consent  of  the  other.  For 
thus  far  also,  The  toife  hath  riot  poicer  of  her  own  body,  hitii  Cor. 
the  man:  in  like  maimer  also  the  man  hath  not  pouer  of 
his  oicn  bodi/,  but  the  woman.  That  that  also,  which,  not 
for  the  begetting  of  children,  but  for  weakness  and  incon- 
tinence, either  he  seeks  of  marriage,  or  she  of  her  husband, 
they  deny  not  the  one  or  the  other ;  lest  by  this  they  fall 
into  damnable  seductions,  through  temptation  of  Satan,  by 
reason  of  incontinence  either  of  both,  or  of  w^hichever  of  them. 
For  intercourse  of  marriage  for  the  sake  of  begetting,  hath 
not  fault;  but  for  the  satisfying  of  lust,  but  yet  with  husband 
or  wife,  by  reason  of  the  faith  of  the  bed,  it  hath  venial 
fault:  but  adultery  or  fornication  hath  deadly  fault,  and, 
through  this,  continence  from  all  intercourse  is  indeed  better 
even  than  the  intercourse  of  marriage  itself,  which  takes 
place  for  the  sake  of  begetting.  But  because  that  Conti-  vii. 
neuce  is  of  larger  desert,  but  to  pay  the  due  of  mamage  is 
no  crime,  but  to  demand  it  beyond  the  necessity  of  begetting 
is  a  venial  fault,  but  to  commit  fornication  or  adultery  is  a 
crime  to  be  punished ;  charity  of  the  married  ought  to  beware, 
lest,  whilst  it  seek  for  itself  occasion  of  larger  honour,  it  do 
that  for  its  partner  which  cause  condemnation.  For  who-  Matt. 5, 
soever  pnttetli  aicay  his  wife^  except  for  the  cause  of  forni- 
cation, maketh  Iter  to  commit  adulter ij.     To  such  a  degree 


282         Marriage  not  tvholhj  dissolved  but  by  death. 

DE     is  that  marriage  compact  entered  upon  a  matter  of  a  certain 

coNJu-  sacrament,  that  it  is  not  made  void  even  by  separation  itself, 

GALi.   since,  so  long  as  her  husband  lives,  even  by  whom  she  hath 

been  left,  she  commits  adultery,  in  case  she  be  married  to 

another;  and  he  who  hath  left  her,  is  the  cause  of  this  evil. 

7.  But  I  marvel,  if,  as  it  is  allowed  to  put  away  a  wife  who 
is  an  adulteress,  so  it  be  allowed,  having  put  her  away,  to 
marry  another.     For  holy  Scripture  causes  a  hard  knot  in 
this  matter,  in  that  the  Apostle  says,  that,  by  commandment 
of  the  Lord,  the  wife  ought  not  to  depart  from  her  husband, 
but,  in  case  she  shall  have  departed,  to  remain  unmarried,  or 
1  Cor. 7, to  be  reconciled  to  her  husband;  whereas  surely  she  ought 
not  to  depart  and  remain  unmarried,  save  from  an  husband 
that  is  an  adulterer,  lest  by  withdrawing  from  him,  who  is 
not  an  adulterer,  she  cause  him  to  commit  adultery.     But 
perhaps  she  may  justly  be  reconciled  to  her  husband,  either 
he  being  to  be  borne  with,  if  she  cannot  contain  herself,  or 
being  now  corrected.     But  I  see  not  how  the  man  can  have 
permission  to  marry  another,  in  case  he  have  left  an  adul- 
teress, when  a  woman  has  not  to  be  married  to  another,  in 
case  she  have  left  an  adulterer.     And,  this  being  the  case,  so 
strong  is  that  bond  of  fellowship  in  married  persons,  that, 
although  it  be  tied  for  the  sake  of  begetting  children,  not 
even  for  the  sake  of  begetting  children  is  it  loosed.     For  it  is 
in  a  man's  ])ower  to  put  away  a  wife  that  is  barren,  and 
marry  one  of  whom  to  have  children.     And  yet  it  is  not 
allowed ;  and  now  indeed  in  our  times,  and  after  the  usage 
of  Rome,  neither  to  marry  in  addition,  so  as  to  have  more 
than  one  wife  living :  and,  surely,  in  case  of  an  adulteress  or 
adulterer  being  left,  it  would  be  possible    that  more  men 
should  be  born,  if  either  the  woman  were  married  to  another, 
or  the  man  should  marry  another.     And  yet,  if  this  be  not 
lawful,  as  the  Divine  Rule  seems  to  prescribe,  who  is  there 
but  it  must  make  him  attentive  to  learn,  what  is  the  meaning  of 
this  so  great  strength  of  the  marriage  bond.?    Which  I  by 
no  means  think  could  have  been  of  so  great  avail,  were  it  not 
that  there  were  taken  a  certain  sacrament  of  some  greater 
matter  from  out  this  weak  mortal  state  of  men,  so  that,  men 
deserting  it,  and   seeking  to   dissolve  it,  it  should  remain 
unshaken  for  their  punishment.     Seeing  that  the  compact  of 


Marriage  not  an  evil,  hut  a  lesser  good.  283 

marriage  is  not  done  away  by  divorce  intervening;  so  that     de 
they  continue   wedded  persons  one  to  another,  even   after  ^^j^j^. 
separation;    and    commit    adultery   with    those,  with   whom  gm.\. 
they  shall  be  joined,  even   after  their  own   divorce,  either 
the  woman  with  a  man,  or  the  man  with  a  woman.     And  yet, 
save  in  the  City  of  our  God,  in  His  Holy  Mount,  the  case  is  Ps.  48, 
not  such  with  the  wife.     But,  that  the  laws  of  the  Gentiles  '  ■■. 
are  otherwise,  who  is  there  that  knows  not ;  where,  by  the 
interposition  of  divorce,  without  any  offence  of  which  man 
takes  cognizance,  both  the  woman  is  married  to  whom  she 
will,  and  the  man  marries  whom  he  will.     And  something 
like  this  custom,  on  account  of  the  hardness  of  the  Israelites, 
Moses  seems  to  have  allowed,  concerning  a  bill  of  divorce-  Deut. 

24    1. 

ment.     In  which  matter  there  appears  rather  a  rebuke,  than  M'at.*i9 
an  approval,  of  divorce.  ^• 

8.    Honourable,    therefore,    is  marriage  in    all,   and    the  Heh. 
bed  undejiled.     And  this  we  do  not  so  call  a  good,  as  that  ^^'    * 
it  is  a  good  in  comparison  of  fornication :  otherwise  there 
will  be  two  evils,  of  which  the  second  is  worse :  or  fornication 
will  also  be  a  good,  because  adultery  is  worse:  for  it  is  worse 
to  violate  the  marriage  of  another,  than  to  cleave  unto  an 
harlot:  and  adultery  will  be  a  good,  because  incest  is  worse; 
for  it  is  worse  to  lie  with  a  mother  than  with   the  wife  of 
another:  and,  until  we  arrive  at  those  things,  which,  as  the 
Apostle  saith,  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of,  all  will  be  good  Eph.  5, 
in  comparison  of  what  are  worse.     But  who  can  doubt  that    ,' 
this  is  false?  Therefore  marriage  and  fornication  are  not  two 
evils,  whereof  the  second  is  worse :  but  marriage  and  con- 
tinence are  two  goods,  whereof  the  second  is  better,  even  as 
this  temporal  health  and  sickness  are  not  two  evils,  whereof 
the  second  is  worse;  but  that  health  and  immortality  are  two 
goods,  whereof  the  second  is  better.     Also  knowledge  and 
vanity  are  not  two  evils,  whereof  vanity  is  the  worse :  but 
knowledge  and  charity  are  two  goods,  whereof  charity  is  the 
better.    For  knowledge  shall  be  destroyed,  saith  the  Apostle:  i  Ccr. 
and  yet  it  is  necessary  for  this  time  :  but  charity  shall  never     ' 
fail.     Thus  also  this  mortal  begetting,  on  account  of  which 
marriage  takes  place,  shall  be  destroyed :  but  freedom  from 
all  sexual  intercourse  is  both  angelic  exercise'  here,  andi,i,edi- 
continueth  for  ever.      But  as  the   repasts  of  the   Just   are*^''°- 


BONO 
CONJU 


284    Examples  of  Saints,  Mary,  Marlha,  Anna,  Susanna. 

DE     better  than  the  fasts  of  the  sacrilegious,  so  the  marriage  of 
the  faithful  is  to  be  set  before  the  virginity  of  the  impious. 
GALi.   However  neither  in  that  case  is  repast  preferred  to  lasting, 
but   rigliteousness   to    sacrilege;    nor   in    this,   marriage    to 
virginity,    but    faith    to    impiety.       For    for    this    end    the 
righteous,  when   need   is,   take   their  repast,   that,   as   good 
masters,  they   may  give   to   their   slaves,  i.  e.   their  bodies, 
what  is  just  and  fair :   but  for  this  end  the  sacrilegious  fast, 
that  they  may  serve  devils.     Thus  for  this  end  the  faithful 
are  married,  that  they  may  be  chastely  joined  unto  husbands, 
but  for  this  end  the  impious  are  virgins,  that  they  may  com- 
mit fornication  away  from  the  true  God.     As,  therefore,  that 
was  good,  which  Martha  was  doing,  being  engaged  in  the 
ministering  unto  the  Saints,  but  that  better,  which  Mary,  her 
sister,  sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord,  and  hearing  His  word  ; 
Hist,  ofthus  we  praise  the  good  of  Susanna  in  married  chastity,  but 
"^sT^y^^  we  set  before   her  the  good  of  the  widow  Anna,  and, 
Lute  2,  much  more,  of  the  Virgin  Mary.    It  was  good  that  they  were 
Luke  1  doing,  who  of  their  substance  were  ministering  necessaries 
27.28.'  yjjto  Christ  and  His  disciples:  but  better,  who  left  all  their 
substance,   that    they   might    be    freer    to    follow   the   same 
Lord.     But  in  both  these  cases  of  good,  whether  what  these, 
or  whether  what  Martha  and  Mary  were  doing,  the  better 
could  not  be  done,  unless  the  other  had  been  passed  over  or 
left.     Whence  we   are   to  understand,  that  we  are  not,  on 
this  account,  to  think  marriage  an  evil,  because,  unless  there 
be  abstinence  from  it,  widowed   chastity,  or  virgin   purity, 
cannot   be    had.      For   neither    on    this    account  was   what 
Martha  was  doing  evil,  because,  unless  her  sister  abstained 
from  it,  she   could   not   do   what   was  better:    nor  on   this 
account  is  it  evil  to  receive  a  just  man  or  a  prophet  into 
one's   house,  because  he,  who  wills   to   follow   Christ  unto 
perfection,  ought  not  even  to  have  a  house,  in  order  to  do 
what  is  better. 

9.  Truly  we  must  consider,  that  God  gives  us  some  goods, 
which  are  to  be  sought  for  their  own  sake,  such  as  wisdom, 
health,  friendship :  but  others,  which  are  necessary  for  the 
sake  of  somewhat,  such  as  learning,  meat,  drink,  sleep, 
marriage,  sexual  intercourse.  For  of  these  certain  are 
necessary  for  the  sake  of  wisdom,  as  learning:    certaui  tor 


rx. 


Marriage  of  the  continent  once  more  needed  than  noic.  285 

the  sake  of  health,  as  meat  and  drink  and  sleep  :  certain  for  de 
the  sake  of  friendship,  as  marriage  or  sexual  intercourse  :  conju- 
for  hence  subsists  the  propagation  of  the  human  kind,  "^li. 
wherein  friendly  fellowship  is  a  great  good.  These  goods, 
therefore,  which  are  necessary  for  the  sake  of  something  else, 
whoso  useth  not  for  this  purpose,  wherefore  they  were  insti- 
tuted, sins;  in  some  cases  venially,  in  other  cases  damnably. 
But  whoso  useth  them  for  this  purpose,  wherefore  they  vv^ere 
given,  doeth  well.  Therefore,  to  whomsoever  they  are  not 
necessary,  if  he  use  them  not,  he  doeth  better.  Wherefore, 
these  goods,  when  we  have  need,  we  do  well  to  wish  ;  but  we 
do  better  not  to  wish  than  to  wish  :  because  ourselves  are 
in  a  belter  state,  when  we  account  them  not  necessary.  And 
on  this  account  it  is  good  to  marry,  because  it  is  good  to 
beget  children,  to  be  a  mother  of  a  family:  but  it  is  better  1  Tim. 
not  to  maiTy,  because  it  is  better  not  to  stand  in  need  of  this  '  " 
work,  in  order  to  human  fellowship  itself.  For  such  is  the 
state  of  the  human  race  now,  that  (others,  who  contain  not, 
not  only  being  taken  up  with  marriage,  but  many  also  waxing 
wanton  through  unlawful  concubinages,  the  Good  Creator 
working  what  is  good  out  of  their  evils)  there  fails  not 
numerous  progeny,  and  abundant  succession,  out  of  which 
to  procure  holy  friendships.  Whence  we  gather,  that,  in  the 
first  times  of  the  human  race,  chiefly  for  the  propagation  of 
the  People  of  God,  through  whom  the  Prince  and  Saviour  of 
all  people  should  both  be  prophesied  of,  and  be  born,  it  was  the 
duty  of  the  Saints  to  use  this  good  of  marriage,  not  as  to  be 
sought  for  its  own  sake,  but  necessary  for  the  sake  of  some- 
thing else  :  but  now,  whereas,  in  order  to  enter  upon  holy 
and  pure  fellowship,  there  is  on  all  sides  from  out  all  nations 
an  overflowing  fulness  of  spiritual  kindred,  even  they  who 
wish  to  contract  marriage  only  for  the  sake  of  children,  are 
to  be  admonished,  that  they  use  rather  the  larger  good  of 
continence. 

10.  But  I  am  aware  of  some  that  murmur:  What,  say  they,     x. 
if  all  men  should  abstain  from  all  sexual  intercourse,  whence 
will  the  human  race  exist?     Would  that  all  would  this,  only 
in  charHy  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  good  conscience,  andiTim. 
faith  unfeigned ;  much  more  speedily  would  the  City  of  God  ^'  ''• 
be  filled,  and  the  end  of  the  world  hastened.     For  what  else 


286  Best  not  to  marry,  yet  Marriage  no  sin. 

DE     dolh  the  Apostle,  as  is  manifest,  exhort  to,  when  he  saith, 
coNJu-SP^^^'^g  on  this  head,  1  would  that  all  were  as  myself;  or 
GALT.  in  that  passage.  But  this  I  say,  brethren,  the  time  is  short : 
7      *  '  it  remains  that  both  they  who  have  icives,  be  as  thongh  not 
^eT.29-ji(ii-if,g:  (ijid  fjigy  y^Jio  t{-eep,as  though  not  weeping:    and 
they  who  rejoice,  as  though  not  rejoicing:  and  they  who  buy, 
as  though  not   buying:    and  they  tcho  use  this  world,  as 
though  they  use  it  not.     For  the  form  of  this  world  passeth 
by.     I  would  have  you  tvithout  care.     Then  he  adds,  Whoso 
is  without  a  ivife,  thinks  of  the  things  of'  the  Lord,  how  to 
please  the  Lord:  but  whoso  is  joined  in  marriage,  thittks  of 
the  things  of  the  tvorld,  how  to  please  his  wife:  and  a  woman 
that  is  umnarried  and  a  virgin  is  different:  she  that  is  un- 
married is  anxious  about  the  things  of  the  Lord,  to  he  holy 
both  in  hodjy  and  spirit :  but  she  that  is  married,  is  anxious 
about  the  things  of  the  %vorld,  hoiv  to  please  her  husband. 
Whence  it  seems  to  me,  that  at  this  time,  those  only,  who 
contain  not,  ought  to  marry,  according  to  that  sentence  of 
iCor.7, the    same   Apostle,  But  if  they  contain    not,  let    them   be 
married:  for  it  is  better  to  be  married  than  to  burn. 

11.  And  yet  not  to  these  themselves  is  marriage  a  sin; 
which,  if  it  were  chosen  in  comparison  of  fornication,  would 
be  a  less  sin  than  fornication,  and  yet  would  be  a  sin.  But 
now  what  shall  we  say  against  the  most  plain  speech  of  the 
iCor.  7,  Apostle,  saying.  Let  her  do  what  she  ivill ;  she  sinneth  not, 
YeT.28.if  ^^^^  ie  married;  and,  If  thou  shall  have  taken  a  wife, 
thou  hast  not  sinned:  and,  if  a  virgin  shall  have  been 
married,  she  sinneth  not.  Hence  surely  it  is  not  lawful 
now  to  doubt  that  marriage  is  no  sin.  Therefore  the  Apostle 
•veniamalloweth  not  marriage  as  matter  oi  pardon^ :  for  who  can 
doubt  that  it  is  extremely  absurd  to  say,  that  they  have 
not  sinned,  unto  whom  pardon  is  granted.  But  he  allows, 
as  matter  of  pardon,  that  sexual  intercourse,  which  takes 
place  through  incontinence,  not  alone  for  the  begetting  of 
children,  and,  at  times,  not  at  all  for  the  begetting  of  children ; 
and  it  is  not  that  marriage  forces  this  to  take  place,  but  that 
it  procures  pardon  for  it;  provided  however  it  be  not  so  in 
excess  as  to  hinder  what  ought  to  be  set  aside  as  seasons  of 
prayer,  nor  be  changed  into  that  use  which  is  against  nature, 
on  which  the  Apostle  could  not  be  silent,  when  speaking  of 


No  sort  of  excess  really  helonys  to  Marriage.         287 

the  excessive  corruptions  of  unclean  and  impious  men.     For     dr 
necessary  sexual  intercourse  for  begetting  is  free  from  blame,  ^on^u- 
and  itself  is  alone  worthy  of  marriage.     But  that  which  goes  »ali. 
beyond  this  necessity,  no   longer  follows  reason,  but  lust.  |^g°™i^' 
And  yet  it  pertains  to  the  character  of  marriage,  not  to  exact 
this,  but  to  yield  it  to  the  partner,  lest  by  fornication  the 
other  sin  damnably.     But,  if  both  are  set  under  such  lust, 
they  do  what  is  plainly  not  matter  of  marriage.     However, 
if  in  their  intercourse  they  love  what  is  honest  more  than 
what  is  dishonest,  that  is,  what  is  matter  of  marriage  more 
than  what  is  not  matter  of  marriage,  this  is  allowed  to  them 
on  the  authority  of  the  Apostle  as  matter  of  pardon  :   and  for 
this  fault,  they  have  in  their  marriage,  not  what  sets  them  on 
to  commit  it,  but  what  entreats  pardon  for  it,  if  they  turn  not 
away  from  them  the  mercy  of  God,  either  by  not  abstaining 
on  certain  days,  that  they  may  be  free  to  pray,  and  through 
this   abstinence,   as   through    fasting,   may    commend    their 
prayers;  or  by  changing  the  natural  use  into  that  which  is 
against  nature,  which  is  more  damnable  when  it  is  done  in 
the  case  of  husband  or  w'ife. 

12.  For,  whereas  that  natural  use,  when  it  pass  beyond  xi. 
the  compact  of  marriage,  that  is,  beyond  the  necessity  of 
begetting,  is  pardonable  in  the  case  of  a  wife,  damnable  in 
the  case  of  an  harlot ;  that  which  is  against  nature  is  ex- 
ecrable when  done  in  the  case  of  an  harlot,  but  more 
execrable  in  the  case  of  a  wife.  Of  so  great  power  is  the 
ordinance  of  the  Creator,  and  the  order  of  Creation,  that,  in 
matters  allowed  us  to  use,  even  when  the  due  measure  is 
exceeded,  it  is  far  more  tolerable,  than,  in  what  are  not 
allowed,  either  a  single,  or  rare  excess.  And,  therefore,  in 
a  matter  allowed,  want  of  moderation,  in  a  husband  or  wife, 
is  to  be  borne  with,  in  order  that  lust  break  not  forth  into 
a  matter  that  is  not  allowed.  Hence  is  it  also  that  he  sins 
far  less,  who  is  ever  so  unceasing  in  approaches  to  his 
wife,  than  he  who  approaches  ever  so  seldom  to  commit 
fornication.  But,  when  the  man  shall  wish  to  use  the 
member  of  the  wife  not  allowed  for  this  purpose,  the  wife  is 
more  shameful,  if  she  suffer  it  to  take  place  in  her  own  case, 
than  if  in  the  case  of  another  woman.  Therefore  the  orna- 
ment of  marriage  is  chastity  of  begetting,  and  faith  of  yielding 


288  Marriage  holy,  (hough  the  partner  unholy. 

DE      the  flue  of  the  flesh  :  this  is  the  work  of  uiarviage,  this  the 


BONO 


CON 


jjp.  Apostle  defends  from  every  charge,  in  saying,  Both  if  thou 


PALI,  shall   have  taken  a  ivife,  thou  hast  not  sinned:  and  if  a 

lo^or^' virgin  shall  have  been  married,  she  sinncth  not:  and,  Let 
her  do  what  she  will;  she  sinneth  not  if  site  he  married. 
But  an  advance  beyond  moderation  in  demanding  the  due  of 
either  sex,  for  the  reasons  which  I  have  stated  above,  is 
allowed  to  married  persons  as  matter  of  pardon. 

13.  What  therefore  he  says.  She,  that  is  vnmarried, 
ihinheth  of  the  things  of  the  Lord,  that  she  may  be  holy  both 
in  body  and  spirit;  we  are  not  to  take  in  such  sense,  as  to 
think  that  a  chaste  Christian  wife  is  not  holy  in  body.     For- 

1  Cor. 6,  sooth  unto  all  the  faithful  it  was  said,  Know  ye  not  that  your 
bodies  are  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  within  you.  Whom  ye 
have  from  God?  Therefore  the  bodies  also  of  the  married 
are  holy,  so  long  as  they  keep  faith  to  one  another  and  to 
God.  And  that  this  sanctity  of  either  of  them,  even  an 
unbelieving  partner  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of,  but  rather 
that  the  sanctity  of  the  wife  profits  the  unbelieving  husband, 
and  the  sanctity  of  the  husband  profits  the  unbelieving  wife, 

1  Cor.  7,  the    same   Apostle  is  witness,   saying.  For  the  unbelieving 

1 4- 

husband  is  sanctified  in  the  wife,  and  the  unbelieving  ivife 
is  sanctified  in  a  brother.  Wherefore  that  was  said  accord- 
ing to  the  greater  sanctity  of  the  unmarried  than  of  the  married, 
unto  which  there  is  also  due  a  greater  reward,  according  as, 
the  one  being  a  good,  the  other  is  a  greater  good  :  inasmuch  as 
also  she  has  this  thought  only,  how  to  please  the  Lord.  For 
it  is  not  that  a  female  who  believes,  keeping  married  chastity, 
thinks  not  how  to  please  the  Lord ;  but  assuredly  less  so,  in 
that  she  thinks  of  the  things  of  the  world,  how  to  please  her 
husband.  For  this  is  what  he  would  say  of  them,  that  they 
may,  in  a  certain  way,  find  themselves  obliged  by  marriage 
to  think  of  the  things  of  the  world,  how  to  please  their 
husbands, 
xii.  14.  And  not  without  just  cause  a  doubt  is  raised,  whether 
he  said  this  of  all  married  women,  or  of  such  as  so  many  are, 
as  that  nearly  all  may  be  thought  so  to  be.  For  neither  doth 
1  Cor.  7,  that,  which  he  saith  of  unmarried  women,  She,  that  is  un- 

34  . 

married,  thinketh  of  the  things  of  the  Lord,  to  he  holy  both 
in   body  and  spirit:  pertain    unto    all    unmarried   women: 


Marr'uKje  thol  looks  only  to pleasiruj  God,  rare.        289 

whereas  there  are  certain  widows  who  arc  dead,  who  Uve  in     de 
delights.     However,  so  far  as  regards  a  certain  distinction  conju- 
aud,  as  it  were,  .character  of  their  own,  of  the  unmarried  and   ftAi^i. 
married;  as  she  deserves  the  excess  of  hatred,  who  contain- g' 
ing  from  marriage,  that  is,  from  a  thing  allowed,  does  not 
contain  from  offences,  either  of  luxury,  or  pride,  or  curiosity 
and  prating  ;  so  the  married  woman  is  seldom  met  with,  who, 
in  the  very  obedience  of  married  life,  hath  no   thought  save 
how  to  please   God,  by  adorning  herself,  not  with  plaited  i Tim.?, 
hair,  or  gold  and  pearls  and  costly  attire,  but  as  becometh" 
women  making  profession    of  piety,  through    a  good   con- 
versation.     Such    marriages,    forsooth,   the    Apostle    Peter 

also   describes  by   sfivinp:  commandment.   In   like   manner,  i  Peter 

3    1-7 
saith  he,  ivives  obeying  their  own  husbands ;  in  order  that,  ' 

even  if  any  obey  not  the  word,  they  may  be  gained  without 
discourse  through  the  conversation  of  the  ivives,  seeing  your 
fear  and  chaste  conversation:  that  they  be  not  they  that 
are  adorned  without  with  crispings  of  hair,  or  clothed  with 
gold  or  with  fair  raiment;  but  that  hidden  man  of  your 
heart,  in  that  unbroken  continuance  of  a  quiet  and  modest 
spirit,  which  before  the  Lord  also  is  rich.  For  thus  certain 
holy  women,  who  hoped  in  the  Lord,  used  to  adorn  them- 
selves, obeying  their  own  husbands :  as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham, 
calling  him  Lord:  whose  daughters  ye  are  become,  when  ye 
do  well,  and  fear  not  with  any  vain  fear.  Husbands  in 
like  manner  living  at  peace  and  in  chastity  with  your  wives, 
both  give  ye  honour  as  to  the  weaker  and  subject  vessel,  as 
with  co-heirs  of  grace,  and  see  that  your  prayers  be  not 
hindered.  Is  it  indeed  that  such  marriages  have  no  thought 
of  the  things  of  the  Lord,  how  to  please  the  Lord?  But  they 
are  very  rare:  who  denies  this?  And,  being,  as  they  are,  rare, 
nearly  all  the  persons  who  are  such,  were  not  joined 
together  in  order  to  be  such,  but  being  already  joined  together 
became  such. 

15.  For  what  Christian  men  of  our  time  being  free  from    xiii. 
the  marriage  bond,  having  power  to  contain  from  all  sexual 
intercourse,  seeing  it  to  be  now  a  time,  as  it  is  written,  not  Eccles. 
of  embracing,  hut  of  abstaining  from  embrace,  would  not  '    ' 
choose  rather  to  keep  virginal  or  widowed  continence,  than 

u 


290     Entire  abstinence  easier  tlian  perfect  moderation. 

DE     (now  that  there  is  no  obligation  from  duty  to  human  society) 
coNju-*^  endure  tribulation  of  the  flesh,  without  which  marriages 
PALI,   cannot  be,  (to  pass  over  in   silence  other  things  from  which 
the  Apostle  spares.)     But  when  through  desire  reigning  they 
shall  have  been  joined  together,  if  they  shall  after  overcome 
it,  because  it  is  not  lawful  to  loose,  in  such  wise  as  it  was 
lawful  not  to  tie,  the  marriage  bond,  they  become  such  as 
the  form  of  marriage  makes  profession  of,  so  as  that  either  by 
mutual  consent  they  ascend  unto  a  higher  degree  of  holiness, 
or,  if  both  are  not  such,  the  one  who  is  such  will  not  be  one 
to  exact  but  to  yield  the  due,  observing  in  all  things  a  chaste 
and  religious  concord.     But  in  those  times,  wherein  as  yet 
the  mystery  of  our  salvation  was  veiled  in  prophetic  sacra- 
ments, even  they  who  were  such  before  marriage,  yet  con- 
tracted   marriage    through  the   duty  of  begetting  children, 
not  overcome  by  lust,  but  led  by  piety,  unto  whom  if  there 
were  given   such  choice,  as  in  the  revelation   of  the  New 
Mat.i9,  Testament  there  hath  been  given,  the  Lord  saying.  Whoso 
can  receive,  let  him  receive  ;  no  one  doubts  that  they  would 
have  been  ready  to  receive  it  even  with  joy,  who  reads  with 
careful  attention  what  use  they  made  of  their  wives,  at  a  time 
when  also  it  was  allowed  one  man  to  have  several,  whom  he 
had  with  more  chastity,  than  any  now  has  his  one  wife,  of 
these,  unto  whom  we  see  what  the  Apostle  allows  by  way  of 
i  Cor. 7, leave.     For  they  had  them  in  the  work  of  begetting  children, 
1  Thess  ^^^  *'*  '^*^  disease  of  desire,  as  the  nations  which  know  not 
4,  5.       God.     And  this  is  so  great  a  thing,  that  many  at  this  day 
more  easily  abstain  from  all  sexual  intercourse  their  whole 
life  through,  than,  if  they  are  joined  in  marriage,  observe  the 
measure   of  not  coming  together  except    for    the   sake    of 
children.     Forsooth  we  have  many  brethren  and  partners  in 
the  heavenly  inheritance  of  both  sexes  that  are  continent, 
whether  they  be  such  as  have  made  trial  of  marriage,  or  such 
as  are  entirely  free  from  all  such  intercourse :  forsooth  they 
are  without  number :  yet,  in  our  familiar  discourses  with  them, 
whom  have  we  heard,  whether  of  those  who  are,  or  of  those 
who  have  been,  married,  declaring  to  us  that  he  has  never 
had  sexual  intercourse  with  his  wife,  save  with  the  hope  of 
conception  ?     What,  therefore,  the  Apostles  command  the 


Concubinage  even  for  oJfspritKjs  sake,  unlawful.       291 

married,  this  is  proper  to  marriage,  but  what  tliey  allow  by     de 
way  of  pardon,  or  what  liinders  prayers,  this  marriage  comjjels  conju- 
not,  but  bears  with.  »ali. 

16.  Therefore  if  haply,  (which  whether  it  can  take  place,    xiv. 
I  know  not;  and  rather  think  it  cannot  take  place  ;  but  yet,  if 
haply,)  having  taking  unto  himself  a  concubine  for  a  time,  a 
man  shall  have  sought  sons  only  from  this  same  intercourse  ; 
neither  thus  is  that  union  to  be  preferred  to  the  marriage 
even  of  those  women,  who  do  this,  that  is  matter  of  pardon '.'veniale. 
For  we  must  consider  what  belongs  to  marriage,  not  what 
belongs  to  such  women  as  marry  and  use  marriage  with  less 
moderation  than  they  ought.     For  neither  if  each  one  so  use 
lands  entered  upon   unjustly  and  wrongly,  as  out   of  their 
fruits  to  give  large  alms,  doth   he  therefore  justify  rapine : 
nor  if  another  brood  over,  through  avarice,  an  estate  to  which 
he  has  succeeded,  or  which  he  hath  justly  gained,  are  we  on 
this  account  to  blame  the  rule  of  civil  law,  whereby  he  is 
made  a  lawful  owner.     Nor  will  the  wrongfulness  of  a  tyran- 
nical rebellion  deserve  praise,  if  the  tyrant  treat  his  subjects 
with  royal  clemency :  nor  will  the  order  of  royal  power  deserve 
blame,  if  a  king  rage  with  tyrannical  cruelty.     For  it  is  one 
thing  to  wish  to   use  well  unjust  power,  and   it  is  another 
thing  to  use  unjustly  just  power.    Thus  neither  do  concubines 
taken  for  a  time,  if  they  be  such  in  order  to  sons,  make  their 
concubinage  lawful;    nor  do    married   women,  if  they  live 
wantonly  with  their  husbands,  attach  any  charge  to  the  order 
of  marriage. 

17.  That  marriage  can  take  place  of  persons  first  ill  joined,  xv. 
an  honest  decree  following  after,  is  manifest.  But  a  marriage 
once  for  all  entered  upon  in  the  City  of  our  God,  where, 
even  from  the  first  union  of  the  two,  the  man  and  the  woman, 
marriage  bears  a  certain  sacramental  character,  can  no  way 
be  dissolved  but  by  the  death  of  one  of  them.  For  the  bond 
of  marriage  remains,  although  a  family,  for  the  sake  of  which 
it  was  entered  upon,  do  not  follow  through  manifest  barren- 
ness ;  so  that,  when  now  married  persons  know  that  they 
shall  not  have  children,  yet  it  is  not  lawful  for  them  to 
separate  even  for  the  very  sake  of  children,  and  to  join  them- 
selves unto  others.  And  if  they  shall  so  do,  they  commit 
adultery  with  those  unto  whom  they  join  themselves,  but  them- 

u  2 


592       Generation  preserves  mankind  as  food  each  man. 

DE  selves  remain  husbands  and  wives.  Clearly  with  the  good 
coNju-  ^^^^  °^  ^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^"^  ioke  another  woman,  that  from  her  may 
"ALL  ije  born  sons  common  to  both,  by  the  sexual  intercourse  and 
seed  of  the  one,  but  by  the  right  and  power  of  the  other,  was 
lawful  among  the  ancient  fathers  :  whether  it  be  lawful  now 
also,  I  would  not  hastily  pronounce.  For  there  is  not  now 
necessity  of  begetting  children,  as  there  then  was,  when,  even 
when  wives  bare  children,  it  was  allowed,  in  order  to  a  more 
numerous  posterity,  to  marry  other  wives  in  addition,  which 
now  is  certainly  not  lawful.  For  the  difference  that  separates 
times  causes  the  due  season  to  have  so  great  force  unto  the  justice 
and  doing  or  not  doing  any  thing,  that  now  a  man  does  better, 
if  he  marry  not  even  one  wife,  unless  he  be  unable  to  contain. 
But  then  they  mai*ried  even  several  without  any  blame,  even 
those  who  could  much  more  easily  contain,  were  it  not  that 
piety  at  that  time  had  another  demand  upon  them.  For,  as 
Phil.  1,  the  wise  and  just  man,  who  now  desires  to  be  dissolved  and 
to  be  with  Christ,  and  takes  more  pleasure  in  this,  the  best, 
now  not  from  desire  of  living  here,  but  from  duty  of  being 
consu- useful ',  takes  food  that  he  may  remain  in  the  flesh,  which 
is  necessary  for  the  sake  of  others;  so  to  have  intercourse 
with  females  in  right  of  marriage,  was  to  holy  men  at  that 
time  a  matter  of  duty  not  of  lust. 
xvi.  18.  For  what  food  is  unto  the  conservation  of  the  man, 
this  sexual  intercourse  is  unto  the  conservation  of  the  race : 
and  both  are  not  without  carnal  delight:  which  yet  being 
modified,  and  by  restraint  of  temperance  reduced  unto  the 
use  after  nature,  cannot  be  lusf.  But  what  unlawful  food  is 
in  the  supporting  of  life,  this  sexual  intercourse  of  forni- 
cation or  adultery  is  in  the  seeking  of  a  family.  And  what 
unlawful  food  is  in  luxury  of  belly  and  throat,  this  unlawful 
intercourse  is  in  lust  that  seeks  not  a  family.  And  what 
^  the  excessive  appetite  of  some  is  in  lawful  food,  this  that 
intercourse  that  is  matter  of  pardon  is  in  husband  and  wife. 
As  therefore  it  is  better  to  die  of  hunger  than  to  eat  things 
offered  unto  idols :  so  it  is  better  to  die  without  children, 
than  to  seek  a  family  from  unlawful  intercourse.     But  from 

a  Retract,  b.  ii.  c.  22.  2.    '  it  was     use  good  things,  so  is  it  good  will  to 
meant  that  the  good  and  right  ui^e  of    use  evil  things.' 
lust  is  not  Irist,  for  as  it  is  evil  will  to 


23, 


lendi 


Prophets  married  of  charity,  as  Apostles  took  food.     293 


whatever  source  men  be  born,  if  they  follow  not  the  vices  of  de 
their  parents,  and  worship  God  aright,  they  shall  be  honest  ^^^'^ 
and  safe.  For  the  seed  of  man,  from  out  what  kind  of  man  gali. 
soever,  is  the  creation  of  God,  and  it  shall  fare  ill  with  those 
who  use  it  ill,  yet  shall  not  itself  at  any  time  be  evil.  But 
as  the  good  sons  of  adulterers  are  no  defence  of  adulteries, 
so  the  evil  sons  of  married  persons  are  no  charge  against 
marriage.  Wherefore  as  the  Fathers  of  the  time  of  the  New 
Testament  taking  food  from  the  duty  of  conservation,  although 
they  took  it  with  natui-al  delight  of  the  flesh,  were  yet  in  no 
way  compared  with  the  delight  of  those  who  fed  on  what 
had  been  offered  in  sacrifice,  or  of  those  who,  although  the 
food  was  lawful,  yet  took  it  to  excess :  so  the  Fathers  of  the 
time  of  the  Old  Testament  from  the  duty  of  conservation  used 
sexual  intercourse;  and  yet  that  their  natural  delight,  by  no 
means  relaxed  unto  unreasonable  and  unlawful  lust,  is  not 
to  be  compared  either  with  the  vileness  of  fornications,  or 
with  the  intemperance  of  married  persons.  Forsooth 
through  the  same  vein'  of  charity,  now  afier  the  spirit,  them' vena.' 
after  the  flesh,  it  was  a  duty  to  beget  sons  for  the  sake  of 
that  mother  Jerusalem:  but  it  was  nought  save  the  difference 
of  times  which  made  the  works  of  the  fathers  different.  But 
thus  it  was  necessary  that  even  Prophets,  not  living  after  the 
flesh,  should  come  together  after  the  flesh;  even  as  it  was 
necessary  that  Apostles  also,  not  living  after  the  flesh,  should 
eat  food  after  the  flesh. 

19.  Therefore   as  many  women   as  there   are  now,   unto  jj.^.jj 
whom  it  is  said,  If  they  contain  not,  let  them  he  married,\  Cor. 
are  not  to  be  compared  to  the  holy  women  then,  even  when'''^- 
theymarried.  Marriage  itselfindeed  in  all  nations  is  for  the  same 
cause  of  begetting  of  sons,  and  of  what  character  soever  these 
may  be  afterward,  yet  was  marriage  for  this  purpose  insti- 
tuted, that  they  may  be  bom  in  due  and  honest  order.     But 
men,  who  contain  not,  as  it  were  ascend  unto  marriage  by  a 
step  of  honesty  :  but  they,  who  without  doubt  would  contain, 
if  the  purpose  of  that  time  had  allowed  this,  in  a  certain 
measure  descended  unto  marriage  by  a  step  of  piety.     And,  on 
this  account,  although  the  marriages  of  both,  so  far  as  they 
are  marriages,  in  that  they  are  for  the  sake  of  begetting,  are 
equally  good,  yet  these  men  when  married  are  not   to  be 


294  Why  one  man  could  once  have  several  wives. 

DE  compared  with  those  men  as  mamed.  For  these  have,  what 
coNju-^^  allowed  them  by  way  of  leave,  on  account  of  the  honesty 
GAi.i.  of  marriage,  although  it  pertain  not  to  marriage;  that  is,  the 
advance  M'hich  goes  beyond  the  necessity  of  begetting,  which 
they  had  not.  But  neither  can  these,  if  haply  there  be  now 
any  found,  who  neither  seek,  nor  desire,  in  marriage  any 
thing,  save  that  wherefore  marriage  was  instituted,  be  made 
equal  to  those  men.  For  in  these  the  very  desire  of  sons  is 
carnal,  but  in  those  it  was  spiritual,  in  that  it  was  suited  to 
the  sacrament  of  that  time.  Forsooth  now  no  one  who  is 
made  perfect  in  piety  seeks  to  have  sons,  save  after  a  spiritual 
sense ;  but  then  it  w^as  the  work  of  piety  itself  to  beget  sons 
even  after  a  carnal  sense:  in  that  the  begetting  of  that 
people  was  fraught  with  tidings  of  things  to  come,  and  per- 
tained unto  the  prophetic  dispensation. 

20.  And  on  this  account,  not,  so  as  it  was  allowed  one 
man  to  have  even  several  wives,  was  it  allowed  one  female 
to  have  several  husbands,  not  even  for  the  sake  of  a  family, 
in  case  it  should  happen  that  the  woman  could  bear,  the 
man  could  not  beget.  For  by  a  secret  law  of  nature  things 
that  stand  chief  love  to  be  singular;  but  what  are  subject 
are  set  under,  not  only  one  imder  one,  but,  if  the  system  of 
nature  or  society  allow,  even  several  under  one,  not  without 
becoming  beauty.  For  neither  hath  one  slave  so  several 
masters,  in  the  way  that  several  slaves  have  one  master. 
Thus  we  read  not  that  any  of  the  holy  women  served  two  or 
more  living  husbands:  but  we  read  that  many  females 
'societas served  one  husband,  when  the  social  state'  of  that  nation 
allowed  it,  and  the  purpose  of  the  time  persuaded  to  it :  for 
neither  is  it  contrary  to  the  nature  of  marriage.  For  several 
females  can  conceive  fi'om  one  man:  but  one  female  cannot 
from  several,  (such  is  the  power  of  things  principal :)  as 
many  souls  are  rightly  made  subject  unto  one  God.  And  on 
this  account  there  is  no  True  God  of  souls,  save  One:  but 
one  soul  by  means  of  many  false  gods  may  commit  forni- 
cation, but  not  be  made  fruitful, 
xviii.  21.  But  since  out  of  many  souls  there  shall  be  hereafter 
32"'^^'  one  City  of  such  as  have  one  soul  and  one  heart  towards 
God;  which  perfection  of  our  unity  shall  be  hereafter,  after 
this  sojourn  in  a  strange  land,  wherein  the  thoughts  of  all 


Typical  meaninij  of  this,  and  of  Bishops  hut  once  married.  295 

shall  neither  be  hidden  one  from  another,  nor  shall  be  in     de 
any  matter  opposed   one  to  another;  on  this   account  thepQj^,j^. 
Sacrament  of  marriage  of  our  time  hath  been  so  reduced  to  j«^^_ 
one  man  and  one  wife,  as  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  ordain  any 
as  a  steward  of  the  Church,  save  the  husband  of  one  wife,  i  Tim. 
And  this  they  have  understood  more  acutely  who  have  been  j'j^  j  g^ 
of  opinion,  that  neither  is  he  to  be  ordained,  who  as  a  cate- 
chumen  or  as  a  heathen''  had  a  second  wife.     For  it  is  a 
matter  of  sacrament,  not  of  sin.     For  in  baptism  all  sins  are 
put  away.     But  he  who  said,   If  thou  shalt  have  taken  «iCor.7, 
wife,  thou  hast  not  sinned;  and  if  a  virgin  shall  have  been 
married,  she  sinneth  not:   and,  "  het  her  do  what  sAe  will, 
she  sinneth  not,  if  she  be  married,"  hath  made  it  plain  enough 
that  marriage  is  no  sin.     But  on  account  of  the  sanctity  of 
the  Sacrament,  as  a  female,  although  it  be  as  a  catechumen 
that  she  hath  suffered  violence,  cannot  after  Baptism  be  con- 
secrated among  the  virgins  of  God :  so  there  was  no  absurdity 
in    supposing   of  him   who   had   exceeded    the    number   of 
one  wife,  not  that  he  had  committed  any  sin,  but  that  he  had 
lost  a  certain  prescript  rule^  of  a  sacrament,  necessary  not'nor- 
unto  desert  of  good  life,  but  unto  the  seal  of  ecclesiastic 
ordination;  and  thus,  as  the  many  wives  of  the  old  Fathers 
signified  our  future  Churches  out  of  all  nations  made  subject 
unto  one  husband,  Christ:  so  our  chief-priest^  the  husband 2  antis- 
of  one  wife,  signifies  unity  out  of  all  nations,  made  subject  '^^ 
unto  one  husband,   Christ:  which   shall   then   be   perfected, 
when  He  shall  have  unveiled  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  1  cor. 
and  shall  have  made  manifest  the  thoughts  of  the  heart,  that*'  ^• 
then  each  may  have  praise  from  God.     But  now  there  are 
manifest,  there  are  hidden,  dissensions,  even  where  charit}^  is 
safe  between  those,  who  shall  be  hereafter  one,  and  in  one ; 
which  shall  then  certainly  have  no  existence.     As  therefore 
the  Sacrament  of  marriage  with  several  of  that  time  signified 
the  multitude  that  should  be  hereafter  made  subject  unto 
God  in  all  nations  of  the  earth,  so  the  Sacrament  of  marriage 
with  one  of  our  time  signifies  the  unity  of  us  all  made  subject 
to    God,    which  shall  be    hereafter  in  one  Heavenly  City. 

b  Thus    Ambrose.     Ep.    to    Ch.    of  tion,  and  says,  b.  i.  near  the  end,  that 

Verellffi,  and  ancient  general  custom.  Ruffinus  had  found  fault  with  him  for 

Jerome,  Ep.  ad  Ocean,  speaks  strongly  this.    Ben. 
and   harshly   against   this   interpreta- 


296    The  desire  of  children,  in  the  holy  Fathers,  spiritual. 

DE     Therefore  as  to  serve  two  or  more,  so  to  pass  over  from  a 
^Jt!^,Z  liviuo'    husband    into    marriage    with     another,    was    neither 
PALI,  lawful  then,  nor  is  it  lawful  now,  nor  will  it  ever  be  lawful- 
Forsooth  to  apostatise  from  the  One  God,  and  to  go  into 
adulterous  superstition  of  another,  is  ever  an  evil.     Therefore 
not  even  for  the  sake  of  a  more  numerous  family  did  our 
•  Cato    Saints  do,  what  the  Roman  Cato  is  said  to  have  done ',  to 
"f°pV    S^^'^  "P  ^^^^  vvifc,  during  his  own  life,  to  fill  even  another's 
tareh.p.  house  with  SOUS.     Forsooth  in  the  marriage  of  one  woman 
'  the  sanctity  of  the  Sacrament  is  of  more  avail  than  the  fruit- 

fulness  of  the  womb. 

22.  If,  therefore,  even  they  who  are  united  in  marriage  only 
for  the  purpose  of  begetting,  for  which  purpose  marriage 
was  instituted,  are  not  compared  with  the  Fathers,  seeking 
their  very  sons  in  a  way  far  other  than  do  these;  forasmuch 
as  Abraham,  being  bidden  to  slay  his  son,  fearless  and 
devoted,  spared  not  his  only  son,  whom  from  out  of  great 
Gen.22,  despair  he  had  received,  save  that  he  laid  down  his  hand, 
^^*  when  He  forbade  him,  at  Whose  command  he  had  lifted  it 
up  ;  it  remains  that  we  consider,  whether  at  least  continent 
persons  among  us  are  to  be  compared  to  those  Fathers  who 
vvei'e  married ;  unless  haply  now  these  are  to  be  preferred  to 
them,  to  whom  we  have  not  yet  found  persons  to  compare. 
For  there  was  a  greater  good  in  their  marriage,  than  is  the 
proper  good  of  marriage  :  to  which  without  doubt  the  good 
of  Continence  is  to  be  preferred :  because  they  sought  not 
sons  from  marriage  by  such  duty  as  these  are  led  by,  from  a 
certain  sense  of  mortal  nature  requiring  succession  against 
decease.  And,  whoso  denies  this  to  be  good,  he  knows  not 
God,  the  Creator  of  all  things  good,  from  things  heavenly 
even  unto  things  earthly,  from  things  immortal  even  unto 
things  mortal.  But  neither  are  beasts  altogether  without 
this  sense  of  begetting,  and  chiefly  birds,  whose  care  of 
building  nests  meets  us  at  once,  and  a  certain  likeness  to 
marriages,  in  order  to  beget  and  nurture  together.  But 
those  men,  with  mind  far  holier,  surpassed  this  affection  of 
mortal  nature,  the  chastity  whereof  in  its  own  kind,  there 
being  added  thereto  the  worship  of  God,  as  some  have 
luiderstood,  is  set  forth  as  bearing  first  thirty -fold ;  who 
sought   sons   of  their  marriage   for  the  sake    of  Christj    in 


XIX. 


Legal  purification  is  not  for  sin  hut  for  its  type.       297 

order  to  distinguish  His  race  after  the  flesh  from  all  nations:     de 
even  as  God  was  pleased  to  order,  that  this  above  the  rest^^^j^. 
should  avail  to  prophesy  of  Him,  in  that  it  was  foretold  of  gali. 
what  race  also,  and  of  what  nation,  He  should  hereafter  come 
in  the  flesh.     Therefore  it  was  a  far  greater  good  than  the 
chaste  marriages  of  believers  among  us,  which  father  Abra- 
ham   knew   in    his    own    thigh,    under   which    he    bade  his 
servant  to  put  his  hand,  that  h'e  might  take  an  oath  concern- 
ing the  wife,  whom  his  son  was  to  marry.     For  putting  his 
hand  under  the  thigh  of  a  man,  and  swearing  by  the  God  ofGen.24, 
Heaven,  what  else  did  he  signify,  than  that  in  that  Flesh,  ~ 
which  derived  its  origin  from  that  thigh,  the  God  of  Heaven 
would    come?     Therefore    marriage    is    a    good,    wherein 
married  persons  are  so  much  the  better,  in  proportion   as 
they  fear  God  with  greater  chastity  and  faithfulness,  specially 
if  the  sons,  whom  they  desire  after  the  flesh,  they  also  bring 
up  after  the  spirit. 

23.  Nor,  in  that  the  Law  orders  a  man  to  be  purified  even  xx. 
after  intercourse  with  a  wife,  doth  it  shew  it  to  be  sin  :  unless 
it  be  that  which  is  allowed  by  way  of  pardon,  which  also, 
being  in  excess,  hinders  prayers.  But,  as  the  Law  setsMnfir- 
many  things  in  sacraments  and  shadows  of  things  to  come ;  ™''^^'^ 
a  certain  as  it  were  material  formless  state  of  the  seed,  which 
having  received  form  will  hereafter  produce  the  body  of  man, 
is  set  to  signify  a  life  formless  and  untaught:  from  which 
formless  state,  forasmuch  as  it  behoves  that  man  be  cleansed 
by  form  and  teaching  of  learning ;  as  a  sign  of  this,  that 
purification  was  ordered  after  the  emission  of  seed.  For 
neither  in  sleep  also  doth  it  take  place  through  sin.  And 
yet  there  also  a  purification  was  commanded.  Or,  if  any 
think  this  also  to  be  sin,  thinking  that  it  comes  not  to  pass 
save  from  some  lust  of  this  kind,  which  without  doubt  is 
false;  what?  are  the  ordinary  menses  also  of  women  sins? 
and  yet  from  these  the  same  old  Law  commanded  that 
they  should  be  cleansed  by  expiation;  for  no  other  cause, 
save  the  material  formless  state  itself,  in  that  which,  when 
conception  hath  taken  place,  is  added  as  it  were  to  build  up 
the  body;  and  for  this  reason,  when  it  flows  without  form, 
the  Law  would  have  signified  by  it  a  soul  without  form  of 
discipline,  flowing  and  loose  in  an  unseemly  manner.     And 


298  Virtues  of  the  soul  map  exist  miseen  in  liahit. 

DE     that  this  ought  to  receive  form,  it  signifies,  when  it  commands 

jjQjjju.such  flow  of  the  body  to  be  purified.     Lastly,  what?  to  die, 

QAI.I.  is  that  also  a  sin  ?  or,  to  bury  a  dead  person,  is  it  not  also  a 

good  work  of  humanity  ?  and  yet  a  purification  was  com- 

nianded  even  on  occasion  of  this  also ;  because  also  a  dead 

body,  life  abandoning  it,  is  not  sin,  but  signifies  the  sin  of  a 

Numb,  soul  abandoned  by  righteousness. 

19, 11.  24.  Marriage,  I  say,  is  a  good,  and  may  be,  by  sound 
reason,  defended  against  all  calumnies.  But  with  the  mar- 
riage of  the  holy  fathers,  I  enquire  not  what  marriage,  but 
what  continence,  is  on  a  level :  or  rather  not  marriage  with 
marriage;  for  it  is  an  equal  gift  in  all  cases  given  to 
the  mortal  nature  of  men ;  but  men  who  use  marriage, 
forasmuch  as  1  find  not,  to  compare  with  other  men  wlio 
used  marriage  in  a  far  other  spirit,  we  must  enquire 
what  continent  persons  admit  of  being  compared  with 
those  married  persons.  Unless,  haply,  Abraham  could 
not  contain  from  marriage,  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  he  who,  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  could 
fearless  sacrifice  his  only  pledge  of  offspring,  for  whose  sake 
marriage  was  dear ! 
xxi.  25,  Forsooth  continence  is  a  virtue,  not  of  the  body,  but 
of  the  soul.  But  the  virtues  of  the  soul  are  sometimes  shewn 
in  work,  sometimes  lie  hid  in  habit,  as  the  virtue  of  martyr- 
dom shone  forth  and  appeared  by  enduring  sufferings ;  but 
how  many  are  there  of  the  same  virtue  of  mind,  unto  whom 
trial  is  wanting,  whereby  what  is  within,  in  the  sight  of  God, 
may  go  forth  also  into  the  sight  of  men,  and  not  to  men  begin 
to  exist,  but  only  become  known  ?  For  there  was  already 
Job  1,8.  in  Job  patience,  which  God  knew,  and  to  which  He  bore 
witness :  but  it  became  known  unto  men  by  test  of  trial : 
and  what  lay  hid  within  was  not  produced,  but  shewn,  by 
the  things  that  were  brought  on  him  froin  without.  Timothy 
1  Tim.    also  certainly  had  the  virtue  of  abstaining  from  wine,  whicli 

5   23  {•  • 

'  *  Paul  took  not  from  him,  by  advising  him  to  use  a  moderate 
portion  of  wine,  "  for  the  sake  of  his  stomach  and  his  often 
infirmities,"  otherwise  he  taught  him  a  deadly  lesson,  that 
for  the  sake  of  the  health  of  the  body  there  should  be  a  loss 
of  virtue  in  the  soul :  but  because  what  he  advised  could 
take  place  with  safety  to  that  virtue,  the  profit  of  drinking 


Our  Lord  had  all  virlue,  yel  not  all  abstinence.         299 

was  so  left  free  to  the  body,  as  that  the  habit  of  continence     ^^ 
continued  in  the  soul.     For  it  is  the  habit  itself,  whereby  any  conju- 
thing  is  done,  when  there  is  need ' ;  but  when  it  is  not  done,  _<*^^^- 


or 


it  can  be  done,  only  there  is  no  need.   This  habit,  in  the  mat- '  work.' 
ter  of  that  continence  which  is  from  sexual  intercourse,  they 
have  not,  unto  whom  it  is  said,  If  they  contain  not,  let  them  iCor.  7, 
he  married.     But  this   they   have,   unto  whom    it   is    said. 
Whoso  can   receive,  let    him    receive.     Thus   have   perfect  Mat.  19, 
souls  used  earthly  goods,  that  are  necessary  for  something 
else,  through  this  habit  of  continence,  so  as,  by  it,  not  to  be 
bound  by  them,  and  so  as  by  it,  to  have  power  also  not  to 
u?e  them,  in  case  there  were  no  need.     Nor  doth  any  use 
them   well,  save   who   hath    power   also   not  to  use   them. 
Many  indeed  with  more  ease  practise  abstinence,  so  as  not 
to  use,  than  practise  temperance,  so  as  to  use  well.     But  no 
one  can  wisely  use  them,  save  who  can  also  continently  not 
use  them.     From  this  habit  Paul  also  said,  I  knoia  both  /ophii.4, 
abound,  and  to  suffer  want.     Forsooth  to  suffer  want  is  the^^- 
part  of  any  men  soever ;  but  to  know  to  suffer  want  is  the 
part  of  great  men.     So,  also,  to  abound,  who  cannot .''  but  to 
know  also  to  abound,  is  not,  save  of  those,  whom  abundance 
cornipts  not. 

26.  But,  in  order  that  it  may  be  more  clearly  understood, 
how  there  may  be  virtue  in  habit,  although  it  be  not  in  work, 
I  speak  of  an  example,  about  which  no  Catholic  Christian 
can  doubt.  For  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  truth  of  flesh 
hungered  and  thirsted,  ate  and  drank,  no  one  doubts  of  such 
as  out  of  the  Gospel  are  believers.  What,  then,  was  there 
not  in  Him  the  virtue  of  continence  from  meat  and  drink,  as 
great  as  in  John  Baptist?  For  John  came  neither  eatinyii^tAi, 
nor  drinking ;  and  they  said,  He  hath  a  devil;  the  Son  of^^-  ^^• 
Man  came  both  eating  and  drinking;  and  they  said,  Lo, 
a  glutton  and  tvine-bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  cmd  sin- 
ners. What,  are  not  such  things  said  also  against  them  of  His 
household,  our  fathers,  from  another  kind  of  using  of  things 
earthy,  so  far  as  pertains  to  sexual  intercourse ;  '  Lo,  men 
lustful  and  unclean,  lovers  of  women  and  lewdness .'"  And 
yet  as  in  Him  that  was  not  true,  although  it  were  true  that 
He  abstained  not,  even  as  John,  from  eating  and  drinking, 
for  Himself  saith   most  plainly  and  truly,  John  came,  not 


300        Tiie  truly  continent  now  abstain  from  Marriage. 

DE     eating,  nor  drinking;  the  Son  of  Man   came  eating  and 

^Q^-j^, drinking:   so  neither  is  this  true  in  these  Fathers;  although 

cAi.i.  there  hath  come  now  the  Apostle  of  Christ,  not  wedded,  nor 

begetting,  so  that  the  heathen  say  of  him,  He  was  a  magician; 

but  there  came  then   the  Prophet  of  Christ,  marrying  and 

begetting  sons,  so  that  the  Manichees  say  of  him,  He  was 

Mat.  11,  a  man  fond  of  women :  And  tiisdom,  saith  He,  /lath  been 

justified  of  her  children.     What  the  Lord  there  added,  after 

He  had  thus  spoken  of  John  and  of  Himself;  But  wisdom, 

saith  He,  hath  been  justified  of  her  children.     Who  see  that 

the  virtue  of  continence  ought  to  exist  even  in  the  habit  of 

the   soul,   but   to   be    shewn    forth   in    deed,   according   to 

opportunity   of  things    and    times ;    even    as    the   virtue    of 

patience  of  holy  martyrs  appeared  in  deed ;  but  of  the  rest 

equally  holy  was  in  habit.     Wherefore,  even  as  there  is  not 

unequal  desert  of  patience  in  Peter,  who  suffered,  and   in 

John,  who  suffered  not ;  so  there  is  not  unequal  desert  of 

»  S ,  Je-  continence  in  John  who  made  no  trial  of  marriage  ^  and  in 

*'°™^T     Abraham,  who  begat  sons.     For  both  the  celibate  of  the  one, 
agt.  Jo-  70 

vinia-     and  the  marriage  estate  of  the  other,  did  service  as  soldiers  to 
°"^*       Christ,  as  times  were  allotted ;  but  John  had  continence  in 

work  also,  but  Abraham  in  habit  alone. 

xxii.       27.  Therefore  at  that  time,  when  the  Law  also,  following 

Deut.25  upon  the  days  of  the  Patriarchs,  pronounced  accursed,  whoso 

5_io.    vaised  not  up  seed  in  Israel,  even  he,  who   could,  put  it 

not  forth,  but  yet  possessed  it.     But  from  the  period  that 

Gal.  4,  the  fulness  of  time  hath  come,  that  it  should  be  said,  JVhoso 

\jr     ,g  can  receive,  let  him  receive,  from  that  period  even  unto  this 

12.       'present,  and  from  henceforth  even  unto  the  end,  whoso  hath, 

worketh :  whoso  shall  be  unwilling  to  work,  let  him  not  falsely 

say,  that  he  hath.    And  through  this  means,  they,  who  corrupt 

1  Cor.    good  manners  by  evil  communications,  with  empty  and  vain 

'        craft,   say   to    a  Christian   man   exercising   continence,  and 

refusing  marriage.  What  then,  are  you  better  than  Abraham  ? 

But  let  him  not,  upon  hearing  this,  be  troubled ;  neither  let 

him  dare  to  say,  '  Better,'  nor  let  him  fall  away  from  his 

purpose :  for  the  one  he  saith  not  truly,  the  other  he  doth 

not  rightly.     But  let  him  say,  I  indeed  am  not  better  than 

Abraham,  but  the  chastity  of  the  unmarried  is  better  than 

the  chastity  of  marriage;  whereof  Abraham  had  one  in  use. 


What  virtue  now  is  comparable  to  the  Patriarchs'.     301 

both  in  habit.     For  he  lived  chastely  in  the  marriage  state :     de 
but  it  was  in  his  power  to  be  chaste  without  marriage,  but  con  ju- 
at  that  time  it  behoved  not.     But  I  with  more  ease  use  not  Q^^^- 
marriage,  which   Abraham  used,  than   so  use   marriage  as 
Abraham  used  it :  and  therefore  I  am  better  than  those,  who 
through  incontinence  of  mind  cannot  do  what  I  do ;  not  than 
those,  who,  on  account  of  difference  of  time,  did  not  do  what 
I  do.     For  what  I  now  do,  they  would  have  done  better,  if 
it  had  been  to  be  done  at  that  time ;    but  what  they  did, 
I  should  not  so  do,  although  it  were  now  to  be  done.     Or,  if 
he  feels  and  knows  himself  to  be  such,  as  that,  (the  virtue  of 
continence  being  preserved  and  continued  in  the  habit  of 
his  mind,  in  case  he  had  descended  unto  the  use  of  marriage 
from  some  duty  of  religion,)  he  should  be  such  an  husband, 
and  such  a  father,  as  Abraham  was ;  let  him  dare  to  make 
plain  answer  to  that  captious  questioner,  and  to  say,  I  am 
not  indeed  better  than  Abraham,  only  in  this  kind  of  con- 
tinence, of  which  he  w'as  not  void,  although  it  appeared  not: 
but  I  am  such,  not  having  other  than  he,  but  doing  other. 
Let  him  say  this  plainly :  forasmuch  as,  even  if  he  shall  wish 
to  glory,  he  will  not  be  a  fool,  for  he  saith  the  truth.     But  if 
he  spare,  lest  any  think  of  him  above  what  he  sees  him,  or  2  Cor. 
hears  any  thing  of  him  ;  let  him  remove  from  his  own  person  ^^'  ^' 
the  knot  of  the  question,  and  let  him  answer,  not  concerning 
the  man,  but  concerning  the  thing  itself,  and  let  him  say. 
Whoso  hath  so  great  power  is  such  as  Abraham.    But  it  may 
happen  that  the  virtue  of  continence  is  less  in  his  mind,  who 
uses  not  marriage,  which  Abraham  used :  but  yet  it  is  greater 
than  in  his  mind,  who   on    this    account   held   chastity  of 
marriage,  in  that  he  could  not  a  greater.     Thus  also  let  the 
unmarried  woman,  whose  thoughts  are  of  the  things  of  the 
Lord,  that  she  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit,  whenicor.7 
she  shall  have  heard  that  shameless  questioner  saying,  What,  3*- 
then,  are  you  belter  than  Sara?  answer,  I  am  better,  but  than 
those,  who   are  void  of  the   virtue   of  continence,  which  I 
believe  not  of  Sara ;  she  therefore  together  with  this  virtue 
did  what  was  suited  to  that  time,  from  which  1  am  free,  that 
in  my  body  also  may  appear,  what  she  kept  in  her  mind. 

28.  Therefore,  if  we  compare  the  things  themselves,  we  xxiii. 
may  no  way  doubt  that  the  chastity  of  continence  is  better 


302  Comparison  of  characters.     Ohedience  above  continence. 
DE      than  marriage  chastity,  whilst  yet  both  are  good :  but  when 

BONO  ,  '  1  .         ,  111 

coNJu-  we  compare  the  persons,  he  is  better,  who  hath  a  greater 
^^^^-  good  than  another.  Further,  he  who  hath  a  greater  of  the 
same  kind,  hath  also  that  which  is  less ;  but  he,  who  only 
hath  what  is  less,  assuredly  hath  not  that  which  is  greater. 
For  in  sixty,  thirty  also  are  contained,  not  sixty  also  in 
thirty.  But  not  to  work  from  out  that  which  he  hath,  stands 
in  the  allotment  of  duties,  not  in  the  want  of  virtues :  foras- 
much as  neither  is  he  without  the  good  of  mercy,  who  finds 
not  wretched  persons  such  as  he  may  mercifully  assist. 

29.  And  there  is  this  further,  that  men  are  not  rightly 
compared  with  men  in  regard  of  some  one  good.  For  it 
may  come  to  pass,  that  one  hath  not  what  another  hath,  but 
hath  another  thing,  which  must  be  esteemed  of  more  value. 
The  good  of  obedience  is  better  than  of  continence.  For 
marriage  is  in  no  place  condemned  by  authority  of  our  Scrip- 
tures, but  disobedience  is  in  no  place  acquitted.  If  there- 
fore there  be  set  before  us  a  virgin  about  to  continue  so,  but 
yet  disobedient,  and  a  married  woman  who  could  not  con- 
tinue a  virgin,  but  yet  obedient,  which  shall  we  call  better  ? 
shall  it  be  (the  one)  less  praiseworthy,  than  if  she  were  a 
virgin,  or  (the  other)  worthy  of  blame,  even  as  she  is  a  virgin  ? 
So,  if  you  compare  a  drunken  virgin  with  a  sober  married 
woman,  who  can  doubt  to  pass  the  same  sentence  .^  Forsooth 
marriage  and  virginity  are  two  goods,  whereof  the  one  is 
greater ;  but  sobriety  and  drunkenness,  even  as  obedience 
and  stubbornness,  are,  the  one  good,  and  the  other  evil. 
But  it  is  better  to  have  all  goods  even  in  a  less  degree,  than 
great  good  with  great  evil :  forasmuch  as  in  the  goods  of  the 
body  also  it  is  better  to  have  the  stature  of  Zacchaeus  with 
sound  health,  than  that  of  Goliah  with  fever. 

30.  The  right  question  plainly  is,  not  whether  a  virgin 
every  way  disobedient  is  to  be  compared  to  an  obedient 
married  woman,  but  a  less  obedient  to  a  more  obedient: 
forasmuch  as  that  also  of  marriage  is  chastity,  and  therefore  a 
good,  but  less  than  virginal.  Therefore  if  the  one,  by  so 
much  less  in  the  good  of  obedience,  as  she  is  greater  in  the 
good  of  chastity,  be  compared  with  the  other,  which  of  them 
is  to  be  preferred  that  person  judges,  who  in  the  first  place 
comparing  chastity  itself  and  obedience,  sees  that  obedience 


Obedience  implies  chastity ,  Few  have  it  like  Abraham.  ;308 

is  in  a  certain  way  the  mother  of  all  vartues.  And  therefore,  de 
for  this  reason,  there  may  be  obedience  without  virginity,  conju- 
because  virginity  is  of  counsel,  not  of  precept.  But  1  call  that  <^^^^- 
obedience,  whereby  precepts  are  complied  with.  And,  there- 
fore, there  may  be  obedience  to  precepts  without  virginity, 
but  not  without  chastity.  For  it  pertains  unto  chastity,  not 
to  commit  fornication,  not  to  commit  adultery,  to  be  defiled 
by  no  unlawful  intercourse :  and  whoso  observe  not  these, 
do  contrary  to  the  precepts  of  God,  and  on  this  account  are 
banished  from  the  virtue  of  obedience.  But  there  may  be 
virginity  without  obedience,  on  this  account,  because  it  is 
possible  for  a  woman,  having  received  the  counsel  of  virginity, 
and  having  guarded  virginity,  to  slight  precepts :  even  as  we 
have  known  many  sacred  virgins,  talkative,  curious,  drunken, 
litigious,  covetous,  proud  :  all  which  are  contrary  to  precepts, 
and  slay  one,  even  as  Eve  herself,  by  the  crime  of  disobe- 
dience. Wherefore  not  only  is  the  obedient  to  be  pre- 
ferred to  the  disobedient,  but  a  more  obedient  married  woman 
to  a  less  obedient  virgin. 

31.  From  this  obedience  that  Father,  who  was  not  without 
a  wife,  was  prepared  to  be  without  an  only  son%  and  that 
slain  by  himself.  For  I  shall  not  without  due  cause  call 
him  an  only  son,  concerning  whom  he  heard  the  Lord  say. 
In  Isaac  shall  there  be  called  for  thee  a  seed.  Therefore  Gen. 21, 
how  much  sooner  would  he  hear  it,  that  he  should  be  even  ^^' 
without  a  wife,  if  this  he  were  bidden  ?  Wherefore  it  is  not 
without  reason  that  we  often  consider,  that  some  of  both  sexes, 
containing  from  all  sexual  intercourse,  are  negligent  in  obey- 
ing precepts,  after  having  with  so  great  warmth  caught  at 
the  not  making  use  of  things  that  are  allowed.  Whence  who 
doubts  that  we  do  not  rightly  compare  unto  the  excellence 
of  those  holy  fathers  and  mothers  begetting  sons,  the  men 
and  women  of  our  time,  although  free  from  all  intercourse, 
yet  in  virtue  of  obedience  inferior:  even  if  there  had  been 
wanting  to  those  men  in  habit  of  mind  also,  what  is  plain  in 
the  deed  of  the  latter.  Therefore  let  these  follow  the 
Lamb,  boys  singing  the    new  song,  as  it  is  written  in  the 

e  Retract,  b.  ii.  c.  22.  2.  "  T  do  not  presently  be  restored  to  him  }y  re.sur- 
quite  approve  this ;  as  one  should  rather  rection,  as  we  read  in  the  Epistle  to 
belie\e  that  he  believed  his  son  would     the  Hebrews." 


304       Marriage  bond  never  wholly  loosed  hut  by  death. 

DE      Apocalypse,  icho  have  not  defiled  themselves  with  women : 
coNJu-fo^'  ^^o  other  reason  than  that  they  have  continued  virgins. 
Q-^^i-  Nor  let  them  on  this  account  think  themselves  better  than 
Rev.i4,  ^ljg  first  holy  fathers,  who  used  marriage,  so  to  speak,  after 
the  fashion  of  marriage.     Forsooth  the  use  of  it  is  such,  as 
that,  if  in  it  there  hath  taken  place  through  carnal  inter- 
course aught  which  exceeds  necessity  of  begetting,  although 
in  a  way  that  deserves  pardon,  there  is  pollution.     For  what 
doth  pardon   expiate,   if  that  advance   cause   no  pollution 
whatever  .f'    From  which   pollution  it  were  strange  if  boj's 
following  the  Lamb  were  free,  unless  they  continued  virgins. 
xxiv.       32.  Therefore  the  good  of  marriage  throughout  all  nations 
and  all  men  stands  in  the  occasion  of  begetting,  and  faith  of 
chastity:  but,  so  far  as  pertains  unto  the  People  of  God,  also 
in  the  sanctity  of  the  Sacrament,  by  reason  of  which  it  is 
unlawful  for  one  who  leaves  her  husband,  even  when  she  has 
been   put  away,  to  be  married  to  another,  so  long  as  her 
husband  lives,  no  not  even  for  the  sake  of  bearing  children  : 
and,  whereas  this   is  the   alone   cause,  wherefore   marriage 
takes  place,  not  even  where  that  very  thing,   wherefore  it 
takes  place,  follows  not,  is  the  marriage  bond  loosed,  save 
by  the  death  of  the  husband  or  wife.     In  like  manner  as  if 
there  take  place  an  ordination  of  clergy  in  order  to  form  a 
congregation  of  people,  although  the  congregation  of  people 
follow  not,  yet  there  remains  in  the  ordained  persons  the 
Sacrament    of  Ordination ;   and   if,    for   any  fault,  any   be 
removed  from  his  office,  he  will  not  be  without  the  Sacra- 
ment of  the   Lord   once  for  all  set  upon   him,  albeit  con- 
tinuing unto  condemnation.     Therefore  that  marriage  takes 
place  for  the  sake   of  begetting   children,    the    Apostle   is 
a  witness  thus,  /  tvill,  says  he,  that  the  younger  women  be 
married.     And,  as  though  it  were  said  to  him,  For  what 
purpose  ?    straightway  he   added,   to    have   children,   to    be 
mothers  of  families.     But  unto  the  faith  of  chastity  pertains 
1  Cor.    that  saying,  The  ivife  hath  not  poiver  of  her  own  body,  but 
'   '       the  husband:   likewise  also  the  husband  hath  not  power  of 
his  own  body,  but  the  wife.     But  unto  the  sanctity  of  the 
1  Cor. 7,  Sacrament  that  saying,   The  wife  not  to  depart  froin  her 
husband,  but,  in  case  she  shall  have  departed,  to  remain 
unmarried,  or  to  be  reconciled  to  her  husband:  and  let  not 


Holy  FaUicrs  obedient  in  act,  continent  in  spirit.     305 

llie  liusband  put  aicay  his  wife.     All  these  are   goods,  on     be 

account  of  which  marriage  is  a  good;  offspring,  faith,  sacra- ^.qjjju. 

ment.     But  now,   at   this  time,  not  to  seek   offspring  after  ^jali. 

the  flesh,  and  by  this  means  to  maintain  a  certain  perpetual 

freedom  from  every  such  work,  and  to  be  made  subject  after 

a  spiritual  manner  unto  one  Husband  Christ,  is  assuredly 

better  and  holier;  provided,  that  is,  men  so  use  that  freedom, 

as  it  is  written,  so  as  to  have  their  thoughts  of  the  things  of 

the  Lord,  how  to  please  the  Lord;  that  is,  that  Continence  i  Cor. 
.  .7  32. 

at  all  times  do  take  thought,  that  obedience  fall  not  short  in   ' 

any  matter:  and  this  virtue,  as  the  root-  virtue,  and  (as  it  is  wont 
to  be  called)  the  womb,  and  clearly  universal,  the  holy  fathers 
of  old  exercised  in  deed;  but  that  Continence  they  pos- 
sessed in  habit  of  mind.  Who  assuredly,  through  that 
obedience,  whereby  they  were  just  and  holy,  and  ever  pre- 
pared unto  every  good  work,  even  if  they  were  bidden  to 
abstain  from  all  sexual  intercourse,  would  perform  it.  For 
how  much  more  easily  could  they,  at  the  bidding  or  exhort- 
ation of  God,  not  use  sexual  intercourse,  who,  as  an  act  of 
obedience,  could  slay  the  child,  for  the  begetting  of  which 
alone  they  used  the  ministry  of  sexual  intercoui'se  ? 

33.  And,  the  case  being  thus,  enough  and  more  than  ^-^^'• 
enough  answer  has  been  made  to  the  heretics,  whether  they 
be  Manichees,  or  whosoever  other  that  bring  false  charges 
against  the  Fathers  of  the  Old  Testament,  on  the  subject  of 
their  having  several  wives,  thinking  this  a  proof  whereby  to 
convict  them  of  incontinence  :  provided,  that  is,  that  they 
perceive,  that  that  is  no  sin,  which  is  committed  neither 
against  nature,  in  that  they  used  those  women  not  for  wan- 
tonness, but  for  the  begetting  of  children :  nor  against 
custom,  forasmuch  as  such  things  were  usually  done  at  those 
times:  nor  against  command,  forasmuch  as  they  were  for- 
bidden by  no  law.  But  such  as  used  women  unlawfully, 
either  the  divine  sentence  in  those  Scriptures  convicts  them, 
or  the  reading  sets  them  forth  for  us  to  condemn  and  shun, 
not  to  approve  or  imitate. 

3L  But  those  of  ours  who  have  wives  we  advise,  with  all  xxvi. 
our  power,  that  they  dare  not  to  judge  of  those  holy  fathers 
after  their  own  weakness,  comparing,  as  the  Apostle  says,  them- 
selves with   themselves:    and    therefore,   not   understanding  2  Cor. 

jj.  10,  12. 


306         Widoived  and  Virgin  Chastity  above  marriage. 
DE     how  great  strength  the  soul  hath,  doing  service  unto  righte- 


BONO 


coxju-ousness  against  lusts,  that  it  acquiesce  not  in  carnal  motions 
*^^^'-  of  this  sort,  or  sutTer  them  to  glide  on  or  advance  unto 
sexual  intercourse  beyond  the  necessity  of  begetting  children, 
so  far  as  the  order  of  nature,  so  far  as  the  use  of  custom,  so 
far  as  the  decrees  of  laws  prescribe.  Forsooth  it  is  on  this 
account  that  men  have  this  suspicion  concerning  those 
fathers,  in  that  they  themselves  have  either  chosen  marriage 
through  incontinence,  or  use  their  wives  with  intemperance. 
But  however  let  such  as  are  continent,  either  men,  who,  on 
the  death  of  their  wives,  or  women,  who,  on  the  death  of 
their  husbands,  or  both,  who,  with  mutual  consent,  have 
voM^ed  continence  unto  God,  know  that  to  them  indeed  there 
is  due  a  greater  recompense  than  marriage  chastity  demands; 
but,  (as  regards)  the  marriages  of  the  holy  Fathers,  who  were 
joined  after  the  manner  of  prophecy,  who  neither  in  sexual 
intercourse  sought  aught  save  children,  nor  in  children  them- 
selves aught  save  what  should  set  forward  Christ  coming 
hereafter  in  the  flesh,  not  only  let  them  not  despise  them  in 
comparison  of  their  own  purpose,  but  let  them  without  any 
doubting  prefer  them  even  to  their  own  purpose. 

35.  Boys  also  and  virgins  dedicating  unto  God  actual 
chastity  we  do  before  all  things  admonish,  that  they  be 
aware  that  they  must  guard  their  life  meanwhile  upon  earth 
with  so  great  humility,  by  how  much  the  more  what  they 

Ecclus.  have  vowed  is  lieavenly.  Forsooth  it  is  written,  Hoiv  great 
'  ■  soever  thou  art,  hij  so  much  humble  thyself  in  all  things. 
Therefore  it  is  our  part  to  say  something  of  their  greatness, 
it  is  their  part  to  have  thought  of  great  humility.  Therefore, 
except  certain,  those  holy  fathers  and  mothers  who  were 
married,  than  whom  these  although  they  be  not  married  are 
not  better,  for  this  reason,  that,  if  they  were  married,  they 
would  not  be  equal,  let  them  not  doubt  that  they  surpass  all 
the  rest  of  this  time,  either  married,  or  after  trial  made  of 
marriage,  exercising  continence  ;  not  so  far  as  Anna  sur- 
passes Susanna;  but  so  far  as  Mary  surpasses  both.  I  am 
speaking  of  what  pertains  unto  the  holy  chastity  itself  of  the 
flesh;  for  who  knows  not,  what  other  deserts  Mary  hath.'' 
Therefore  let  them  add  to  this  so  high  purpose  conduct 
suitable,  that  they  may  have  an  assured  security  of  the  surpass- 


Yet  Patriarchs,  who  used  3Iarriage  rvell,  not  surpassed.  307 

ing  reward ;  knowing  of  a  truth,  that,  unto  themselves  and     dh 
unto  all  the  faithful,  beloved  and  chosen  members  of  Christ,  ^°^° 
coming  many  from  the  East,  and  from  the  West,  although   cali. 
shining  vvith^  light  of  glory  that  differeth  one  from  another, 
according  to  their  deserts,  there  is  this  great  gift  bestowed  in 
common,  to  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God  with  Abraham,  Matt.  8 
and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  who  not  for  the  sake  of  this  world,  but^^' 
for  the  sake  of  Christ,  were  husbands,  for  the  sake  of  Christ, 
were  fathers. 


x2 


S.  AUGUSTINE 


or 


HOLY     VIRGINITY. 


Retr.  ii.  23.  "  After  I  had  written  '  on  the  Good  of  Marriage,'  it  was  ex- 
pected that  1  should  write  ou  Holy  Virginity;  and  I  did  not  delay  to  do 
so:  and  that  it  is  God's  gift,  and  how  great  a  gift,  and  with  what  humility 
to  he  guarded,  so  far  as  I  was  able  I  set  forth  in  one  volume.  This 
book  begins,  &c." 


VIR 

GIN 


DE         1.  We  lately  put  forth  a  book  '  of  the  Good  of  Marriage/ 
\  in  which  also  we  admonished  and  admonish  the  virgins  of 
TATE.  Christ,  not,  on  account  of  that  greater  gift  which  they  have 
^"      received,  to  despise,  in  comparison  of  themselves,  the  fathers 
and  mothers  of  the  People  of  God ;  and  not  to  think  those 
Rom.ii,men,  (whom   the   Apostle  sets  forth   as  the  olive,  that   the 
]7. 18,    eugvafted  wild  olive  be  not  proud,)  who  did  service  to  Christ 
about  to  come  hereafter,  even  by  the  begetting  of  sons,  on 
this  account  of  less  desert,  because  by  divine  right  continence 
is  preferred  to  wedded  life,  and  pious  virginity  to  marriage. 
Forsooth  in  them  were  being  prepared  and  brought  forth 
future  things,  which  now  we  see  fulfilled  in  a  marvellous  and 
effectual  manner,  whose    married  life  also    was   prophetic: 
whence,  not  after  the  wonted  custom  of  human  wishes  and 
joys,  but  by  the  very  deep  counsel  of  God,  in  certain  of  them 
fruitfulncss  obtained  to  be  honoured,  in  certain  also  barren- 
ness to  be  made  fruitful.     But  at  this  time,  towards  them 
1  Cor.  7,  unto  whom  it  is  said,  (f  they  contain  not^  let  them  be  married, 
^'  we  must  use  not  consolation,  but  exhortation.     But  them, 


The  Blessed  Virgin  a  Type  ami  Pattern  of  the  Church.   309 

unto  whom  it  is  said,  Whoso  can  receive,  let  him  receive,  \vc     de 
must  exhort,  that  they  be  not  alamaed;  and  alarm  that  they  fji^i- 
be  not  hftcd  up.     Wherefore  virginity  is  not  only  to  be  set  tate. 
forth,  that  it  may  be  loved,  but  also  to  be  admonished,  that  12^  '    ' 
it  be  not  puffed  up. 

2.  This  we  have  undertaken  in  our  present  discourse :  may     ii. 
Christ  help  us,  the  Son  of  a  Virgin,  and  the  Spouse  of  virgins, 
born  after  the  flesh  of  a  virgin  womb,  and  wedded  after  the 
Spirit  in   virgin   marriage.     Whereas,  therefore,  the   whole 
Church  itself  is  a  virgin  espoused  unto  one  Husband  Christ,  2  Cor. 
as  the  Apostle  saith,  of  how  great  honour  are  its  members     ' "" 
worthy,  who  guard  this  even   in  the  flesh  itself,  which  the 
whole  Church  guards  in  the  faith.''  which  imitates  the  mother 

of  her  Husband,  and  her  Lord.  For  the  Church  also  is  both 
a  mother  and  a  virgin.  For  whose  virgin  purity  consult  we 
for,  if  she  is  not  a  virgin  ?  or  whose  children  address  we,  if 
she  is  not  a  mother?  Mary  bare  the  Head  of  This  Body 
after  the  flesh,  the  Church  bears  the  members  of  that  Body 
after  the  Spirit.  In  both  virginity  hinders  not  fruitfulness  : 
in  both  fruitfulness  takes  not  away  virginity.  Wherefore, 
whereas  the  whole  Church  is  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit, 
and  yet  the  whole  is  not  virgin  in  body  but  in  spirit ;  how 
much  more  holy  is  it  in  these  members,  wherein  it  is  virgin 
both  in  body  and  spirit  ? 

3.  It  is  written  in  the  Gospel,  of  the  mother  and  brethren     iii. 
of  Christ,  that  is.  His  kindred  after  the   flesh,  that,  when 
word  had  been  brought   to  Him,  and  they  were  standing 
without,  because  they  could  not  come  to  Him  by  reason  of 

the  crowd,  He  made  answer,  JVho  is  Mi/  mother?  or  who'^^i-i^, 
are  My  brethren?  and  stretching  forth  His  Hand  over  His 
disciples,  He  saith,  These  are  3Iy  brethren:  and  tchosoever 
shall  have  done  the  will  of  My  Father,  thai  man  is  to  Me 
brother,  and  mother,  and  sister.  What  else  teaching  us, 
than  to  prefer  to  kindred  after  the  flesh,  our  descent  after  the 
Spirit:  and  that  men  are  not  blessed  for  this  reason,  that 
they  are  united  by  nearness  of  flesh  unto  just  and  holy  men, 
but  that,  by  obeying  and  following,  they  cleave  unto  their 
doctrine  and  conduct.  Therefore  Mary  is  more  blessed  in 
receiving  the  faith  of  Christ,  than  in  conceiving  the  flesh  of 
Christ.     For  to  a  certain  one  who  said,  Blessed  is  the  u'07nb,^^^Xl^' 

27.  28. 


210  St.  Mary  had  vowed  Virginity  he/ore  the  Annunciation. 
i>E     lohich  hare  Thee,  He  Himself  made   answer,  Yea.  rather, 

VIR- 

oiNi-  hleased  are  they  who  hear  the   Word  of  God,  and  keep  it. 

TATE.  Lastly,  to  His  brethren,  that  is,  His  kindred  after  the  flesh, 
wlio  believed  not  in  Him,  what  profit  was  there  in  that  being 
of  kin  ?  Thus  also  her  nearness  as  a  Mother  would  have 
been  of  no  profit  to  Mary,  had  she  not  borne  Christ  in  her 
heart  after  a  more  blessed  manner  than  in  her  flesh. 
iv.  4.  Her  virginity  also  itself  was  on  this  account  more 
pleasing  and  accepted,  in  that  it  was  not  that  Christ  being 
conceived  in  her,  rescued  it  beforehand  from  a  husband  who 
would  violate  it,  Himself  to  preserve  it;  but,  before  He  was 
conceived,  chose  it,  already  dedicated  to  God,  as  that  from 
which  to  be  born.  This  is  shewn  by  the  words  which  Mary 
spake  in  answer  to  the  Angel  announcing  to  her  her  concep- 

Lnkei,tion;  Hoiv,  saith  she,  shall  this  be,  seeing  J  know  not 
a  man  ?  Which  assuredly  she  would  not  say,  unless  she  had 
before  vowed  herself  unto  God  as  a  virgin.  But,  because  the 
habits  of  the  Israelites  as  yet  refused  this,  she  was  espoused 
to  a  just  man,  who  v.ould  not  take  from  her  by  violence,  but 
rather  guard  against  violent  persons,  what  she  had  already 
vowed.  Although,  even  if  she  had  said  this  only,  How  shall 
this  take  place?  and  had  not  ix(\^ed,  seeing  I  knoia  not  a 
man,  certainly  she  would  not  have  asked,  how,  being  a 
female,  she  should  give  birth  to  her  promised  Son,  if  she  had 
married  with  purpose  of  sexual  intercourse.  She  might  have 
been  bidden  also  to  continue  a  virgin,  that  in  her  by  fitting 
miracle  the  Son  of  God  should  receive  the  form  of  a  servant, 
but,  being  to  be  a  pattern  to  holy  virgins,  lest  it  should  be 
thought  that  she  alone  needed  to  be  a  virgin,  who  had  obtained 
to  conceive  a  child  even  without  sexual  intercourse,  she 
dedicated  her  virginity  to  God,  when  as  yet  she  knew  not 
what  she  should  conceive,  in  order  that  the  imitation  of  a 
heavenly  life  in  an  earthly  and  mortal  body  should  take 
place  of  vow,  not  of  command;  through  love  of  choosing,  not 
through  necessity  of  doing  service.  Thus  Christ  by  being 
born  of  a  virgin,  who,  before  she  knew  Who  was  to  be  born 
of  her,  had  determined  to  continue  a  virgin,  chose  rather  to 
approve,  than  to  command,  holy  virginity.  And  thus,  even 
in  the  female  herself,  in  whom  He  took  the  form  of  a  servant, 
He  willed  that  virginity  should  be  free. 


Holy  Virgins  3Iothers  of  Christ  in  the  Spirit.        311 
5.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  why  the  virgins  of  God  be     de 


VIR- 

QINI- 


sad,  because  themselves  also  cannot,  keeping  their  virginity, 
be  mothers  of  the  flesh.  For  Him  alone  could  virginity  give  tate. 
birth  to  with  fitting  propriety,  Who  in  His  Birth  could  v. 
have  no  peer.  However,  That  Birth  of  the  Holy  Virgin  is 
the  ornament  of  all  holy  virgins;  and  themselves  together 
with  Mary  are  mothers  of  Christ,  if  they  do  the  will  of  His 
Father.  For  Mary  also  is  on  this  account  the  Mother  of 
Christ  in  a  way  more  full  of  praise  and  blessing,  according 
to  His  sentence  mentioned  above.  Whosoever  doelh  the  will 
of  My  Father  Who  is  in  heaven,  that  one  is  to  Me  brother, 
and  sister,  and  mother.  All  these  degrees  of  nearness  of 
kin  to  Himself,  He  shews  forth  in  a  spiritual  manner,  in  the 
People  whom  He  hath  redeemed:  as  brothers  and  sisters  He 
hath  holy  men  and  holy  women,  forasmuch  as  they  all  are 
coheirs  in  the  heavenly  inheritance.  His  mother  is  the 
whole  Church,  because  she  herself  assuredly  gives  birth  to 
His  members,  that  is,  His  faithful  ones.  Also  His  mother  is 
every  pious  soul,  doing  the  will  of  His  Father  with  most 
fruitful  charity,  in  them  of  whom  it  travaileth,  until  Himself  GhI.  4, 
be  foraied  in  them.  Mary,  therefore,  doing  the  will  of  God, 
after  the  flesh,  is  only  the  mother  of  Christ,  but  after  the 
Spirit  she  is  both  His  sister  and  mother. 

(j.  And  on  this  account,  that  one  female,  not  only  in  the  vi. 
Spirit,  but  also  in  the  flesh,  is  both  a  mother  and  a  virgin. 
And  a  mother  indeed  in  the  Spirit,  not  of  our  Head,  Which 
is  the  Saviour  Himself,  of  Whom  rather  she  was  born  after 
the  Spirit:  forasmuch  as  all,  who  have  believed  in  Him, 
among  whom  is  herself  also,  are  rightly  called  c/iildren  of  the  Matt.  9, 
Bridegroom:  but  clearly  the  mother  of  His  members,  which  ^^' 
are  we  :  in  that  she  wrought  together  by  charity,  that  faithful 
ones  should  be  born  in  the  Church,  who  are  members  of  That 
Head:  but  in  the  flesh,  the  mother  of  the  Head  Himself. 
For  it  behoved  that  our  Head,  on  account  of  a  notable 
miracle,  should  be  born  after  the  flesh  of  a  virgin,  that  He 
might  thereby  signify  that  His  members  would  be  born  after 
the  Spirit,  of  the  Church  a  virgin  :  therefore  Mary  alone  both 
in  Spirit  and  in  flesh  is  a  mother  and  a  virgin  :  both  the 
mother  of  Christ,  and  a  virgin  of  Christ ;  but  the  Church,  in 
the  Saints  who  shall  possess  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  the 


3 1 "2    VirginHy  a  good  hetler  than  fruitfiilness  of  the  Jlesh. 

DE  Spirit  indeed  is  altogether  the  mother  of  Christ,  altogether 
(J/ni*  ^  virgin  of  Christ:  but  in  the  flesh  not  altogether,  but  in 
TATE,  certain  a  virgin  of  Christ,  in  certain  a  mother,  but  not  of 
Christ.  Forsooth  both  faithful  women  who  are  married,  and 
iTiin.i,  virgins  dedicated  to  God,  by  holy  manners,  and  charity  out 
of  a  pure  heart,  and  good  conscience,  and  faith  unfeigned, 
because  they  do  the  will  of  the  Father,  are  after  a  spiritual 
sense  mothers  of  Christ.  But  they  who  in  married  life  give 
birth  to  (children)  after  the  flesh,  give  birth  not  to  Christ, 
but  to  Adam,  and  therefore  run,  that  their  offspring  having 
Mmbuti. been  dyed'  in  His  Sacraments,  may  become  members  of 
Christ,  forasmuch  as  they  know  what  they  have  given 
birth  to. 
vii.  7.  1  have  said  this,  lest  ha])ly  married  fruitfulness  dare  to 
vie  with  virgin  chastity,  and  to  set  forth  Mary  herself,  and  to 
say  unto  the  virgins  of  God,  She  had  in  her  flesh  two  things 
worthy  of  honour,  virginity  and  fruitfulness;  inasmuch  as  she 
both  continued  a  virgin,  and  bore:  this  happiness,  since  we 
could  not  both  have  the  whole,  we  have  divided,  that  ye  be 
virgins,  we  be  mothers :  for  what  is  wanting  to  you  in 
children,  let  your  virginity,  that  hath  been  preserved,  be  a 
consolation  :  for  us,  let  the  gain  of  children  make  up  for  our 
lost  virginity.  This  speech  of  faithful  women  married,  unto 
holy  virgins,  would  any  how  be  to  be  endured,  if  they  gave 
birth  to  Christians  in  the  flesh  ;  that  in  this  alone,  save 
virginity,  the  fruitfulness  of  Mary  in  the  flesh  should  be  more 
excellent,  that  she  gave  birth  to  the  Head  Himself  of  these 
members,  but  they  to  the  members  of  That  Head  :  but  now, 
although  by  this  speech  there  vie  such  as  on  this  one  account 
wed  and  have  intercourse  with  husbands,  that  they  may  have 
sons,  and  have  uo  other  thought  of  their  sons,  than  to  gain 
them  for  Christ,  and  do  this  so  soon  as  they  can  :  yet  are 
not  Christians  born  of  their  flesh,  but  made  so  afterwards: 
the  Church  giving  them  birth,  through  this,  that  in  a  spiritual 
manner  she  is  the  mother  of  the  members  of  Christ,  of  Whom 
also  after  a  sjjiritual  manner  sh#  is  the  virgin.  And  unto 
this  holy  birth  mothers  also  who  have  not  borne  in  the  flesh 
Christians,  are  workers  together,  that  they  may  become  what 
they  know  that  they  could  not  give  birth  to  in  the  flesh:  yet 
are  they  workers  together  through  this,  wherein  themselves 


Holy  VirgiuUy  a  dciotion  of  the  Soul.  313 

also  are  virgins  and  mothers'  of  Christ,  that  is  to  sa.y,in/aith     de 
tvhiclt  Horketh  Ihrough  love.  ^j^j^j. 

8.  Therefore  no  fruitfuhiess  of  the  flesh  can  be  compared  tate. 
to  holy  virginity  even  of   the  flesh.      For  neither  is  itself  9^^^- ^' 
also  honoured  because  it  is  virginity,  but  because  it  hath    y\\\ 
been  dedicated  to  God,  and,  although  it  be  kept  in  the  flesh, 
yet  is  it  kept  by  religion  and  devotion  of  the  Spirit.     And  by 
this  means  even  virginity  of  body  is  spiritual,  which  con- 
tinence of  piety  vows  and  keeps.    For,  even  as  no  one  makes 
an  immodest  use  of  the  body,  unless  the  sin  have  been  before 
conceived  in  the  spirit,  so  no  one  keeps  modesty  in  the  body, 
unless   chastity  have   been  before   implanted   in  the   spirit. 
But,    further,    if  modesty    of  married    life,    although    it   be 
guarded  in  the  flesh,  is  yet  attributed  to  the  soul,  not  to  the 
flesh,  under  the  rule  and  guidance  of  which,  the  flesh  itself 
hath  no  intercourse  with  any  beside  its  own  proper  estate  of 
marriage ;    how   much   more,  and  with   how  much   greater 
honour,  are  wc  to  reckon  among  the  goods  of  the  soul  that 
continence,  whereby  the  virgin  purity  of  the  flesh  is  vowed, 
consecrated,  and  kept,  for  the  Creator  Himself  of  the  soul 
and  flesh. 

9.  Wherefore  neither  are  we  to  believe  that  their  fruitful-    ix. 
ness  of  the  flesh,  who  at  this  time  seek  in  marriage  nothing 
else   save  children,  to  make  over  unto  Christ,  can   be  set 
against  the  loss  of  virginity.    Forsooth,  in  former  times,  unto 
Christ  about  to  come  after  the  flesh,  the  race  itself  of  the 
flesh  was  needful,  in  a  certain  large  and  prophetic  nation  : 
but  now,  when  from  out  every  race  of  men,  and  from  out  all 
nations,  members  of  Christ  may  be  gathered  unto  the  People 
of  God,  and    City  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  whoso  can  Mat.i9, 
receive  sacred  virginity,  let  him  receive  it;  and  let  her  only,  icor.7, 
who  contains  not,  be  married.     For  what,  if  any  rich  woman  ^• 
were  to  expend  much  money  on  this  good  work,  and  to  buy, 
from  out  different  nations,  slaves  to   make  Christians,  will 
she  not  provide  for  the  giving  birth  to  members  of  Christ  in 
a  manner  more  rich,  and  more  numerous,  than  by  any,  how 
great  soever,  fruitfulness  of  the  womb  ?  And  yet  she  will  not 
therefore  dare  to  compare  her  money  to  the  offering'  of  holy 'muneri. 

*  It  has  been  proposed  to  omit '  que,'     themselves  also  are  mothers  of  (  hrist,' 
making  the  sense, '  wherein  the  virgin*     hut  the  sense  is  good  as  it  stands. 


114         All  born  Virgins,  but  not  yet  sacred  Virgins. 


PE     virginity.     But  if  for  the  sake  of  making  such  as  shall  be 

GiNi-  born    Christians,   fruitfulness    of  the    flesh    shall   with  just 

TATE,  teason  be  set  against  the  loss  of  chastity,  this  matter  will  be 

more  fruitful,  if  virginity  be  lost  at  a  great  price  of  money, 

whereby  manj'  more  children  may  be  purchased  to  be  made 

Christians,  than   could  be   born   from   the   womb,   however 

X.  fruitful,  of  a  single  person.  But,  if  it  be  extreme  folly  to 
say  this,  let  the  faithful  women  that  are  married  possess  their 
own  good,  of  which  we  have  treated,  so  far  as  seemed  fit, 
in  another  volume ;  and  let  them  more  highly  honour,  even 
as  they  are  most  rightly  used  to  do,  in  the  sacred  virgins, 
their  better  good,  of  which  we  are  treating  in  our  present 
discourse. 

10.  For  not  even  herein  ought  such  as  are  married  to 
compare  themselves  with  the  deserts  of  the  continent,  in  that 
of  them  virgins  are  born:  for  this  is  not  a  good  of  marriage, 
but  of  nature  :  which  was  so  ordered  of  God,  as  that  of  every 
sexual  intercourse  whatever  of  the  two  sexes  of  human  kind, 
whether  in  due  order  and  honest,  or  base  and  unlawful,  there 
is  born  no  female  save  a  virgin,  yet  is  none  born  a  sacred 
virgin  :  so  it  is  brought  to  pass  that  a  virgin  is  born  even  of 
fornication,  but  a  sacred  virgin  not  even  of  marriage. 

xi.  11.  Nor  do  we  ourselves  set  forth  this  in  virgins,  that  they 
are  virgins;  but  that  they  are  virgins  dedicated  unto  God 
by  pious  continence.  For  it  is  not  at  a  venture  that  I  may 
say,  a  married  woman  seems  to  me  happier  than  a  virgin 
about  to  be  married :  for  the  one  hath  what  the  other  as  yet 
desires,  especially  if  she  be  not  yet  even  the  betrothed  of 
any  one.  The  one  studies  to  please  one,  unto  whom  she 
hath  been  given ;  the  other  many,  in  doubt  unto  whom  she 
is  to  be  given:  by  this  one  thing  she  guards  modesty  of 
thought  from  the  crowd,  that  she  is  seeking,  not  an  adulterer, 
but  a  husband,  in  the  crowd.  Therefore  that  virgin  is  with 
good  reason  set  before  a  married  woman,  who  neither  sets 
herself  forth  for  the  multitude  to  love,  whereas  she  seeks 
from  out  the  multitude  the  love  of  one ;  nor,  having  now 
>compo- found   him,   orders  herself   for  one,  taking  thouuht  of  the 

nit-  -^  o  o 

1  Cor. 7, things  of  the  world,  how  to  please  her  husband;  but  hath  so 

Ps45''  lo"^^^  ^^'^^  of  fair  beauty  above  the  sons  of  men,  as  that, 

because  she  could  not,  even  as  Mary,  conceive  Him  in  her 


What  in  childhearing  is  of  Marriage,  what  of  nature.  315 

flesh,  she  hath  kept  her  flesh  also  vh-gin  for  Him  conceived     de 
in  her  heart.    This  kind  of  virgins  no  fruitfulness  of  the  body  ^j^j^j". 
hath  given  birth  to :  this  is  no  progeny  of  flesh  and  blood,  tate. 
If  of  these   the   mother  be    sought   for,  it  is   the   Church,    xii. 
None  bears  sacred  virgins  save  a  sacred  virgin,  she  who  hath 
been  espoused  to  be  presented  chaste  unto  one  Husband,  2  Cor. 
Christ.     Of  her,  not  altogether  in  body,  but  altogether  in     ' 
spirit  virgin,   are  born   holy  virgins  both  in  body   and  in 
spirit. 

12.  Let  marriages  possess  their  own  good,  not  that  they 
beget  sons,  but  that  honestly,  that  lawfully,  that  modestly, 
that  in  a  spirit  of  fellowship  they  beget  them,  and  educate 
them,  after  they  have  been  begotten,  with  cooperation,  with 
wholesome  teaching,  and  earnest  purpose :  in  that  they  keep 
the  faith  of  the  couch  one  with  another;  in  that  they  violate 

not  the  sacrament  of  wedlock.  All  these,  however,  are  xni. 
offices  of  human  duty:  but  virginal  chastity  and  freedom 
through  pious  continence  from  all  sexual  intercourse  is  the 
portion  of  Angels,  and  a  practice S  in  corruptible  flesh,  ofi'medi- 
perpetual  incorruplion.  To  this  let  all  fruitfulness  of  the 
flesh  yield,  all  chastity  of  married  life;  the  one  is  not  in 
(man's)  power,  the  other  is  not  in  eternity ;  free  choice  hath 
not  fruitfulness  of  the  flesh,  heaven  hath  not  chastity  of 
married  life.  Assuredly  they  will  have  something  great 
beyond  others  in  that  common  immortality,  who  have  some- 
thing already  not  of  the  flesh  in  the  flesh. 

13.  Whence  they  are  marvellously  void  of  wisdom,  who 
think  that  the  good  of  this  continence  is  not  necessary  for 
the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  for  the  sake  of  the 
present  world  :  in  that,  forsooth,  married  persons  are  strained 
different  ways  by  earthly  cares  more  and  more  straitened, 
from  which  trouble  virgins  and  continent  persons  are  free : 
as  though  on  this  account  only  it  were  better  not  to  be 
married,  that  the  straits  of  this  present  time  may  be  escaped, 
not  that  it  is  of  any  profit  unto  a  future  life.  And,  that  they 
may  not  seem  to  have  put  forth  this  vain  opinion  from  out 
the  vanity  of  their  own  heart,  they  take  the  Apostle  to 
witness,  where  he  saith,  But  concerning  virgins  I  have  not  iCor.7, 
command  of  the  Lord,  but  I  give  counsel,  as  having  obtained 
ynercy  from  God  to  be  faithful.     Therefore  I  think  that  this 


316  Virginity  has  a  special  reward  hereafter. 

DE     is  good  on  account  of  the  present  necessity,  because  it  is  good 


VIK 
GINI 


for  a  man  so  to  be.  Lo,  say  they,  where  the  Apostle  shews 
TATK.  «  that  this  is  good  on  account  of  the  present  necessity,'  not 
on  account  of  the  future  eternity.  As  though  the  Apostle 
would  have  regard  for  the  present  necessity,  otherwise  than 
as  providing  and  consulting  for  the  future ;  whereas  all  his 
'dispen- dealing'  calls  not  save  unto  life  eternal. 

satio.  j^    jj^  .^^  therefore,  the  present  necessity  that  we  are  to 

avoid,  but  yet  such  as  is  a  hindrance  to  somewhat  of  the  good 
things  to  come  ;  by  which  necessity  the  married  life  is  forced 
to  have  thought  of  the  things  of  the  world,  how  to  please, 
the  husband  the  wife,  or  the  wife  the  husband.     Not  that 
these  separate  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  there  are  sins, 
which  are  restrained  by  command,  not  by  counsel,  on  this 
account,  because  it  is  matter  of  condemnation  not  to  obey 
the  Lord  when  He  commands:  but  that,  which,  within  the 
kingdom  of  God  itself,  might  be  more  largely  possessed,  if 
there  were  larger  thoughts  how  they  were   to  please  God, 
will  assuredly  be  less,  when  as  this  very  thing  is  less  thought 
1  Cor.    of  by  necessity  of  marriage.     Therefore  he  says,  Concerning 
'     ■     virgins  I  have  not  command  of  the  Lord.     For  whosoever 
obeys  not  a  command,  is  guilty  and  liable  for  punishment. 
Wherefore,  because  it  is  not  sin  to  marry  a  wife  or  to  be 
married,  (but  if  it  were  a  sin,  it  would  be  forbidden  by  a 
Command,)  on  this  account  there  is  no    Comma)id  of  the 
Lord  concerning  virgins.     But  since,  after  we  have  shunned 
or  had  forgiveness  of  sins,  we  must  approach   eternal  life, 
wherein  is  a  certain  or  more  excellent  glory,  to  be  assigned 
not  unto  all  who  shall  live  for  ever,  but  unto  certain  there ; 
in  order  to  obtain  which  it  is  not  enough  to  have  been  set 
free  from  sins,  unless  there  be  vowed  unto  Him,  Who  setteth 
us  free,  something,  which  it  is  no  matter  of  fault  not  to  have 
vowed,  but  matter  of  praise  to  have  vowed  and  perfoi'med; 
he  saith,  /  give  counsel,  as  having  obtained  mercy  from  God 
that  I  should  be  faithful.     For  neither  ought  I  to  grudge 
faithful   counsel,  who   not  by   my   own   merits,  but  by   the 
1  Cor.    mercy  of  God,  am  faithful.     /  think  therefore  that  this  is 
''' 2^'     good,  by  reason  of  the  present  necessity.     This,  saitli  he,  on 
which  I  have  not  command  of  the  Lord,  but  give  counsel, 
that  is  concerning  virgins,  T  think  to  be  good  by  reason  of 


Viryiiiily  counselled;   Falfh  of  mar riaye  commanded.  317 

the  present  necessity.     For  I  know  what  the  necessity  of  the     dk 
present  time,  unto  which  marriages  serve,  compels,  that  the   J/nV- 
things  of  God  be  less  thought  of  than   is  enough  for  the  tate. 
obtaining  that  glory,  which   shall  not  be    of  all,   although 
they  abide  in  eternal  life  and  salvation :  For  star  differeth  i  Cor. 
from  star  in  hriyhtness;    so  also    the  Resurrection   of  the  ^2. 
dead.     It  is,  therefore,  good  for  a  man  so  to  be. 

15.  After  that  the  same  Apostle  adds,  and  says,  Thou  art     xv, 
bound  to  a  wife,  seek  not  loosening:   thou  art  loosed  from  a  ^  ^^°''- 
tvife,  seek  not  a  wife.     Of  these  two,  that,  which  he  set  first, 
pertains  unto  command,  against  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  do. 
For  it  is  not  lawful  to  put  away  a  wife,  save  because  of  forni-^3*^-i^> 
cation,  as  the  Lord  Himself  saith  in  the  Gospel.     But  that, 
which  he  added,  Thou  art  loosed  from  a  u'ife,  seek  not  a  wife, 
is  a  sentence  of  counsel,  not  of  command :  therefore  it  is  lawful 
to  do,  but  it  is  better  not  to  do.     Lastly,  he  added  straight- 
way, Botlt  if  thou  shall  have  taken  a  wife,  thou  hast  not  i  Cor.  7, 
sinned;  and,  if  a  virgin  shall  have  been  married,  she  sinneth 
not.     But,  after  that  former  saying  of  his,  Thou  art  bound  to 
a  wife,  seek  not  loosening,  he  added  not,  did  he,  '  And  if 
thou  shalt  have  loosed,  thou  hast  not  sinned  ?'    For  he  had 
already  said  above,  But  to  these,  tvho  are  in  marriage,  I 
command,   not    I,  but   the    Lord,  that   the  wife  depart  not 
from  her  husband:   but,  if  site  shall  have  departed,  that  she 
remain  unmarried,  or  be  reconciled  unto  her  own  husband; 
for  it  may  come  to  pass  that  she  depart,  not  through  any 
fault  of  her  own,  but  of  her  husband.     Then  he  saith.  And 
let  not  the  man  put  away  his  wife,  which,  nevertheless,  he 
set  down  of  command  of  the  Lord:  nor  did  he  then  add. 
And,  if  he  shall  have  put  her  away,  he  sinneth  not.     For 
this  is  a  command,  not  to  obey  which  is  sin:  not  a  counsel, 
which  if  you  shall  be  unwilling  to  use,  you  will  obtain  less 
good,  not  do  any  ill.     On  this  account,  after  he  had  said, 
Thou  art  loosed  from  a  wife,  seek  not  a  wife;  because  he 
was  not  giving  command,  in    order  that  there  be  not  evil 
done,  but  was  giving  counsel,  in  order  that  there  be  done 
what  is  better:   straightway  he  added,    Both,  if  thou  shalt 
have  taken  a  wife,  thou  hast  not  sinned;  and,  if  a  virgin 
shall  have  been  quarried,  she  sinnetli  not. 

16.  Yet  he  added.  But  such  shall  have  tribulation  of  the  j  Cor, 

7,  28,' 


318    JVhat  it  was  St.  Paul  spared  to  tell  the  married. 


DE  Jlesh,  but  I  spare  you:  in  this  manner  exhorting  unto 
GiNi-  virginity,  and  continual  continence,  so  as  some  Httle  to 
TATE,  alarm  also  from  marriage,  with  all  modesty,  not  as  from  a 
matter  evil  and  unlawful,  but  as  from  one  burdensome  and 
troublesome.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  incur  dishonour  of  the 
flesh,  and  another  to  have  tribulation  of  the  flesh:  the  one  is 
matter  of  crime  to  do,  the  other  of  labour  to  suffer,  which  for 
the  most  part  men  refuse  not  even  for  the  most  honourable 
duties.  But  for  the  having  of  marriage,  now  at  this  time, 
wherein  there  is  no  service  done  imto  Christ  about  to  come 
through  descent  of  flesh  by  the  begetting  of  the  family  itself, 
to  take  upon  one  to  bear  that  tribulation  of  the  flesh,  which 
the  Apostle  foretels  to  such  as  shall  be  married,  would  be 
extremely  foolish,  did  not  incontinent  persons  fear,  lest, 
through  the  temptation  of  Satan,  they  should  fall  into 
damnable  sins.  But  whereas  he  says  that  he  spares  them, 
who  he  saith  will  have  tribulation  of  the  flesh,  there  suggests 
itself  to  me  in  the  mean  while  no  sounder  interpretation, 
than  that  he  was  unwilling  to  open,  and  unfold  in  words, 
this  self-same  tribulation  of  the  flesh,  which  he  fore-announced 
to  those  who  choose  marriage,  in  suspicions  of  jealousy  of 
married  life,  in  the  begetting  and  nurture  of  children,  in 
fears  and  sorrows  of  childlessness.  For  how  very  few,  after 
they  have  bound  themselves  with  the  bonds  of  marriage,  are 
not  drawn  and  driven  to  and  fro  by  these  feelings  ?  And 
this  we  ought  not  to  exaggerate,  lest  we  spare  not  the  very 
persons,  who  the  Apostle  thought  were  to  be  spared, 
xvii.  17.  Only  by  this,  which  I  have  briefly  set  down,  the 
reader  ought  to  be  set  on  his  guard  against  those,  who,  in 
this  that  is  written,  hut  such  sliall  have  trihulaiion  of  the 
flesh,  hut  1  spare  you,  falsely  charge  marriage,  as  indirectly 
condemned  by  this  sentence ;  as  though  he  were  unwilling 
to  utter  the  condemnation  itself,  when  he  saith.  But  I  spare 
you,;  so  that,  forsooth,  when  he  spares  them,  he  spared  not 
his  own  soul,  as  saying  falsely.  And,  if  thou  shall  have  taken 
a  wife,  thou  hast  not  sinned;  and  if  a  virgin  shall  have 
been  married,  she  sinneth  not.  And  this,  whoso  believe  or 
would  have  believed  concerning  holy  Scripture,  they,  as  it 
were,  prepare  for  themselves  a  way  for  liberty  of  lying,  or  for 
defence  of  their  own  perverse  opinion,  in  whatever  case  they 


Full  truth  of  statements  each  way  in  Holy  Writ.     819 

hold  other  sentiments  than  what  sound  doctrine  demands,     de 
For  if  there  shall  be  alleged  any  ]3lain  statement  from  the  qini^ 
divine   boolis,  whereby  to  relate  their  errors,  this  they  have  tate. 
at  hand   as   a  shield,  whereby  defending   themselves   as  it 
were    against    the    truth,    they   lay    themselves    bare    to   be 
wounded  by  the  devil:  to  say  that  the  author  of  the  book 
did  not  speak  the  truth  in  this  instance,  at  one  time  in  order 
to  spare  the  weak,  at  another  in  order  to   alarm  despisers ; 
just  as  a  case  shall  come  to  hand,  wherein  to  defend  their 
own  pei'verse  opinion:    and   thus,  whilst   they   had   rather 
defend  than  amend  their  own  opinions,  they  essay  to  break 
the  authority  of  holy  Scripture,  whereby  alone  all  proud  and 
liard  necks  are  broken. 

18.  Wherefore  I  admonish  both  men  and  women  who  xviii, 
follow  after  perpetual  continence  and  holy  virginity,  that  they 
so  set  their  own  good  before  marriage,  as  that  they  judge  not 
marriage  an  evil:  and  that  they  understand  that  it  was  in  no 
way  of  deceit,  but  of  plain  truth  that  it  was  said  by  the 
Apostle,  Wlioao  gives  in  tnarringe  does  tcell;  and  whoso  gives '  Cor.  7, 
not  >n  marriage,  does  better;  and,  if  thou  shalt  have  taken  a  40. 
u-ife,  thou  hast  not  sinned;  and,  (fa  virgin  shall  have  been 
married,  site  sinneth  not;  and  a  little  after,  But  she  will  be 
more  blessed,  if  she  shall  have  continued  so,  according  to  my 
judgment.  And,  that  the  judgment  should  not  be  thought 
human,  he  adds,  But  I  think  I  also  have  the  Spirit  of  God. 
This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord,  this  of  the  Apostles,  this 
true,  this  sound,  so  to  choose  greater  gifts,  as  that  the  lesser 
be  not  condemned.  The  truth  of  God,  in  the  Scripture  of 
God,  is  better  than  virginity  of  man  in  the  mind  or  flesh  of  any. 
Let  what  is  chaste  be  so  loved,  as  that  what  is  true  be  not 
denied.  For  what  evil  thought  may  they  not  have  even  con- 
cerning their  own  flesh,  who  believe  that  the  tongue  of  the 
Apostle,  in  that  very  place,  wherein  he  was  commending 
virginity  of  body,  was  not  virgin  from  corruption  of  lying.  In 
the  first  place,  therefore,  and  chiefly,  let  such  as  choose  the 
good  of  virginity,  hold  most  firmly  that  the  holy  Scriptures 
have  in  nothing  spoken  lies;  and,  thus,  that  that  also  is  true 
whicli  is  said.  And  if  thou  shall  have  taken  a  wife,  thou  hast 
not  sinned;  and,  if  a  virgin  shall  have  been  married,  she 
sinneth  not.     And  let  them  not  think  that  the  so  great  good 


8-20  Marriage  chmtity  good,  Virginal  and  Widow's,  belter. 

"E     of  virgin  chastity  is  made  less,  if  marriage  shall  not  be  an 
GiNi-  evil.     Yea  rather,  let  her  hence  feel  confident,  rather,  that 

m^  there  is  prepared  for  her  a  palm  of  greater  glory,  who  feared 
not  to  be  condemned,  in  case  she  were  married,  but  desired 
to  receive  a  more  honourable  crown,  in  that  she  was  not 
married.  Whoso  therefore  shall  be  willing  to  abide  without 
marriage,  let  them  not  flee  from  marriage  as  a  pitfall  of  sin ; 
but  let  them  surmount  it  as  a  hill  of  the  lesser  good,  in  order 
that  they  may  rest  in  the  mountain  of  the  greater,  continence. 
It  is  on  this  condition,  forsooth,  that  this  hill  is  dwelt  on ; 

1  Cor.7,t}jat  one  leave  it  not  when  he  will.  For,  a  woman  is  bound, 
so  long  as  Iter  husband  liveth.  However  unto  widowed  con- 
tinence one  ascends  from  it  as  from  a  step :  but  for  the 
sake  of  virgin  continence,  one  must  either  turn  aside  from  it 
by  not  consenting  to  suitors,  or  overleap  it  by  anticipating 
suitors. 
^^^'  19.  But  lest  any  should  think  that  of  two  works,  the  good 
and  the  better,  the  rewards  will  be  equal,  on  this  account  it 
was  necessary  to  treat  against  those,  who  have  so  interpreted 

iCor.  7,  that  saying  of  the  Apostle,  Bui  I  think  that  this  is  good  bg 
reason  of  the  present  necessitg,  as  to  say  that  virginity  is  of 
use  not  in  order  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  in  order  to 
this  present  time :  as  though  in  that  eternal  life,  they,  who 
had  chosen  this  better  part,  would  have  nothing  more  than 
the  rest  of  men.     And  in  this  discussion  when  we  came  to 

1  Cor.  7,  that  saying  of  the  same  Apostle,  But  such  shall  have  tribula- 
tion  of  the  jlesh,  but  I  spare  you;  we  fell  in  with  other 
disputants,  who  so  far  from  making  marriage  equal  to  per- 
petual virginity,  altogether  condemned  it.  For  whereas  both 
are  errors,  either  to  equal  marriage  to  holy  virginity,  or  to 
condemn  it:  by  fleeing  from  one  another  to  excess,  these 
two  errors  come  into  open  collision,  in  that  they  have  been 
unwilling  to  hold  the  mean  of  truth:  whereby,  both  by  sure 
reason  and  authority  of  holy  Scriptures,  we  both  discover 
that  marriage  is  not  a  sin,  and  yet  equal  it  not  to  the  good 
XX.  either  of  virginal  or  even  of  widowed  chastity.  Some  forsooth 
by  aiming  at  virginity  have  thought  marriage  hateful  even  as 
adultery  :  but  others,  by  defending  marriage,  would  have  the 
excellence  of  perpetual  continence  to  deserve  nothing  more 
than  married  chastity;  as  though  either  the  good  of  Susanna 


What  St.  Paul  ^  spares''  is  not  condemnation  of  Marriage.  321 


be  the  lowering  of  Mary  :   or  the  greater  good  of  Mary  ought     df. 

.  VIR- 

to  be  the  condemnation  of  Susanna.  oini- 

20.  Far  be  it,  therefore,  that  the  Apostle  so  said,  unto  such   '^atb. 
as  are  married  or  are  about  to  marry,  But  I  spare  you,  as  if  he 
were  unwilling  to  say  what  punishment  is  due  to  the  married 
in  another  life.     Far  be  it  that  she,  wliom  Daniel  set  free  from 
temporal  judgment,  be  cast  by  Paul  into  hell!    Far  be  it  that 
her  husband's  bed  be  unto  her  punishment  before  the  judg- 
ment seat  of  Christ,  keeping  faith  to  which  she  chose,  under 
false  charge  of  adultery,  to  meet  either  danger,  or  death !    To 
what  effect  that  speech,  It  is  better  for  me  to  fall  into  your  Hist,  of 
hands,  than   to  sin   in    the  sight  of  God;    if  God  had  been  "^^^' ^''^" 
about,  not  to  set  her  free  because  she  kept  married  chastity, 
but  to  condemn  her  because  she  had  married  ?     And  now  so 
often  as  married  chastity  is  by  truth  of  holy  Scripture  justified 
against  such  as  bring  calumnies  and  charges  against  marriage, 
so  often  is  Susanna  by  the  Holy  Spirit  defended  against  false 
witnesses,  so  often  is  she  set  free  from  a  false  charge,  and 
with    much    greater    ado.      For    then    against    one    married 
woman,  now  against  all ;  then  of  hidden  and  untrue  adultery, 
now  of  true  and  open  marriage,  an  accusation  is  laid.     Then 
one  woman,  upon  what  the  unjust  elders  said,  now  all  hus- 
bands and  wives,  upon  what  the  Apostle  would  not  say,  are 
accused.     It  was,  forsooth,  your  condemnation,  say  they, 
that  he  was  silent  on,  when  he  said,  But  I  spare  you.     Who 
(saith)  this.?     Surely  he,  who  had  said  above;  And,  if  thou  ^^ov. 7, 
shalt  have  taken   a  wife,  thou   hast  not  sinned ;  and,  if  a 
virgin  shall  have    been    married,  sJie   sinneth   not.     Why, 
therefore,  wherein    he    hath    been   silent  through    modesty, 
suspect  ye  a  charge  against  marriage  ;  and  wherein  he  hath 
spoken    openly,   recognise  ye    not   a   defence  of  marriage  ? 
What,  doth  he  condemn  by  his  silence  them  whom  he  acquitted 
by  his  words  .?     Is  it  not  now  a  milder  charge,  to  charge 
Susanna,  not  with  marnage,  but  with  adultery  itself,  than  to 
charge  the  doctrine  of  the  Apostle  with  falsehood  ?     What 
in  so  great  peril  could  we  do,  were  it  not  as  sure  and  plain 
that  chaste  marriage  ought  not  to  be  condemned,   as   it    is 
sure  and  plain  that  holy  Scripture  cannot  lie  .? 

21.  Here  some  one  will  say.  What  has  this  to  do  with  holy 

Y 


322       VirghiHy  more  honoured  in  allowing  3Iarriage. 

DE  virginity,  or  perpetual  continence,  the  setting  forth  of  which 
GiNi-  ^^'^s  undertaken  in  this  discourse  ?  To  whom  I  make  answer 
TATE.  i„  ti^g  fj|.g|_  place,  what  I  mentioned  above,  that  the  glory  of 
^^'-  that  greater  good  is  greater  from  the  fact  that,  in  order  to 
oV)tain  it,  the  good  of  married  life  is  surmounted,  not  the  sin 
of  marriage  shunned.  Otherwise  it  would  be  enough  for 
perpetual  continence,  not  to  be  specially  praised,  but  only 
not  to  be  blamed :  if  it  were  maintained  on  this  account, 
because  it  was  a  crime  to  wed.  In  the  next  place,  because 
it  is  not  by  human  judgment,  but  by  authority  of  Divine 
Scripture,  that  men  must  be  exhorted  unto  so  excellent  a 
gift,  we  must  plead  not  in  a  common  place  manner,  or  merely 
by  the  way,  that  divine  Scripture  itself  seem  not  to  any  one 
in  any  matter  to  have  lied.  For  they  discourage  rather  than 
exhort  holy  virgins,  who  compel  them  to  continue  so  by 
passing  sentence  on  marriage.     For  whence  can  they  feel 

1  Cor=7,  sure  that  that  is  true,  which  is  v.'ritten.  And  he,  ivho  gives  her 
not  in  marriage,  does  better:  if  they  think  that  false,  which 
yet  is  written  close  above,  Both  he,  who  gives  his  virgin,  does 
nell  ^  But,  if  they  shall  without  all  doubt  have  believed 
Scripture  speaking  of  the  good  of  marriage,  confirmed  by  the 
same  most  true  authority  of  the  divine  oracle,  they  will  hasten 
beyond  unto  their  own  better  part  with  glowing  and  con- 
fident eagerness.  Wherefore  we  have  already  spoken  enough 
for  the  business  which  we  have  taken  in  hand,  and,  so  far  as 
we  could,  have  shewn,  that  neither  that  saying  of  the  Apostle, 

I  Cor. 7,  But  I  think  that  this  is  good  by  reason  of  the  present 
necessity,  is  so  to  be  understood,  as  though  in  this  life  holy 
virgins  are  better  than  faithful  women  married,  but  are  equal 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  in  a  future  life  :  nor  that  other, 

1  Cor.  7  ^here  he  saith  of  such  as  wed,  But  such  shall  have  tribula- 

28.  tion  of  the  Jlesh ,  but  I  spare  you  :  is  to  be  so  understood,  as 
though  he  chose  rather  to  be  silent  on,  than  to  speak  of,  the 
sin  and  condemnation  of  marriage.  Forsooth  two  errors, 
contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  have,  thi'ough  not  understanding 
them,  taken  hold  of  each  one  of  these  two  sentences.  For 
that  concerning  the  present  necessity  they  interpret  in  their 
own  favour,  who  contend  to  equal  such  as  wed  to  such  as  wed 
not :  but  this,  where  it  is  said,  But  I  spare  you,  they  who 


Continence  projitahle  for  the  life  to  come.  323 

presiuno  to  condemn  such  as  wed.      Ihit  we,  according  to  de 

the  failli  and  sound  doctrine  of  holy  Scriptures,  both  say  that  qini. 

marriage  is   no  sin,  and  yet   set   its   good  not   only  below  tate. 


virginal,  but  also  below  widowed  continence  ;  and  say  that 
the  present  necessity  of  married  persons  is  an  hindrance  to 
their  desert,  not  indeed  unto  life  eternal,  but  unto  an  excel- 
lent glory  and  honour,  which  is  reserved  for  perpetual  con- 
tinence: and  that  at  this  time  marriage  is  not  expedient  save 
for  such  as  contain  not;  and  that  on  the  tribulation  of  the 
flesh,  which  comelh  from  the  affection  of  the  flesh,  without 
which  marriages  of  incontinent  persons  cannot  be,  the  Apostle 
neither  wished  to  be  silent,  as  forewarning  what  was  true, 
nor  to  unfold  more  fully,  as  sparing  men's  weakness. 

22.  And  now  by  plainest  witnesses  of  divine  Scriptures,  xxii, 
such  as  according  to  the  small  measure  of  our  memory  we 
shall  be  able  to  remember,  let  it  more  clearly  appear,  that, 
not  on  account  of  the  present  life  of  this  world,  but  on  account 
of  that  future  life  which  is  promised  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  we  are  to  choose  perpetual  continence.  But  who 
but  must  observe  this  in  that  which  the  same  Apostle  says  a 
little  after,    Whoso  is   without   a  wife   has   thought  of  the  lCor.7, 

.    32.  33. 

things  (f  the  Lord,  how  to  please   the  Lord:  hut  whoso  is S4[' 
joined  in  marriage  has  thought  of  the  things  of  the  world, 
how  to  please  his  uife.  And  a  woman  nnmarried  and  a  virgin 
is    divided};    she    that    is  unmarried   is  careful  about  the^cLde 
things  of  the  Lord,  to  be  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit :   but  ^°^-  ^ 
she  that  is    married    is    careful   about   the    things  of  the 
world,  how  to  please  her  husband.     Certainly  he  saith  not, 
hath  thought   of  the  things  of  a  state  without   care  in  this 
world,  to  pass  her  time  without  weightier  troubles ;  nor  doth 
he  say  that  a  woman  unmarried  and  a  virgin  is  divided,  that 
is,  distinguished,  and  separated  from  her  who  is  married,  for 
this  end,  that  the  unmarried  woman  be  without  care  in  this 
life,  in  order  to  avoid   temporal  troubles,  which  the  married 
woman  is  not  free  from:  but.  She  hath  thought,  saith  he,  of 
the  things  of  the  Lord,  how  to  please    the   Lord;    and  is 
careful  about  the  things  of  the  Lord,  to  be  holy  both  in  body 
and  spirit.     Unless  to  such   a  degree,  perchance,  each  be 
foolishly  contentious,  as  to  essay  to  assert,  that  it  is  not  on 
account  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  on  account  of  this 

y2 


324  JVho  ^7iiake  themselves  eunuchs  for  Kingdom  of  Heaven^ 

DE     present  world,  that  we  wish  to  '  please  the  Lord,'  or  that  it 
GTNi-  ^''^  o"  accomit  of  this  present  life,  not  on  account  of  life  eternal, 
'^^'^'^-  that  they  are  '  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit.'     To  believe 
this,  what  else  is  it,  than  to  be  more  miserable  than  all  men? 
15^19    ^^^  ^°  ^^^  Apostle  saith,  If  in  iJiis  life  only  we  are  hoping  in 
Christ,  ice  are  more  miserable  than  all  men.     What?  is  he 
who  breaks  his  bread   to  the  hungry,  if  he  do   it  only  on 
account  of  this  life,  a  fool;  and  shall  he  be   prudent,  who 
chastens  his  own  body  even  unto  continence,  whereby  he 
hath  no  intercourse  even  in  marriage,  if  it  shall  profit  him 
nought  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 
xxiii.       23.  Lastly,  let  us  hear  the  Lord  Himself  delivering  most 
plain  judgment  on  this  matter.     For,  upon  L[is  speaking  after 
a  divine  and  fearful  manner  concerning  husband  and  wife 
not  separating,  save  on  account  of  fornication.  His  disciples 
Mat.i9,said  to   Him,  If  the  case   he  such  with  a    wife,  it   is  not 
jg'     ■   good  to  marry.     To   whom  He  saith,  Not  all  receive  this 
saying.     For   there   are   eunuchs  who  were   so   born :   but 
there  are  others  taho  were  made  by  men  :  and  there  are 
eunuchs,  who  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  sake  of  the 
kingdom   of  lieaveit :    whoso   can  receive,  let   him   receive. 
What  could  be  said  more  true,  what  more  clear }     Christ 
.saith,  the  Truth  saith,  the  Power  and  Wisdom  of  God  saith, 
that  they,  who  of  pious  purpose  have  contained  from  marry- 
ing a  wife,  make  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  sake   of  the 
kingdom   of  heaven:   and  against  this,  human   vanity  with 
impious  rashness  contends,  that  they,  who  do  so,  shun  only 
the  jjresent  necessity  of  the  troubles  of  married  life,  but  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  have  no  more  than  others. 
xxiv.       24.  But  concerning  what  eunuchs  speaketh  God  by  the 
Is.  56,    prophet  Isaiah,  unto  whom  He  saith  that  He  will  give  in 
4-^-       His  house  and  in  His  wall  a  place   by  name,  much  better 
than   of  sons    and   daughters,  save   concerning   these,   who 
make  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ?     For    for    these,   whose    bodily    organ    is    without 
strength,  so  that  they  cannot  beget,  (such  as  are  the  eunuchs 
of  rich   men  and  of  kings,)  it  is  surely  enough,  when  they 
become   Christians,  and  keep   the   commands  of  God,  yet 
have  this  purpose,  that,  if  they  could,  they  would  have  wives, 
to  be  made  equal  to  the  rest  of  the  faithful  in  the  house  of 


For  whom  is  '  a  place  letter  than  of  sons  and  danyhters.^  325 

God,  who  are  married,  who  bring  up  in  tlie  fear  ol  God  dk 
a  family  which  they  have  kiwfiiUy  and  cliastely  gotten,  ^^^^\ 
teaching  their  sons  to  set  their  hope  on  God ;  but  not  to  tate. 
receive  a  better  place  than  of  sons  and  daughters.  For  it  is 
not  of  virtue  of  the  soul,  but  of  necessity  of  the  flesh,  that 
they  marry  not  wives.  Let  who  will  contend  that  the 
Prophet  foretold  this  of  those  eunuchs  who  have  suflured 
mutilation  of  body ;  that  even  also  helps  the  cause  which  we 
have  undertaken.  For  God  hath  not  preferred  these  eunuchs 
to  such  as  have  no  place  in  His  house,  but  assuredly  to  those 
who  keep  the  desert  of  married  life  in  begetting  sons. 
For,  when  He  saith,  /  will  give  unto  them  a  place  much 
better;  He  shews  that  one  is  also  given  unto  the  married, 
but  much  inferior.  Therefore,  to  allow  that  in  the  house 
of  God  there  will  be  the  eunuchs  after  the  flesh  spoken  of 
above,  who  were  not  in  the  People  of  Israel :  because  we  see 
that  these  also  themselves,  whereas  they  become  not  Jews, 
yet  become  Christians :  and  that  the  Prophet  spake  not  of 
them,  who  through  purpose  of  continence  seeking  not 
marriage,  make  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  sake  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  :  is  any  one  so  madly  opposed  to  the 
truth  as  to  believe  that  eunuchs  made  so  in  the  flesh  have 
a  better  place  than  married  persons  in  the  house  of  God, 
and  to  contend  that  persons  being  of  pious  purpose  con- 
tinent, chastening  the  body  even  unto  contempt  of  marriage, 
making  themselves  eunuchs,  not  in  the  body,  but  in  the  very 
root  of  concupiscence,  practising  an  heavenly  and  angelic 
life  in  an  earthly  mortal  state,  are  on  a  level  with  the  deserts 
of  the  married;  and,  being  a  Christian,  to  gainsay  Christ 
when  He  praises  those  who  have  made  themselves  eunuclis, 
not  for  the  sake  of  this  world,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  aflSrming  that  this  is  of  use  for  the  present  life, 
not  for  a  future  ?  What  else  remains  for  these,  save  to  assert 
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  itself  pertains  unto  this  temporal 
life,  wherein  we  now  are  ?  For  why  should  not  blind  pre- 
sumption advance  even  to  this  madness?  And  what  more 
full  of  phi'ensy  than  this  assertion }  For,  although  at  times 
the  Church,  even  that  which  is  at  this  time,  is  called  the 
kingdom  of  heaven;  certainly  it  is  so  called  for  this  end, 
because  it  is  being  gathered  together  for  a  future  and  eternal 


3'26        '  An  elervdl  name'  promised  to  those  Eunuchs. 

v)v.     life.    Although,  therefore,  it  have  the  promise  of  the  present, 
liim-  ^^^^  ^^  ^  future  life,  yet  in  all  its  good  works  it  looks  not  to 

TATE.  iJie  ihings  that  are  seen,  hut  to  what  are  not  seen.     For  what 

iTim.4,  ^,^.^  ^^g^  ^j.g  temporal;  but  what  are  not  seen,  are  eternal. 

2  Cor. 4,  25.  Nor  indeed  hath  the  Holy  Spirit  failed  to  speak  what 
should  be  of  open  and  unshaken  avail  against  these  men, 
most  shamelessly  and  madly  obstinate,  and  should  repel 
their  assault,  as  of  wild  beasts,  from  His  sheep-fold,  by 
defences  that  may  not  be  stormed.     Vox,  after  He  had  said 

Is.  50,  concerning  eunuchs,  /  will  (jive  unto  them  i}?,  My  house  and 
in  My  wall  a  named  place,  much  better  than  of  sons  and 
daughters ;  lest  any  too  carnal  should  think  that  there  was 
any  thing  temporal  to  be  hoped  for  in  these  words,  straight- 
way He  added.  An  eternal  name  I  will  give  unto  litem,  nor 
shall  it  ever  fail:  as  though  He  should  say,  Why  dost  thou 
draw  back,  impious  blindness?  Why  dost  thou  draw  back? 
Why  dost  thou  pour  the  clouds  of  thy  perverseness  over  the 
clear  (sky)  of  truth  ?  Wliy  in  so  great  light  of  Scriptures  dost 
thou  seek  after  darkness  from  out  which  to  lay  snares? 
Why  dost  thou  promise  temporal  advantage  only  to  holy 
persons  exercising  continence  ?  An  eternal  name  I  will  give 
unto  them:  why,  where  persons  keep  from  all  sexual  inter- 
course, and  also  in  the  very  fact  that  they  abstain  from 
these,  have  thought  of  the  thiugs  of  the  Lord,  how  to 
please  the  Lord,  do  you  essay  to  refer  them  unto  earthly 
advantage?  An  eternal  name  I  ivill  give  unto  them.  Why- 
contend  you  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  the  sake  of 
which  holy  eunuchs  have  made  themselves  eunuchs,  is  to  be 
understood  in  this  life  only  ?  An  eternal  name  I  will  give 
unto  them.  And  if  haply  in  this  place  you  endeavour  to 
take  the  word  itself  eternal  in  the  sense  of  lasting  for  a  long 
time,  I  add,  1  heap  up,  I  tread  in,  nor  shall  it  ever  fail. 
What  more  seek  you  ?  What  more  say  you  ?  This  eternal 
name,  whatever  it  be,  unto  the  eunuchs  of  God,  which 
assuredly  signifies  a  certain  peculiar  and  excellent  glory, 
shall  not  be  in  counnon  with  many,  although  set  in  the 
same  kingdom,  and  in  the  same  house.  For  on  this  account 
also,  perhaps,  it  is  called  a  name,  that  it  distinguishes  those, 
to  whom  it  is  given,  from  the  rest. 
xxvi.       26.  What  then,  say  they,  is  the  meaning  of  that  penny, 


Sainls,  equal  in  eternal  life,  differ  in  ylorij.  327 

which  is  given  in  payment  to  all  alike  when  the  work  of  the     de 
vineyard  is  ended?  whether  it  be  to  those  who  have  laboured  qini. 
from  the  first  hour,  or  to  those  who  have  laboured  one  hour?  tate. 
What  assuredly  doth    it  signify,  but  something,  which   allg|^Q^^' 
shall    have  in   common,   such   as  is  life   eternal   itself,  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  itself,  where   shall  be  all,  whom   God 
hath   predestinated,  called,  iustified,  glorified  ?    For  it  be-  ]S^°y- 
hoveth  that  litis  corruptible  put  on  incorrupfion,  and  this 
mortal  put  on  immortality.     This  is  that  penny,  wages  for 
all.      Yet  star  differ  eth  from  star  in   glory;    so  also  </ielb.  41. 
resurrection  of  the  dead.     These  are  the  different  merits  of 
the  Saints.     For,  if  by  that  penny  the  heaven  were  signified, 
have  not  all  the  stars  in  common  to  be  in  the  heaven  ?    And 
yet,  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  another  glory  of  the  moon, 
another  of  the  stars.     If  that  penny  were  taken  for  health  of 
body,  have  not  all  the  members,  when  we  are  well,  health  in 
common ;  and,  should  this  health  continue  even  unto  death, 
is  it  not  in  all  alike  and  equally  ?    And  yet,  God  hath  set  the  i  Cor. 

12    18 

members,  each  one  of  them,  in  the  body,  as  He  tcould ;  that     ' 
neither  the  whole  be  an  eye,  nor  the  whole  hearing,  nor  the 
whole  smelling:  and,  whatever  else  there  is,  it  hath  its  own 
property,  although  it  have  health  equally  with  all.     Thus 
because  life   eternal   itself  shall   be  alike   to   all,   an   equal 
penny  was  assigned  to  all ;  but,  because  in  that  life  eternal 
itself  the  lights  of  merits  shall  shine  with  a  distinction,  there 
are  many  mansions  in  the  house  of  the  Father  :  and,  by  this  johni4, 
means,  in  the  penny  not  unlike,  one  lives  not  longer  than  ^• 
another ;  but  in  the  many  mansions,  one  is  honoured  with 
greater  brightness  than  another. 

27.  Therefore  go  on.  Saints  of  God,  boys  and  girls,  males  xxvii. 
and  females,  unmarried  men  and  women ;    go  on  and   per- 
severe unto  the  end.     Praise  more  sweetly  the  Lord,  Whom 
ye  think  on  more  richly  :  hope  more  happily  in  Him,  Wliom 
ye  serve  more  instantly  :  love  more  ardently  Him,  Whom  ye 
please    more    attentively.      With    loins    girded,    and    lamps  Lulcei2, 
burning,  wait   for   the    Lord,  when    He    cometh    from    the^^*^^' 
marriage.     Ye  shall  bring  unto  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb 
a  new  song,  which  ye  shall  sing  on  your  harps.     Not  surely 
such  as  the  whole  earth  singeth,  unto  which  it  is  said,  iSingl's.96,i. 
ntito  the  Lord  a  new  song;  sing  unto  the  Lord,  the  whole 


328        Virgins  alone  \follow  the  Lamb^  every  tahere. 

DE     earth:  but  such  as  no  one  shall  be  able  to  utter  but  you. 

g/ni-  ^^^  ^^^^  there  saw  you  in  the  Apocalypse  a  certain  one 

TATE,  beloved  above  others  by  the  Lamb,  who  had  been  wont  to 

J^g^^'lie  on  His  breast,  and  who  used  to  drink  in,  and  burst'  forth, 

1 '  eruc-  the  Word  of  God  above  wonders  of  heaven.     He  saw  you 

tuabat ' 

ef.  Ps.    twelve  times  twelve  thousand  of  holy  harpers,  of  undefiled 

45,  ].  virginity  in  body,  of  inviolate  truth  in  heart;  and  he  wrote 
of  you,  that  ye  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  shall  go. 
Where  think  we  that  This  Lamb  goeth,  where  no  one  either 
dares  or  is  able  to  follow  save  you  ?  Where  think  we  that 
He  goeth  ?  Into  what  glades  and  meadows }  Where,  I  think, 
the  grass  are  joys;  not  vain  joys  of  this  world,  lying  mad- 
nesses ;  nor  joys  such  as  shall  be  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
itself,  for  the  rest  that  are  not  virgins;  but  distinct  from  the 
portion  of  joys  of  all  the  rest.  Joy  of  the  virgins  of  Christ, 
of  Christ,  in  Christ,  with  Christ,  after  Christ,  through 
Christ,  for  Christ.  The  joys  peculiar  to  the  virgins  of 
Christ,  arc  not  the  same  as  of  such  as  are  not  virgins, 
although  of  Christ,  For  there  are  to  different  persons 
different  joys,  but  to  none  such.  Go  (enter)  into  these, 
follow  the  Lamb,  because  the  Flesh  of  the  Lamb  also  is 
assuredly  virgin.  For  this  He  retained  in  Himself  when 
grown  up,  which  He  took  not  away  from  His  Mother  by 

smerito.  His  conception  and  birth.  Follow  Him,  as  ye  deserve^,  in 
virginity  of  heart  and  flesh,  wheresoever  He  shall  have  gone. 

lPet.2,  For  what  is  it  to  follow,  but  to  imitate .''  Because  Christ  hath 
suffered  /or  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  as  saith  the  Apostle 
Peter,  that  ive  should  follow  His  steps.  Him  each  one 
follows  in  that,  wherein  he  imitates  Him  :  not  so  far  forth 
as  He  is  the  Only  Son  of  God,  by  Whom  all  things  were 
made ;  but  so  far  forth  as,  the  Son  of  Man,  He  set  forth 
in  Himself,  what  behoved  for  us  to  imitate.  And  many 
things  in  Him  are  set  forth  for  all  to  imitate  :  but  virginity 
of  the  flesh  not  for  all ;  for  they  have  not  what  to  do  in 
order  to  be  virgins,  in  whom  it  hath  been  already  brought  to 
pass  that  they  be  not  virgins. 

XXV iii.  28.  Therefore  let  the  rest  of  the  faithful,  who  have  lost 
virginity,  follow  the  Lamb,  not  whithersoever  He  shall  have 
gone,  but  so  far  as  ever  they  shall  have  been  able.  But  they 
are  able  every  where,  save  when  He  walks  in  the  grace  of 


All  may  foUoiv  Christ  in  many  ifiings,  not  all  in  this.  829 
virginity.      Blessed  are   the  poor  in  spirit;   imitate   Him,     de 


VIR- 
GINI- 


Wlio,  whereas  He  was  rich,  was  made  poor  for  your  sakes. 
Blessed  are  the  meek ;   imitate  Him,  Who  said,  Learn  of  tate. 
Me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.     Blessed  are  they  .^_^^q^' 
that    mourn ;    imitate    Him,    Who    wept    over    Jerusalem.  2  Cor. 

8    10 

Blessed  are  they,  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness :  Mat.h, 
imitate  Him,  Who  said.  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him'^- 
Who  sent  Me.    Blessed  are  the  mercifid;  imitate  Him,  Who  4i. 
came  to  the  help  of  him  who  was  wounded  by  robbers,  aud^^  °   ' 
who  lav  in  the  way  half-dead  and  despaired  of.     Blessed  are  Lukeio, 

J  */  i-  Qrt oe 

the  pure  in  heart;  imitate  Him,  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  y^^^  2 
was  guile  found  in   His  mouth.      Blessed  are  the  peace-^^- 
makers;  imitate  Him,  Who  said  on  behalf  of  His  persecutors, 
Father,  forgive   them,  for  they  know   not   what   they  do.  Luke23, 
Blessed  are  they,ivho  suffer  persecution  for  righteousness    ' 
sake;  imitate  Him,  Who  siffered  for  you,  leaving  you  an  \Vet.2, 
example,  that  ye  follow  His  steps.     These  things,  whoso     * 
imitate,  in  these   they  follow  the  Lamb.     But  surely  even 
married  persons  may  go  in  those  steps,  although  not  setting 
their  foot  perfectly  in  the  same  print',  yet  walking  in  the  "forma' 
same  paths. 

29.  But,  lo.  That  Lamb  goeth  b}-  a  Virgin  road,  how  shall  xxix. 
they  go  after  Him,  who  have  lost  what  there  is  no  way  for 
them  to  recover.?  Do  ye,  therefore,  do  ye  go  after  Him, 
His  virgins;  do  ye  thither  also  go  after  Him,  in  that  on  this 
one  account  whithersoever  He  shall  have  gone,  ye  follow 
Him:  for  unto  any  other  gift  whatsoever  of  holiness,  whereby 
to  follow  Him,  we  can  exhort  married  persons,  save  this 
which  they  have  lost  beyond  jjower  of  recovery.  Do  ye, 
therefore,  follow  Him,  by  holding  with  perseverance  what  ye 
have  vowed  with  ardour.  Go  when  ye  can,  that  the  good  of 
virginity  perish  not  from  you,  unto  which  ye  can  do  nothing, 
in  order  that  it  may  return.  The  rest  of  the  multitude  of 
the  faithful  will  see  you,  which  cannot  unto  this  follow  the 
Lamb  ;  it  will  see  you,  it  will  not  envy  you:  and  by  rejoicing 
together  with  you,  what  it  hath  not  in  itself,  it  will  have  in 
you.  For  that  new  song  also,  which  is  your  own,  it  will  not 
be  able  to  utter;  but  it  will  not  be  unable  to  hear,  and  to  be 
delighted  with  your  so  excellent  good :  but  ye,  who  shall 
both  uttei  and  hear,  in  that  what  ye  shall  say,  this  ye  shall 


330  Virginiiij,  not  connnamlcd,  is  a  free  offering. 

DE     liear  of  yourselves,  will  exult   with  greater   happiness,  and 


VIR 

GIN 


J*,  reign  with  greater  joy.     But  they  will  have  no  sorrow  on 

TATE,  account  of  your  greater  joy,  to  whom  this  shall  be  wanting. 

Forsooth  That  Lamb,  Whom  ye  shall  follow  whithersoever 

He  shall  have  gone,  will  not  desert  those  who  cannot  follow 

Him,  where  you  can.     Almighty  is  the  Lamb,  of  Whom  we 

speak.     He   both  will  go  before  you,  and  will  not  depart 

I  Cor.    from  them,  when  God  shall  be  all  in  all.     And  they,  who 

"'     ■   shall  have  less,  shall    not  turn   away  in  dislike  from  you: 

for,  where  thei'e  is  no  envying,  difference  exists  with  concord. 

> '  prsc-  Take  to  you*,  then,  have  trust,  be  strong,  continue,  ye  who 

vow  and  pay  unto   the  Lord  your  God  vows  of  perpetual 

continence,  not  for  the  sake  of  this  pi-esent  world,  but  for  the 

sake  of  the  kingdom  of  Heaven. 

XXX.       30.  Ye  also  who  have  not  yet  made  this  vow,  who  are  able 

Mat.  19,  to  receive  it,  receive  it.     Run  with  perseverance,  that  ye  may 

1  Cor.  9,  obtain.     Take  ye  each  his  sacrifices,  and  enter  ye  into  the 
?f"  ^„  courts  of  the  Lord,  not  of  necessity,  having  power  over  your 

Ps.96,8.  ./  7  o  A 

iCor.7,  own  will.     For  not  as.   Thou  shalt   not   commit   aduUery, 
Ex  20    Thou  shalt  not  kill,  can  it  so  be  said,  Thou  shalt  not  wed. 
13. 14.    Xhe  former  are   demanded,  the  latter  are  offered.     If  the 
latter   are  done,  they   are   praised :  unless   the    former   are 
done,  they  are  condemned.     In  the  former  the  Lord  com- 
mands us  what  is  due ;  but  in  the  latter,  if  ye  shall  have 

2  super-  spent  any  thing  n)ore'-,  on  His  return  He  will  repay  you. 
verftis'  Think  of  (whatever  that  be)  within  His  wall  a  place  named, 
Lukeio,  y^j^^^/^  Ifgiter  than  of  sons  and  of  daughters.  Think  of  an 
§.  48?^  eternal  name  there.  Who  unfolds  of  what  kind  that  name 
Is.56,5.  ^I^^ll  ijgp    Ygj.^  whatever  it  shall  be,  it  shall  be  eternal.     By 

believing  and  hoi)ing  and  loving  this,  ye  have  been  able,  not 
to  shun  marriage,  as  forbidden,  but  to  fly  past  it,  as  allowed, 
xxxi.  31.  Whence  the  greatness  of  this  service  %  unto  the  under- 
^_mune-  ^^i.j^^g.  ^f  which  we  have  according  to  our  strength 
exhorted,  the  more  excellent  and  divine  it  is,  the  more  doth 
it  warn  our  anxiety,  to  say  something  not  only  concerning 
most  glorious  chastity,  but  also  concerning  safest  humility. 
When  then  such  as  make  profession  of  perpetual  chastity, 
comparing  themselves  with  married  persons,  shall  have  dis- 
covered, that,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  the  others  are 
below  both  in  work  and  wages,  both  in  vow  and  reward,  let 


Humility  most  needful  for  holy  Virgins  to  cuUivale.  331 
what  is  written  straightway  come  into  their  mind,  By  how     de 

V  T  R.- 

much  thou  art  yreat,  by  so  much  humble  thyself  in  all  things:    ^1^1. 
and  thou  shall  find  favour   before   God.     The  measure  o{_Z^^^ 
humility  for  each  hath  been  given  from  the  measure  of  hisg^'^^s?" 
greatness  itself:  unto  which  pride  is  fidl  of  danger,  which 
hiyeth  the  greater  wait  against  persons  the  greater  they  be. 
On    this    foUoweth    envying,    as    a   daughter    in    her    train; 
forsooth  pride  straightway   giveth  birth  to  her,  nor  is  she 
ever  without  such  a  daughter  and  companion.     By  which 
two  evils,  that  is,  pride  and  envying,  is  the  devil  (a  devil). 
Therefore  ii  is  against  pride,  the  mother  of  envying,  that  the 
whole  Christian  discipline  chiefly   wars.     For  this  teaches 
humility,  whereby  both    to    gain    and  to  keep   charity;  of 
which  after  that  it  had  been  said,  Charity  envieth  not;    as  1  Cor. 
though  we  were  asking  the  reason,  how  it  comes  to  pass  that     ' 
it  envieth  not,  he  straightway  added,  is  not  puffed  up;  as 
though  he  should  say,  on  this  account  it  hath  not  envying, 
in   that  neither  hath  it  pride.     Therefore   the    Teacher   of 
humility,  Christ,  first  emptied  Himself,  taking  the  form  of  a  Fhi\.  2, 
servant,  made  in  the  likeness  of  men,  and  found  in  fashion  ''  ^" 
as  a  man,  He  humbled  Himself,  made  obedient  even  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross.  But  His  teaching  itself,  how 
carefully  it  suggests  humility,  and  how  earnest  and  instant  it 
is  in   commanding  this,  who  can  easily  unfold,  and  bring- 
together  all  witnesses  for  proof  of  this  matter  ?    This  let  him 
essay  to  do,  or  do,  whosoever  shall  wish  to  write  a  separate 
treatise    on    humility ;    but   of  this    present    work    the    end 
proposed  is  different,   and  it  hath  been  undertaken   on    a 
matter  so   great,  as  that  it  hath  chiefly   to    guard    against 
pride. 

32.  Wherefore  a  few  witnesses,  which  the  Lord  deigns  to  xxxii. 
suggest  to   my  mind,  I   proceed   to  mention,  from  out  the 
teaching  of  Christ  concerning  humility,  such  as  perhaps  may 
be  enough  for  my  purpose.     His  discourse,  the  first  which 
He  delivered  to  His  disciples  at  greater  length,  began  from 
this.     Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  King-  Matt.  6, 
dom  of  Heaven.     And  these  without  all  controversy  we  take^- 
to  be  humble.     The  faith   of  that    Centurion  He    on    this 
account  chiefly  praised,  and  said  that  He  had  not  found  in 
Israel    so    great    faith,  because  he  believed    with   so    great 


332        Humility  especially  commended  hy  our  Lord. 

DE     humility  as   to  say,  /  am  not  ivorthy  that  thou  shouldesl 

Cx/ni-  ^nl^^'  under  my  roof.     Whence  also  Matthew  for  no  other 

•r^TE.  reason  said  that  he  came  unto  Jesus,  (whereas  Luke  most 

6  "lo"  *^' pl^"i^y  signifies  that  he  came  not  unto  Him  himself,  but 

Luke  7,  sent  his  friends,)  save  that  by  his  most  faithful  humility  he 

himself  came   unto   Him    more    than   they  whom  he   sent. 

Ps.  138,  Whence  also  is  that  of  the  Proj^het,  The  Lord  is  very  high, 

and  hath  respect  tinto  things  that  are  lowly:   but  what  are 

very  high  He  noteth  afar  off;  assuredly  as  not  coming  unto 

Mat.  15,  Him.     Whence  also  He  saith  to  that  woman  of  Canaan,  O 
22—28 

woman,  great  is  thy  faith;   he  it  done  unto  thee  as  thou 

wilt ;  whom  above   He  had  called  a   dog,   and  had  made 

answer  that  the  bread  of  the  sons  was  not  to  be  cast  to  her. 

And  this  she  taking  with  humility  had  said.  Even  so,  Lord; 

for  the  dogs  also  eat  of  the  crumhs  which  fall  from  their 

inasters'    table.     And  thus  what  by   continual    crying    she 

'  P'o*"^" obtained  not,  by  humble   confession  she  earned'.     Hence 

ruit 

also  those  two  are  set  forth  praying  in  the  Temple,  the  one  a 
Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  Publican,  for  the  sake  of  those  who 
seem  to  themselves  just  and  despise  the  rest  of  men,  and  the 
confession  of  sins  is  set  before  the  reckoning  up  of  merits. 
And  assuredly  the  Pharisee  was  rendei'ing  thanks  unto  God 
by  reason  of  those  things  wherein  he  was  greatly  self- 
Lukei8,  satisfied.  /  render  thanks  to  Thee,  saith  he,  tJuit  L  am  not 
even  as  the  rest  of  men,  unjust,  extortioners,  adulterers, 
even  as  also  this  publican.  L  fast  twice  in  the  iceek,  L  give 
tithes  of  all  things  ivhatsoever  L  possess.  But  the  Publican 
was  standing  afar  off,  not  daring  to  lift  up  his  eyes  to 
Heai'en,  but  beating  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful 
unto  me  a  sinner.  But  there  follows  the  divine  judgment. 
Verily  L  say  unto  you,  the  Publican  went  down  from  the 
Temple  justified  more  than  that  Pharisee.  Then  the  cause 
is  shewn,  why  this  is  just;  Forasmucli  as  he  who  exalteth 
himself  shall  be  humbled,  and  whoso  humbleth  himself  shall 
he  exalted.  Therefore  it  may  come  to  pass,  that  each  one 
Jamesi,both  shuu  real  evils,  and  reflect  on  real  goods  in  himself, 
^''*  and  render  thanks  for  these  unto  the  Fatlier  of  lights,  from 
WJiom  Cometh  down  every  best  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift, 
and  yet  be  rejected  by  reason  of  the  sin  of  haughtiness,  if 
through  pride,  even  in  his  thought  alone,  which  is  before 


Taught  by  Him,  as  a  chief  lesson,  near  His  Passion.  333 

God,  lie  insult  other  sinners,  and  specially  when  confessing     de 
their  sins  in  prayer,  unto  whom  is  due  not  upbraiding  with   ^^^^^ 
arrogance,  but  pity  without  despair.     What  is  it  that,  when  tate. 
His  disciples  were  questioning  among  themselves,  who  of 
them   should   be   greater.  He  set  a  little  child  before  their 
eyes,  saying.  Unless  ye  shall  be  as  this  child,  ye  shall  wo/Mat.  18, 
enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  ?     Did  He  not  chiefly 
commend  humility,  and  set  in  it  the  desert  of  greatness?     Or 
when  unto  the  sons  of  Zebedee  desiring  to  be  at  His  side  in 
lofty  seats  He  so  made  answer,  as  that  they  should  rather  Mat. 20, 
think   of  having  to  drink  the  Cup  of  His  Passion,  wherein  ^^•22- 
He  humbled  Himself  even  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  phii.  2, 
Cross,  than  with  proud  desire  demand  to  be  preferred  to  the  '^• 
rest;  what  did  He  shew,  save,  that  He  would  be  a  bestower 
of  exaltation  upon  them,  who  should  first  follow  Him  as  a 
teacher  of  humility?     And  now,  in  that,  when  about  to  gojolinis, 
forth  unto  His  Passion,  He  washed  the  feet  of  His  disciples,  ^"~^'- 
and  most  openly  taught  them  to  do  for  their  fellow-disciples 
and  fellow-servants  this,  which  He  their  Lord  and  Master 
had  done  for  them  ;  how  greatly  did  He  commend  humility? 
And  in    order   to  commend  this  He  chose  also  that   time, 
wherein  they  were  looking  on  Him,  as  immediately  about  to 
die,  with  great  longing;  assuredly  about  to  retain  in  their 
memory  this   especially,   which   their  Master,   Whom    they 
were  to  imitate,  had  pointed  out  to  them  as  the  last  thing. 
But  He  did  this  at  that  time,  which  surely  He  could  have 
done  on  other  days  also  before,  wherein  He  had  been  con- 
versant with  them ;  at  which  time  if  it  were  done,  this  same 
would  indeed  be  delivered,  but  certainly  would  not  be  so 
received. 

33.  Whereas,  then,  all  Christians  have  to  guard  humility,  xxxiii. 
forasmuch  as  it  is  from  Christ  that  they  are  called  Christians, 
Whose  Gospel  no   one   considers   with    care,  but   that   he 
discovers  Him  to  be  a  Teacher  of  humility;  specially  is  it 
becoming  that  they  be  followers  and  keepers  of  this  virtue, 
who  excel  the  rest  of  men  in  any  great  good,  in  order  that 
they  may  have  a  great  care  of  that,  which  I  set  down  in  the 
beginning.  By  how  much  tltou  art  great,  by  so  much  htmible  ^cc]ns, 
thyself  in  all  things,  and  thou  shall  Jind  grace  before  God.' ^ 
Wherefore,   because    perpetual    Continence,    and    specially 
virginity,  is  a  great  good  in  the  Saints  of  God,  they  must 


334    Unwilling  continence  no  ground  for  high  ihotighis. 
DE      with  all  watchfulness  beware,  that  it  be  not  corrupted  with 


^Z'-  P"^^^^- 


TATE.       34.  Paul    the    Apostle    censures    evil    unmarried    women, 
curious  and  prating,  and  says  that  tliis  fault  comes  of  idle- 

1  Tim.    ness.     But  at  the  same  time,  sailh  he,  being  idle  they  learn 

12.13.  to  go  about  to  houses:  but  not  only  idle,  but  curious  also 
and  prating,  speaking  ivhat  they  ought  not.  Of  these  he 
had  said  above,  But  younger  widous  avoid ;  for  lohen  they 
have  past  their  time  in  delights,  they  wish  to  wed  in  Christ ; 
having  con  decimal  ion,  in  that  they  have  made  void  their 
first  faith :    that  is,  have  not  continued  in  that,  which  they 

xxxiv.had  vowed  at  the  first.  And  yet  he  saith  not,  tliey  marry, 
but  they  uish  to  marry.  For  many  of  them  are  recalled 
from  marrying,  not  by  love  of  a  noble  purpose,  but  by  fear 
of  open  shame,  which  also  itself  comes  of  pride,  whereby 
persons  fear  to  displease  men  more  tlian  God.  These, 
therefore,  who  wish  to  marry,  and  do  not  marry  on  this 
account,  because  they  cannot  with  impunity,  who  would  do 
better  to  marry  than  to  be  burned,  that  is,  than  to  bo  laid 
wastein  their  very  conscience  by  the  hidden  flame  of  lust,  who 
repent  of  their  profession,  and  who  feel  their  confession  irksome ; 
unless  they  correct  and  set  right  their  heart,  and  by  the  fear 
of  God  again  overcome  their  lust,  must  be  accounted  among 
the  dead;  whether  they  pass  their  time  in  delights,  whence 

1  Tim.  the  Apostle  says,  Btit  she  who  passes  her  time  in  delights, 
living,  is  dead;  or  whether  in  labours  and  fastings,  which 
are  useless  where  there  is  no  correction  of  the  heart,  and 
serve  rather  for  display  than  amendment.  I  do  not,  for  my 
part,  impose  on  such  a  great  regard  for  humility,  in  whom 
pride  itself  is  confounded,  and  bloodstained  by  wound  of 
conscience.  Nor  on  such  as  are  drunken,  or  covetous,  or 
who  are  lying  in  any  other  kind  whatever  of  damnable 
disease,  at  the  same  time  that  they  have  profession  of  bodily- 
continence,  and  through  perverse  manners  are  at  variance 
with  their  own  name,  do  I  impose  this  great  anxiety  about 
pious  humility :  unless  haply  in  these  evils  they  shall  dare 
even  to  make  a  display  of  themselves,  unto  whom  it  is  not 
enough,  that  the  punishments  of  these  are  deferred.  Nor  am 
I  treating  of  these,  in  whom  there  is  a  certain  aim  of  pleasing, 
either  by  more  elegant  dress  than  the  necessity  of  so  great 
profession  demands,  or  by  remarkable  manner  of  binding  the 


'> 


The  best  need  most  caulion  against  pride.  335 

head,  whether  by  bosses  of  hair  swelling  forth,  or  by  cover-     de 


VIR- 

GlNt- 


ings  so  yielding,  that  the  fine  net  work  below  appears:  unto 
these  we  must  give  precepts,  not  as  yet  concerning  humility,  tate. 
but  concerning  chastity  itself,  or  virgin  modesty.  Give  me 
one  who  makes  profession  of  perpetual  continence,  and  who 
is  free  from  these,  and  all  such  faults  and  spots  of  conduct ; 
for  tliis  one  I  fear  pride,  for  this  so  great  good  I  am  in 
alarm  from  the  swelling  of  arrogance.  The  more  there  is  in 
any  one  on  account  of  which  to  be  self  pleased,  the  more  I 
fear,  lest,  by  pleasing  self,  he  please  not  Him,  Who  resisteth  James 
the  proud,  hut  unto  the  liumble  giveth  grace.  ' 

35.  Certainly  we  are  to  contemplate  in  Christ  Himself,  thexxxv. 
chief  instruction    and    pattern    of    virginal    purity.      What 
further  precept  then  concerning  humility  shall  I  give  to  the 
continent,  than  what  He  saith  to  all,  Learn   of  3Ie,in  that  ^at.Wj 
I  am  meek  and  lowly  f)/  heart?  when  He  had  made  mention 
above  of  His  greatness,  and,  wishing  to  shew  this  very  thing, 
how  great  He  was,  and  how  little  He  had  been  made  for  our 
sakes,  saith,  /  con/ess  to  Thee,   0  Father,  Lord  of  heavenu&t.w, 
and  earth,  in  that  Thou  hast  hidden  these  things  from  the'^^~^  ' 
ivise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  little  children. 
Even  so,  O  Father,  in  that  so  it  hath  been  pleasing  before 
Thee.     All  things  have  been  delivered  unto  3Ie  of  My  Father : 
and  no  one  knoweth  the  Son,  save  the  Father,-  and  no  one 
knoiceth  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son 
shall  have  willed  to  reveal  Him.     Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  who 
labour  and  are  burdened,  and  I  xoill  refresh  you.     Take  My 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  Me,  in  that  L  am  meek  and 
lowly   of  heart.      He,    He,  unto  Whom    the    Father   hath 
delivered   all  things,  and  Whom  no   one  knoweth  but  the 
Father,  and  Who  alone,  (and  he,  unto  whom  He  shall  have 
willed  to  reveal  Him,)  knoweth  the  Father,  saith  not,  Learn 
of  Me  to  make  the  world,  or  to  raise  the  dead,  but,  in  that 
I  am    meek  and  lowly  of  heart.     O    saving  teaching !  O 
Teacher  and  Lord  of  mortals,  unto  whom  death  was  pledged 
and  passed  on  in  the  cup  of  pride.  He  would  not  teach  what 
Himself  was  not,  He  would  not  bid  what  Himself  did  not. 
I  see  Thee,  O  good  .Tesu,  with  the  eyes  of  faith,  which  Thou 
hast  opened  for  me,  as  in  an  assembly  of  the  human  race, 
crying  out  and   saying.  Come  unto  Me,  and  learn  of  Me. 


336  Sinners  learn  humility  of  Christ  humbled. 

DE     What,  1  beseech  Thee,  through  Wliom  all  things  were  made, 
GiNi-  ^  ^o^^  *^^  God,  and  the  Same  Who  wast  made  among  all 
'r^'^^-  thmgs,  O  Son  of  Man:  to  learn  what  of  Thee,  come  we  to 
Thee  ?     For  that  I  am  meek,  saith  He,  and  lowly  of  heart. 
Col.2,3,  Is  it  to  this  that  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge 
hidden  in  Thee  are  brought,  that  we  learn  this  of  Thee  as  a 
great  thing,  that  Thou  art  meek  and  lowly  of  heart  ?     Is  it 
so  great  a  thing  to  be  little,  that  it  could  not  at  all  be  learned 
unless  it  wei"e  brought  to  pass  by  Thee,  Who  ait  so  great  ? 
So  indeed  it  is.     For  by  no  other  way  is  there  found  out  rest 
for   the   soul,  save  when   the    unqiuet  swelling  hath    been 
dispersed,  whereby  it  was  great  unto  itself,  when  it  was  not 
sound  inito  Thee. 
xxxvi.      36.  Let  them  hear  Thee,  and  let  them  come  to  Thee,  and 
let  them  learn  of  Thee  to  be  meek  and  lowly,  who  seek  Thy 
Mercy  and  Truth,  by  living  unto  Thee,  unto  Thee,  not  unto 
Lukeis,  themselves.     Let  him  hear  this,  labouring  and  laden,  who  is 
^^'         weighed  down  by  his  burthen,  so  as  not  to  dare  to  lift  uji  his 
eyes  to  heaven,  that  sinner  beating  his  breast,  and  drawing 
Matt.  8,  near  from  afar.     Let  him  hear,  the  centurion,  not  worthy  that 
Lukeio  Thou  shouldest  enter  under  his  roof.  Let  him  hear,  Zaccheus, 
2—8.     chief  of  publicans,  restoring  fourfold  the  gains  of  damnable 
Luke  7,  sins.     Let  her  hear,  the  woman  in  the  city  a  sinner,  by  so 
37.38.  jj-jmj]^  ^\^Q  more  full  of  tears  at  Tliy  feet,  the  more  alien  she 
Mat.2i,had  been  from  7'hy  steps.     Let  them  hear,  the  harlots  and 
^^'        publicans,  who  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  the 
Matt.  9,  Scribes  and  Pharisees.     Let  them  hear,  every  kind  of  such 
^^"  ^^'   ones,  feastings  with  whom  were  cast  in  Thy  teeth  as  a  charge, 
forsooth,   as   though  by  whole   persons   who  sought  not   a 
physician,  whereas  Thou  earnest  not  to  call  the  righteous, 
but  sinners  to  repentance.     All   these,  when  they  are  con- 
verted luito  Thee,  easily  grow  meek,  and  are  humbled  before 
Thee,  mindful  of  their  own  most  unrighteous  life,  and  of  Thy 
Rom.  b,  most  indulgent  mercy,  in  that,  tvhere  sin  hath  abounded, 
^^*        grace  hath  abounded  more. 

37.  Rut  regard  the  troops  of  virgins,  holy  boys  and  girls  : 
this  kind  hath  been  trained  up  in  Thy  Church:  there  for  Thee 
it  hath  been  budding  from  its  mother's  breasts;  for  Thy 
Name  it  hath  loosed  its  tongue  to  speak,  Thy  Name,  as 
through  the  milk  of  its  infancy,  it  hath  had  poured  in  and 


Holy  Virgins  may  learn  humility  from  Christ  Himself.  337 
hath  sucked,  no  one  of  this  number  can  say,  /,  who  before     de 


VIR- 
GINI- 


was   a   blasphemer^  and  persecutor,  and  injurious,   but  I 
obtained  mercy,  in  that  I  did  it  being  ignorant,  in  unbelief,  tate. 
Yea  more,  that,  which  Thou  commandedst  not,  but  only  didst  jg  ""    ' 
set  forth,  for  such  as  would,  to   seize,  saying,  Whoso  can 
receive,  let  him  receive ;  they  have  seized,  they  have  vowed, 
and,  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  not  for  that  Thou 
threatenedst,  but  for  that  Thou  exhortedst,  they  have  made^at.  19, 
themselves  eunuchs.     To  these  cry  out,  let  these  hear  Thee, 
in  that  Thou  art  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.     Let  these,  by  xxxvii. 
how  much  they  are  great,  by  so  much  humble  themselves  in 
all  things,  that  they  may  find  grace  before  Thee.     They  are 
just:  but  they  are  not,  are  they,  such  as  Thou,  justifying  the 
ungodly?  They  are  chaste:  but  them  in  sins  their  mothers  Ps.5i, 5. 
nurtured  in  their  wombs.     They  are  holy,  but  Thou  art  also 
Holy  of  Holies.     They  are  virgins,  but  they  are  not  also  born 
of  virgins.     They  are  wholly  chaste   both  in   spirit  and  in 
flesh:  but  they  are  not  the  Word  made  flesh.     And  yet  let  John  i, 
them   learn,   not    from    those    unto    whom    Thou    forgivest 
sins,  but  from  Thee  Thyself,  The  Lamb  of  God  Who  takestJohn  i, 

•  29 

away  the  sins  of  the  world,  in  that  Thou  art  ?neek  and  lowly    ' 
of  heart. 

38.  I  send  thee  not,  soul  that  art  religiously  chaste,  that 
hast  not  given  the  reins  to  fleshly  appetite  even  so  far  as  to 
allowed  marriage,  that  hast  not  indulged  thy  body  about  to 
depart  even  to  the  begetting  one  to  succeed  thee,  that  hast 
sustained  aloft  thy  earthly  members,  afloat  to  accustom  them 
to  heaven  ;  I  send  thee  not,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  learn 
humilit}^,  unto  publicans  and  sinners,  who  yet  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  before  the  proud :  I  send  thee  not  to 
these:  for  they,  who  have  been  set  free  from  the  gulf  of  un- 
cleanness,  are  unworthy  that  undefiled  virginity  be  sent  to 
them  to  take  pattern  from.  I  send  thee  unto  the  King  of 
Heaven,  unto  Him,  by  Whom  men  were  created,  and  Who 
was  created  among  men  for  the  sake  of  men;  unto  Him,  Who 
is  fair  of  beauty  above  the  sons  of  men,  and  despised  by  the  Ps.45,2. 
sons  of  men  on  behalf  of  the  sons  of  men:  unto  Him,  Who, 
ruling  the  immortal  angels,  disdained  not  to  do  service  unto 
mortals.  Him,  at  any  rate,  not  unrighteousness,  but  charity, 
made  humble;  Charity,  which  rivalleth  not,  is  not  puffed i  Cor. 

2  13,4.5. 


338  Perfect  love  still  fears  to  displease  God. 

_pE     2(p^  seeketh  not  her  own ;  forasmuch  as  Christ  also  pleased 

not  Himself^  but,  as  it  is  written  of  Him,  The  reproaches  of 

^  such  as  reproached  Thee  have  fallen  upon  3Ie.     Go  then. 


VIR- 
GINI 
TA 


i5°"3.  come  unto  Him,  and  learn,  in  that  He  is  meek  and  lowly  of 
heart.  Thou  shalt  not  go  unto  him,  who  dared  not  by  reason 
of  the  bm'den  of  unrighteousness  to  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven, 

John  6,  but  unto  Him,  Who  by  the  weight  of  charity  came  down 
from  heaven.  Thou  shalt  not  go  unto  her,  who  watered  with 
tears  the  feet  of  her  Lord,  seeking  forgiveness  of  heavy  sins  ; 
but  thou  shalt  go  unto  Him,  Who,  granting  forgiveness  of  all 

Johnis,  sins,  washed  the  feet  of  His  own  disciples.  I  know  the 
dignity  of  thy  virginity  ;  I  propose  not  to  thee  to  imitate  the 

Luke  18, publican  humbly  accusing  his  own  faults;  but  I  fear  for  the 

]Q 2^  *'  "^ 

Luke  7  Pharisee  proudly  boasting  of  his  own  merits.     I  say  not,  Be 
38.  47.   ^|JQ^  sucii  as  she,  of  whom  it  was  said,  There  are  forgiven 
unto  her  many  sins,  in  that  she  hath  loved  much ;  but  I  fear 
lest,  as  thinking  that  thou  hast  little  forgiven  to  thee,  thou 
love  little, 
xxxviii.      39,  I  fear,  I  say,  greatly  for  thee,  lest,  when  thou  boastest 
that  thou  wilt  follow  the  Lamb  wheresoever  He  shall  have 
gone,  thou  be  unable  by  reason  of  swelling  pride  to  follow 
Him  through  strait  ways.     It  is  good  for  thee,  O  virgin  soul, 
that  thus,  as  thou  art  a  virgin,  thus  altogether  keeping  in  thy 
heart  that  thou  hast  been  born  again,  keeping  in  thy  flesh 
that  thou  hast  been  born,  thou  yet  conceiv^e  of  the  fear  of 
Is.  26,   the  Lord,  and  give  birth  to  the  spirit  of  salvation.     Fear^ 
Lxx!  iiideed,  there  is  not  in  charity,  but  perfect  charity,  as  it  is 
1  John  written,  casteth  out  fear:  but  fear  of  men,  not  of  God :  fear 
4j  1*^-     of  temporal  evils,  not  of  the  Divine  Judgment  at  the  last. 
Eoin.     Be  not  thou  hifjh-minded,  but  fear.    Love  thou  the  goodness 
11,20.   Qf  Qq(J.   fear  thou  His  severity:   neither  suffers  thee  to  be 
proud.     For  by  loving  you  fear,  lest  you  grievously  offend 
One  Wiio  is  loved  and   loves.      For  what  more   grievous 
offence,  than  that  by  pride  thou  displease  Him,  Who  for  thy 
sake  hath  been  displeasing  to  the  proud  ?    And  where  ought 
PS.-.1 9,9.  there  to  be  more  that  chaste  fear  abidiiig  for  ever  and  ever, 
than  in  thee,  who  hast  no  thought  of  the  things  of  this  world, 
1  Cor. 7,  how  to  please  a  wedded  partner;  but  of  the  things  of  the  Lord, 
how  to  please  the  Lord?    That  other  fear  is  not  in  charity,  but 
this  chaste  fear  quitteth  not  charity.    If  you  love  not,  fear  lest 


VIR- 
GINT- 


Love  fears  not  punishmenf,  nor  iemporal  loss.        339 

yoii  perish  ;  if  you  love,  fear  lest  you  displease.     That  fear    de 
charity  casteth  out,  with  this  it  runneth  within.    The  Apostle 
Paul    also    says.   For  we   have   not   received    the   spirit   of  tate. 
bondage  again  to  fear;  but  ue  have  received  the  spirit  o/'^""'  ^' 
adoption  of  sons,  wherein  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.     I  believe 
that  he  speaks  of  that  fear,  which  had  been  given  in  the  Old 
Testament,  lest  the  temporal   goods  should  be  lost,  which 
God  had  promised  unto  those  not  yet  sons  under  grace,  but 
as  yet  slaves  under  the  law.    There  is  also  the  fear  of  eternal 
fire,  to  serve  God  in  order  to  avoid  which  is  assuredly  not 
yet  of  ])erfect  charity.     For  the  desire  of  the  reward  is  one 
thing,  the  fear  of  punishment  another.     They  are  different 
sayings,   Whither  shall  I  go  away  from    Thy  Spirit,  a«(/P^.  139, 
from  Thy  face  whither  shall  IJlee?  and,  One  thing  I  have  ^^  27  4. 
sought  of  the  Lord,  this  I  will  seek  after;  that  I  may  dwell 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  through  all  the  days  of  my  life, 
that  I  may  consider  the  delight  of  the  Lord,  that  I  be  pro- 
tected in  His  temple:    and,  Turn  not  away  Thy  face  from'^^-'il  ,'^- 
me:    and,  3Iy  soul  longeth  and  fainteih  nnto  the  courts  o/"Ps.84,2. 
the  Lord.     Those  sayings  let  him  have  had,  who  dared  not 
to  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven  ;   and  she  who  was  watering 
with   tears    His    feet,  in    order   to    obtain    pardon   for    her 
grievous  sins ;  but  these  do  thou  have,  who  art  careful  about 
the  things  of  the  Lord,  to  be  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit. 
With  those  sayings  there  companies  fear  which  hath  torment, 
which  perfect  charity  casteth  forth  :  but  with  these  sayings 
there  companies  chaste  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  abideth  for 
ever  and  ever.     And  to  both  kinds  it  must  be  said.  Be  noti^om. 
thou  high-minded,  hut  fear ;  that  man  neither  of  defence  of^^'^*** 
his  sins,  nor  of  presumption  of  righteousness  set  himself  up. 
For  Paul  also  himself,  who  saith.  For  ye  have  not  received^'^^^"'^-^' 
the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear ;  yet,  fear  being  a  com- 
panion of  charity,  saith,  With  fear  and  much  trembling  was\Cof.2, 
I  towards  you:  and  that  saying,  which  I  have  mentioned, ■^' 
that  the  engrafted  wild  olive  tree  be  not  proud  against  the 
broken   branches  of  the   olive   tree,  himself  made   use   of, 
saying,  Be  not   thou  high-minded,  but  fear ;    himself  ad- 
monishing all  the  members  of  Christ  in  general,  saith,  With  Phil.  2, 
fear  and  trembling  work  out  your  own  salvation;  for  itis^^'^^' 
God  Who  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do,  according 

z  2 


340  Danger  of  faUivg  a  reason  for  humUily. 

DE      to  His  good  pleasure ;  that  it  seem  not  to  pertain  unto  the 
ginV-  ^^^  Testament  what  is  written,  Serve  the  Lord  in  fear:,  and 
TATE,  rejoice  unto  Him  ivith  trembling. 
P.s.2,11.      ^Q    p^^^  what  members  of  the  holy  body,  which  is  the 

XXXIX 

Church,  ought  more  to  take  care,  that  upon  them  the  Holy 
Spirit  may  rest,  than  such  as  profess  virginal  holiness  ?     But 
how  doth  He  rest,  where  He  findeth  not  His  own  place  ? 
what  else  than  an  humbled  heart,  to  fill,  not  to  leap  back 
from ;  to  raise  up,  not  to  weigh  down  ?   whereas  it  hath  been 
Is. 66,2. most  plainly  said.  On  ichoni  shall  rest  My  Spirit'^    On  him 
that  is  htmible  and  quiet,  and  tremhles  at  My  laords.    Already 
thou  livest  righteously,  already  thou  livest  piously,  thou  livest 
chastely,  holily,  with  virginal  parity;  as  yet,  however,  thou 
Job  7,1.  livest  here,  and  art  thou  not  humbled  at  hearing,  What,  is  not 
human  life  npon  earth  a  trial?    Doth  it  not  drive  thee  back 
Mat.  18,  from  over-confident  arrogance.  Woe  unto  the  world  because 
''■  of  offences?    Dost  thou  not  tremble,  lest  thou  be  accounted 

5Tat.24,  among    the    many,  whose    love    waxelh.    cold,  because    that 
iniquity  abounds?    Dost  thou  not  smite  thy  breast,"  when 
'  Cor.    thou  hearest,  Wherefore,  whoso  tliinketh  that  lie  standeth, 
'   ~"   let  him  see  to  it  lest  he  fall?    Amid  these  divine  warnings 
and  human  dangers,  do  we  yet  find  it  so  hard  to  persuade 
holy  virgins  to  humility? 
xl.         41.  Or  are  we  indeed  to  believe  that  it  is  for  any  other 
reason,  that  God  suffers  to  be  mixed  up  with  the  number  of 
your  profession,  many,  both  men  and  women,  about  to  fall, 
than  thai  by  the  fall  of  these  your  fear  may  be  increased, 
whereby  to    repress   pride;    which   God    so   hates,   as   that 
against    this    one    thing   The    Highest    humbled    Himself.'' 
Unless  haply,  in  truth,  thou   shalt  therefore  fear  less,  and 
be  more  puffed  up,  so  as  to  love  little  Him,  Who  hath  loved 
Gal.  2,   thee  so  much,  as  to  give  up  Himself  for  thee,  because  He 
^^'         hath  forgiven   thee   little,  living,   forsooth    from   childhood, 
religiously,  piously,  with  pious  chastity,  with  inviolate  vir- 
ginity.    As  though  in  truth  you  ought  not  to  love  with  much 
greater  glow  of  affection  Him,  Who,  whatsoever  things  He 
hath  forgiven  unto  sinners  upon  their  being  turned  to  Him, 
suffered  you  not  to  fall  into  them.     Or  indeed  that  Pharisee, 
Luke  7,  who   therefore   loved  little,   because   he   thought   that  little 
•^^■'^'-   was  forgiven  him,  was  it  for  any  other  reason  that  he  was 


All  sin  Ihal  we  are  spared froin^  in  a  manner  foryiven  us.  341 

blinded  by  this  error,  than  because  being  ignorant  of  the     re 
righteousness  of  God,  and  seeking  to  estabhsh  his  own,  he   ^ini- 
had  not  been  made  subject  unto  the  righteousness  of  God  ?  '^^'^^- 
But  yon,  an  elect  race,  and  among  the   elect  more  elect,  ^g"  3. 
virgin  choirs  that  follow  the  Lamb,  even  you  by  grace  havefv^-^, 
been  saved  through  faith ;  and  this  not  of  yourselves,  but  it 
is  the  gift  of  God:  not  of  works,  lest  haply  any  be  elated. 
For  we  are  His  tcorkmanship,  created  in  Jesus  Christ  in 
good  works,  lohich  God  hath  prepared,  that  in  them  we  may 
walk.     What   therefore,   by    how   much   the    more    ye    are 
adorned  by  His  gifts,  shall  ye  by  so   much  the   less  love 
Him  ?    May  He  Himself  turn  away  so  dreadful  madness ! 
Wherefore  forasmuch   as  the  Truth   has  spoken  the  truth, 
that  he,  unto  whom  little  is  forgiven,  loveth  little ;  do  ye,  in 
order   that   ye  may  love   with  full   glow   of  affection  Him, 
Whom    ye    are    free    to  love,  being  loosened    from    ties  of 
marriage,  account  as  altogether  forgiven  unto  you,  whatever 
of  evil,  by  His  governance,  ye    have    not  committed.     For 
your  eyes  ever  unto  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  He  shall  pluck  ys.  25, 
out  of  the  net  your  feet,  wadi.  Except  tlie   Lord  shall  ^'"''^^  pg' ^2' 
kept   the  city,  in  vain   hath,   lie  watched   who   keepeth   it.  1. 
And  speaking  of  Continence  itself  the  Apostle  says.  But  /^  Cor. 
would  that  all  men  were  as  I  myself;  but  each  one  haili  his  ' 
owti  proper  gift  from  God;  one  in  this  way,  and  another  in 
that   2cay.     Who    therefore   bestoweth    these    gifts  ?    Who 
distributeth  his  own  proper  gifts  unto  each  as  He  will  ?     For- 1  Cor. 
sooth  God,  with  Whom  there  is  not  unrighteousness,  and  by  ^^'  ^^' 

.  Kom.  9, 

this  means  with  what  equity  He  makes  some  ni  this  way,  and  14. 

others  in  that  way,  for  man  to  know  is  either  impossible  or 

altogether  hard:  but  that  with  equity  He  maketh,  it  is  not 

lawful  to   doubt.      IVhaf,  therefore,  hast   thou,  which  thou  1  Cor. 

4   7. 
hast  not  received?    And  by  what  perversity  dost  thou  less   ' 

love  Him,  of  Whom  thou  hast  received  more  ? 

42.  Wherefore  let  this  be  the  first  thought  for  the  putting    xli. 

on  of  humihty,  that  God's  virgin  think  not  that  it  is  of  herself 

that  she  is  such,  and  not  rather  that  this  best  gift  cometh  James 

.  1  17. 
down  from  above,  from  tlie  Father  of  Lights,  with  Whom  is   ' 

no  change  nor  shadow  of  motion.     For  thus  she  will  not 

think  that  little  hath  been  forgiven  her,  so  as  for  her  to  love 

little,  and,  being  ignorant  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  and 


312     The  gifts  ue  praij  for  are  of  God,  not  of  ourselves. 

DE  wishing  lo  establish  her  oun,  not  to  be  made  subject  to  the 
Jj^j^j'.  righteousness  of  God.  In  which  fault  was  that  Simon,  who 
TATg.  was  surpassed  by  the  woman,  unto  whom  many  sins  were 
forgiven,  because  she  loved  much.  But  she  will  have  more 
cautious  and  true  thoughts,  that  we  are  so  to  account  all 
sins  as  though  forgiven,  from  which  God  keeps  us  that  we 
commit  them  not.  Witnesses  are  those  expressions  of  pious 
prayers  in  holy  Scrijitures,  whereby  it  is  shewn,  that  those 
very  things,  which  are  commanded  by  God,  are  not  done 
save  by  His  Gift  and  help,  Who  commands.  For  there  is  a 
falsehood  in  the  asking  for  them,  if  we  could  do  them  with- 
out the  help  of  His  grace.  What  is  there  so  generally  and 
chiefly  charged,  as  obedience  whereby  the  Commandments 
of  God  are  kept  ?  And  yet  we  find  this  wished  for.  Thou, 
saith  he,  hast  charged,  that  T/ti/  commandments  be  greatly 
Ps.\l9,  kept.  Then  it  follows,  O  that  my  ways  uere  directed  to 
~  '  keep  Thy  righteousnesses:  then  shall  I  not  be  confounded, 
whilst  I  look  nnto  all  Thy  commajidments.  That  which  he 
had  set  down  above  that  God  had  commanded,  that  he 
wished  might  of  himself  be  fulfilled.  This  is  done  assuredly, 
that  there  be  not  sin ;  but,  if  there  hath  been  sin,  the  com- 
mand is  that  one  repent ;  lest  by  defence  and  excuse  of  sin 
he  perish  through  pride,  who  hath  done  it,  whilst  he  is 
luiwilling  that  what  he  hath  done  perish  through  repentance. 
This  also  is  asked  of  God,  so  that  it  may  be  understood  that 
it  is  not  done,  save  by  His  grant  from  Whom  it  is  asked. 
Ps.  141,  ^e/j  saith  he,  O  Lord,  a  watch  to  my  mouth,  and  a  door  of 
continence  around  my  lips :  let  not  my  heart  turn  away 
unto  evil  words,  to  make  excuses  in  sins,  with  men  that 
work  unrighteousness.  If,  therefore,  both  obedience,  whereby 
we  keep  His  commandments,  and  repentance  whereby  we 
excuse  not  our  sins,  are  wished  for  and  asked,  it  is  plain 
that,  when  it  is  done,  it  is  by  His  gift  that  it  is  possessed,  by 
His  help  that  it  is  fulfilled,  yet  more  openly  is  it  said  by 
Ps.  37,  reason  of  obedience.  By  the  Lord  the  steps  of  a  man  are 
directed,  and  He  shall  will  His  uay:  and  of  repentance 
2  Tim.  the  Apostle  says,  if  haply  God  may  grant  unto  them  repent- 
ance. 

43.  Concerning  continence  also    itself  hath  it  not  been 
"Wisci.8,  most  openly  said,  And  when  I  knevj  that  no  one  can  be  con- 

21. 


I^yisdom  GoWs  Gi/l.      Virgins  not  to  despise  others.     343 

tinent  unless   God  give  it,  this  also  itself  ivas  a  part  of    de 

wisdom,  to  know  lohose  gift  it  ivas  ?    But  jjerhaps  conti-   ^jj^-j. 

nence  is  the  gift  of  God,  but  wisdom  man  bestows  upon  tate. 

himself,  whereby  to  understand,  that  that  gift  is,  not  his  own,    xUi. 

but  of  God.     Yea,  The  Lord  maketh  wise  the  blind:  and,  ^*'-  ^^^' 

The  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  faithful,  it  giveth  wisdom  icntoPs.]9,7, 

little  ones :  and,  If  any  one  want  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  ^^'^^^^y 

Who  giceth  unto  all  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not,  and  it 

shall  be  given  to  him.     But  it  becometh  virgins  to  be  wise,  Mat.25, 

that  their  lamps  be  not  extinguished.     How  '  wise,'  save  wo^iiom.12, 

having  high  thoughts,  but  consenting  unto  the  lowly.     For  ^^- 

Wisdom  Itself  hath  said  unto  man,  Lo, piety  is  wisdom!    If 28.  ixx' 

therefore  thou  hast  nothing,  which  thou  hast  not  received, 

Be  not  hiqh-minded,  but  fear.     And  love  not  thou  little,  as  Rom. 

11  20 
though   Him   by  Whom  little   hath  been  forgiven  to  thee;     ' 

but,  rather,  love   Him  much,  by  Whom   much  hath  been 

given  to  thee.     For  if  he  loves,  unto  whom  it  hath  been 

given  not  to  repay :  how  much  more  ought  he  to  love,  unto 

whom  it  hath  been  given  to  possess.     For  both,  whosoever 

continues  chaste  from  the  beginning,  is  ruled  by  Him;  and 

whosoever  is  made  chaste  instead  of  unchaste,  is  corrected 

by  Him ;  and  wdiosoever  is  unchaste  even  unto  the  end,  is 

abandoned  by  Him.     But  this  He  can  do  by  secret  counsel, 

by  unrighteous  He  cannot:   and  perhaps  it  is  for  this  end 

that  it  lies  hid,  that  there  ma}'  be  more  fear,  and  less  pride. 

44.  Next  let  not  man,  now  that  he  knoweth  that  by  the  xliii. 

gi'ace  of  God  he  is  what  he   is,  fall  into  another  snare  of 

pride,  so  as  by  lifting  up  himself  for  the  very  grace  of  God 

to  despise  the  rest.     By    which    fault  that  other   Pharisee 

both  gave  thanks  unto  God  for  the   goods   which  he  had, 

and  yet  vaunted  himself  above  the  Publican  confessing  his 

sins.     What  therefore  should  a  virgin  do,  what  should  she 

think,  that  she  vaunt  not  herself  above  those,  men  or  women, 

who  have  not  this  so  great  gift.-^    For  she  ought  not  to  feign 

humility,  but  to  set  it  forth  :  for  the  feigning  of  humility  is 

greater  pride.     Wherefore  Scripture   wishing  to  shew  that 

humility  ought  to  be  true,  after  having  said.  By  how  much  Ecclus. 

thou  art  great,  by  so  much  humble  thyself  in  all  things,  ' 

added  soon  after.  And  thou  shall  find  grace  before  God: 

assuredly  where  one  could  not  humble  one's  self  deceitfully. 


344    Some  Virgins  najif,  some  married  Jit  for  Martyrdom. 

DE         45.  Wherefore  what  shall  we  say  ?  is  there  any  thought 

GiNi-  which  a  virgin  of  God  may  truly  have,  by  reason  of  which 

^ATE.  g}jg  dare  not  to  set  herself  before  a  faithful  woman,  not  only 

^''^  •    a  widow,  but  even  married?     I  say  not  a  reprobate  virgin; 

for   who  knows  not  that  an  obedient  woman  is   to  be   set 

before  a  disobedient  virgin?     But  where  both  are  obedient 

unto  the  commands  of  God,  shall  she  so  tremble  to  prefer 

holy  virginity   even  to  chaste  marriage,  and   continence  to 

wedded   life,   the    fruit    an    hundred-fold    to    go    before    the 

thirty-fold  ?     Nay,  let  her  not  doubt  to  prefer  this  thing  to 

that  thing;  yet  let  not  this  or  that  virgin,  obeying  and  fearing 

God,  dare  to  set  herself  before  this  or  that  woman,  obeying 

and  fearing  God;    otherwise  she  will  not  be  humble,  and  God 

James    resistciJi  ihe  proud!    What,  therefore,  shall  she  have  in  her 
4  6.  ,  .  .  > 

thoughts  ?     Forsooth  the  hidden  gifts  of  God,  which  nought 

save  the  questioning  of  trial  makes  known  to  each,  even  in 

himself.     For,  to  pass  over  the  rest,  whence  doth  a  virgin 

1  Cor.  know,  although  careful  of  the  things  of  the  Lord,  how  to 
'  ■  please  the  Lord,  but  that  haply,  by  reason  of  some  weakness 
of  mind  unknown  to  herself,  she  be  not  as  yet  ripe  for  mar- 
tyrdom, whereas  that  woman,  whom  she  rejoiced  to  set 
herself  before,  may  already  be  able  to  drink  the  Cup  of  the 

Mat.20,  Lord's  humiliation,  which   He  set  before  His   disciples,   to 

22. 

drink  first,  when  enamoured  of  high  place?  Whence,  I  say, 
doth  she  know  but  tliat  she  herself  be  not  as  yet  Thecia,  that 
other  be  already  Crispina''.  Certainly,  unless  there  be 
present  trial,  there  takes  place  no  proof  of  this  gift. 
xlv.  46.  But  this  is  so  great,  that  certain  understand  it  to  be 
the  fruit  an  hundred-fold''.  For  the  authority  of  the  Church 
bears  a  very  conspicuous  witness,  in  which  it  is  known  to  the 
faithful  in  what  place  the  Martyrs,  in  what  place  the  holy 
nuns  deceased,  are  rehearsed  at  the  Sacraments  of  the  Altar", 


*  A  married  woman, who  was  beheaded  conquered.'     Ben. 

in  the  persecution  under  Diocletian  and  •*  St.  Jerome  mentions  this  interpre- 

Maximian  at  Thebeste  in  Africa.    See  tation ;  but  b.  ].  agt.  Jovinian,  and  on 

■•■"er.354,ad  Continentes,n.5.where  he  Mat.  13.  takes  that  which  assigns  the 

says,  '  bethink  you  that  in  the  time  of  hundredfold  to  virginity.     Ben. 

persecution  not  only  Agnes  the  Virgin  <"  Ser.   159.   he  says,  '  Martyrs  are 

was    crowned,  but   likewise   Crispina,  in  such  place  rehearsed  at  the  Altar  of 

the  wife  :  and  perchance,  as  there  is  no  God    as    that   prayer  is  not  made  for 

doubt,  some  of  the  continent  then  failed,  them;  but  for  the  other  deceased  that 

ajid   many  of  the  wedded  fought  and  are  mentioned  prayer  is  made.'     Ben. 


God's  gifts  too  rarious/or  ns  to  measure  exactly.      345 

But  what  tlie  meaning  is  of  that  difference  of  fruitfulness,  let     de 
them  see  to  it,  who  understand  these  things  better  than  we;   0,^1" 
wheiher  the   virginal  life  be   in   fruit   an   hundred-fold,    in  '''^^e- 
sixtv-fold   the    widowed,    in     thirty-fold    the    married ;    or 
whether  the  hundred-fold  fruitfulness  be  ascribed  unto  mar- 
tyrdom, the  sixty-fold  unto  continence,  the  thirty-fold  unto 
marriage ;  or  whether  virginity,  by  the  addition  of  martyr- 
dom, fill  up  the  hundred-fold,  but  when  alone  be  in  sixty-fold, 
but  married  persons  bearing  thirty-fold  arrive  at  sixty-fold, 
in  case  they  shall  be  martyrs:  or  whether,  what  seems  to  me 
more  probable,  forasmuch  as  the  gifts  of  Divine  grace  are 
many,  and  one  is  greater  and  better  than  another,  whence 
the  Apostle  says,  But  emulate  ye  the  belter  gifts;   we  are'  Cor. 
to  understand  that  they  are  more  in  number  than  to  allow  of  "' 
being  distributed  under  those  different  kinds.     In  the  first 
place,  that  we  set  not  widowed  continence  either  as  bearing- 
no  fruit,  or  set  it  but  level  with  the  desert  of  married  charity, 
or  equal  it  unto  virgin  glory  ;  or  think  that  the  Crown  of 
Martyrdom,   either   established  in  habit  of  mind,   although 
proof  of  trial  be  wanting,  or  in  actual  making  trial  of  suffer- 
ing, be    added    unto    either    one  of  those  these  chastities, 
without  any  increase  of  fruitfulness.     Next,  when  we  set  it 
dowai  that  many  men  and  women  so  keep  virginal  chastity, 
as  that  yet  they  do  not  the  things  which  the  Lord  saitb,  //Mat. 19, 
thou  wiliest  to  be  perfect,  go,  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and^^' 
give  Kiito  the  poor,  and  tliou  shall  have  treasure  in  Heathen: 
and  come,  follow    me ;    and  dare   not   unite  themselves  to 
those  dwelling  together,  among  whom  no  one  saith  that  any  Acts  2, 
thing  is  his  own,  but  all  things  are  unto  them  common;  do^"*'^'^^' 
we  think  that  there  is  no  addition  of  fruitfulness  unto  the 
virgins  of  God,  when  they  do  this }    or  that  the  virgins  of 
God   are   without   any    fruit,    although    they    do   not   this .? 
Therefore    there    are    many    gifts,    and    some  brighter  and 
higher  than  others,  each  than  each.     And  at  times  one   is 
fruitful  in  fewer  gifts,  but  better ;  another  in  lower  gifts,  but 
more.     And  in  what  manner  they  be  either  made  equal  one 
to  another,  or  distinguished  one  from  another,  in  receiving 
eternal    honours,  who    of  men   would    dare   to  pronounce? 
whereas  yet  it  is  plain  both  that  those  differences  are  many, 
and  that  the  better  are  profitable  not  for  the  present  time, 


346    The  thought  of  Martyrdom  may  keep  Viryins  humhle. 
DE     but  for  eternity.     But  I  judge  that  the  Lord  willed  to  make 


VIR- 
GINI- 


mention  of  three  differences  of  fruitfulness,  the  rest  He  left 
TATE,  to  such  as  understand.  For  also  another  Evangelist  hath 
Mat.i3,^g^^g  mention  only  of  the  hundred-fold:  we  are  not,  there- 
Luke  8,  fore,  are  we,  to  think  that  he  either  rejected,  or  knew  not  of, 
^"  the  other  two,  but  rather  that  he  left  them  to  be  understood  ? 

47.  But,    as    I   had  begun   to  say,  whether  the  fruit  an 
hundred-fold  be  virginity  dedicated  to  God,  or  whether  we 
are  to  understand  that  interval  of  fruitfulness  in  some  other 
way,  either  such  as  we  have  made  mention  of,  or  such  as  we 
have  not  made  mention  of;  yet  no  one,  as  I  suppose,  will 
have  dared  to  ])refer  virginity  to  martyrdom,  and  no  one  will 
have  doubted  that  this  latter  gift  is  hidden,  if  trial  to  test  it 
xlvii,  be  wanting.     A  virgin,  therefore,  hath  a  subject  for  thought, 
such  as  may  be  of  profit  to  her  for  the  keeping  of  humility, 
that  she  violate  not  that  charity,  which  is  above   all  gifts, 
without  which  assuredly  whatever  other  gifts  she  shall  have 
had,   whether  few  or  many,  whether  great  or  small,  she  is 
nothing.     She  hath,  I  say,  a  subject  for  thought,  that  she  be 
not  puffed  up,  that  she  rival  not;  forsooth  that  she  so  make 
profession  that  the  virginal  good  is  much  greater  and  better 
than  the  married  good,  as  that  yet  she  know  not  whether  this 
or  that  married  woman   be   not   already  able  to  suffer  for 
Christ,  but  herself  as  yet  unable,  and  she  herein  spared,  that 
1  Cor.    her  weakness  is  not  put  to  the  question  by  trial.     For  God, 
^'^'  ^^-   saith  the  Apostle,  is  faithful.  Who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be 
tried  above  what  ye  are  able;  but  will  make  witli  the  trial 
a  way  out,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it.     Perhaps,  there- 
fore, those  men   or  women  keeping  a    way  of  married  life 
praiseworthy  in  its  kind,  are  already  able,  against  an  enemy 
forcing  to   unrighteousness,   to   contend  even  by  tearing  in 
pieces  of  bowels,  and  shedding  of  blood;  but  these  men  or 
women,  continent  from   childhood,  and   making  themselves 
eunuchs  for  the  sake  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  still  are  not 
as  yet  able  to  endure  such,  either  for  righteousness,  or  for 
chastity  itself.     For  it  is  one  thing,  for  truth  and  an  holy 
purpose,  not  to  consent  unto  one  who  would  persuade  and 
flatter,   but   another   thing   not  to  yield  even   to   one   who 
tortures    and   strikes.     These   lie   hid   in    the    powers    and 
strength  of  souls,  by  trial  they  are  unfolded,  by  actual  essay 


All  sinners,  .since  all  taiighl  to  ask  forgiveness.       347 

they    come   forth.     In    order,    therefore,  that   each  be  uot     de 
puffed  up  by  reason  of  that,  which  he  sees  clearly  that  he   albi- 
can do,  let  him  humbly  consider  that  he  knows  not  that  there  ^^te. 
is  perchance  something  more  excellent  which  he  cannot  do, 
but  that  some,  who  neither  have  nor  profess  that  of  which  he 
is  lawfully  self-conscious,  are  able  to  do  this,  which  he  him- 
self cannot  do.     Thus  will  be  kept,  not  by  feigned  but  by 

true    humility,    In    honour    nreveniing   one    another,   and  Rom.  12, 

10 
esteeming  each  the  other  higher  than  himself.  Phil.  2 

48.  What  now  shall  I  say  concerning  the  very  carefulness  3- 

and  watchfulness  against  sin  ?      Who  shall  boast  that  he  hath  ^'^'^"• 

a  chaste  heart?  or  loho  shall  boast  that  he  is  clean  from  20,  Q. 

sin  f     Holy  virginity  is  indeed  inviolate  from  the  mother's 

womb  ;  but  no  one,  saith  he,  is  clean  in  Thy  sight,  not  even 

the  iiif ant  IV hose  life  is  of  one  day  upon  the  earth.     There  Job  25, 

is  kept  also  in    faith    inviolate    a  certain  vii-ginal  chastity,   ' 

whereby  the  Church  is  joined  as  a  chaste  virgin  unto  One 

Husband  :  but  That  One  Husband  hath  taught,  not  only  the 

faithful  who  are  virgin  in  mind  and  body,  but  all  Christians 

altogether,  from  spiritual  even   unto   carnal,  from  Apostles 

even  unto  the  last  penitents,  as  though  from   the  height  of  Mat.24, 

heaven  even  unto  the  bounds  of  it,  to  pray,  and  in  the  prayer 

itself  hath  admonished  them  to  say,  And  forgive  us  our  debts.  Matt.  6, 

even  as  we  also  forgive  our  debtors  :  where,  by  this  which  we 

seek,  He  shews  what  also  we  should  remember  that  we  are. 

For  neither  on  behalf  of  those  debts,  which  for  our  whole  past 

life  we  trust  have  been  forgiven  unto  us  in  Baptism  through 

His  peace,  hath  He  charged  us  to  pray,  saying.  And  forgive 

us  our  debts,  even  as  we  also  forgive  our  debtors  :  otherwise 

this  were  a  prayer  which  Catechumens  rather  ought  to  pray 

up  to  the  lime  of  Baptism  ;  but  whereas  it  is  what  baptized 

persons  pray,  rulers   and  people,  pastors  and  flocks  ;  it  is 

sufficiently  shewn  that  in  this  life,  the  whole  of  which  is  Job 7,1. 

a  trial,  no  one  ought  to  boast  himself  as  though  free  from  all 

sins. 

49.  Wherefore    also    the   virgins  of  God   without   blame  xlix. 

indeed,  folio Lo  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  shall  have  gone, 

both  the  cleansing  of  sins  being  perfected,  and  virginity  being 

kept,  which,  were  it  lost,  could  not  return:  but,  because  that 

same  Apocalypse  itself,  wherein  such  unto  one  such  were 


348  Such  sin  its  all  probably  liave,  in  uJioni  easily  pardoned. 
DE      revealed,  in  this  also  praises  them,  that  in  their  mouth  there 

VIR-  . 

GiNi-  i^as  not  foiDid  a  lie:  let  them  remember  in  this  also   to  be 
TATE,  true,  that  they  dare  not  say  that  they  have  not  sin.     Forsooth 


4.Y.     ''^^^  same  John,  who  saw  that,  hath  said  this,  If  we  shall  have 
iJohn], said  that  we  have  not  sin,  we  deceive  our  own  selves,  and 

g in  '  ' 

the  truth  is  not  in  its ;  but  if  we  shall  have  confessed  our 
faidts,  He  is  faithful  and  Just,  so  as  to  forgive  us  our  sins, 
and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness.  But  if  we  shall 
have  said  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  shall  make  Him  a 
liar,  and  His  word  shall  not  be  in  its.  'I'his  surely  is  not 
said  unto  these  or  those,  but  unto  all  Christians,  wherein 
virgins  also  ought  to  recognise  themselves.  For  thus  they 
shall  be  without  a  lie,  such  as  in  the  Apocalypse  Ihey 
appeared.  And  by  this  means  so  long  as  there  is  not  as  yet 
perfection  in  heavenly  height,  confession  in  lowliness  maketh 
them  without  blame. 

50.  But,  again,  lest  by  occasion  of  this  sentence,  any  one 
should  sin  with  deadly  security,  and  should  allow  himself  to 
be  carried  away,  as  though  his  sins  were  soon  by  easy  con- 

Jjohn2,fession  to  be  blotted  out,  he  straightway  added,  My  little 
children,  these  things  have  I  written  unto  you,  that  ye  sin 
not ;  and,  if  one  shall  have  sinned,  we  have  an  Advocate  with 
the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,  and  Himself  is  a 
propitiation  of  our  sins.  Let  no  oue  therefore  depart  from 
sin  as  though  about  to  return  to  it,  nor  bind  himself  as  it 
were  by  compact  of  alliance  of  this  kind  with  unrighteousness, 
1.  so  as  to  take  delight  rather  to  confess  it  than  to  shun  it.  But, 
forasmuch  as  even  upon  such  as  are  busy  and  on  the  watch 
not  to  sin,  there  creep  by  stealth,  in  a  certain  way,  from  human 
weakness,  sins,  however  small,  however  few,  yet  not  none  ; 
these  same  themselves  become  great  and  grievous,  in  case 
pride  shall  have  added  to  them  increase  and  weight :  but  by 
the  Priest,  Whom  we  have  in  the  heavens,  if  by  pious 
humility  they  be  destroyed,  they  are  with  all  ease  cleansed, 

51.  But  I  contend  not  with  those,  who  assert  that  a  man 
can  in  this  life  live  without  any  sin:  I  contend  not,  I  gainsay 
not.     For  perhaps  we   take  measure   of  the  great  from  out 

2  Cor.    our  own  misery,  and,  comparing  ourselves  with   ourselves, 

'     ■  understand  not.     One  tiling  I  know,  that  those  great  ones, 

such  as  we  are  not,  such  as  we  have  not  as  yet  made  proof 


HuniiUty  most  ueedful  to  those  ir/io  icoitld  follow  Christ.  349 

of,  bv  how  much  they  are  great,  by  so  much  humble  them-     de 
selves  in  all  things,  •  that  they  may  find  grace  before  God.   J,!^!^' 
For,  let  them  be  how  great    soever    they  will,  there  is  no  t^te. 
servant  greater  than  his  Lord,  nor  disciple  greater  than  his  ^^}^^'^' 
master.     And  assuredly   He  is  the  Lord,  Who  saith,  Allua.\..u, 
things  have  been  delivered  unto  Me  of  My  Father ;  and  He^'*  ""* 
is  the  Master,  Who  saith.  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  who  labour, 
and  learn  of  3Ie ;  and  yet  what  learn  we?    In   that  I  am 
meek.^  saith  He,  and  lowly  of  heart. 

52.  Here  some  one  will  say.  This  is  now  not  to  write  of  li. 
virginity,  but  of  himiility.  As  though  truly  it  were  any  kind 
of  virginity,  and  not  that  which  is  after  God,  which  we  had 
undertaken  to  set  forth.  And  this  good,  by  how  much  I  see 
it  to  be  great,  by  so  much  I  fear  for  it,  lest  it  be  lost,  the  thief 
pride.  Therefore  there  is  none  that  guardeth  the  virginal 
good,  save  God  Himself  Who  gave  it:  and  God  is  Charity,  i  John 
The  Guardian  therefore  of  virginity  is  Charity  :  but  the  place  ■*'^' 
of  this  Guardian  is  humility.  There  forsooth  He  dwelleth. 
Who  said,  that  on  the  lowly  and  quiet,  and  that  trembleth  at  1^.(30,2. 
His  words.  His  Spirit  resteth.  What,  therefore,  have  I  done 
foreign  from  my  purpose,  if  wishing  the  good,  which  I  have 
praised,  to  be  more  securely  guarded,  1  have  taken  care  also 
to  prepare  a  place  for  the  Guardian  ?  For  I  speak  with  con- 
fidence, nor  have  I  any  fear  lest  they  be  angry  with  me, 
whom  I  admonish  with  care  to  fear  for  themselves  together 
with  me.  More  easily  do  follow  the  Lamb,  although  not 
whithersoever  He  shall  have  gone,  yet  so  far  as  they  shall 
have  had  power,  married  persons  who  are  humble,  than 
virgius  who  are  proud.  For  how  doth  one  follow  Him, 
unto  Whom  one  wills  not  to  approach  ?  or  how  doth  one 
approach  Him,  unto  Whom  one  comes  not  to  learn,  in  that 
I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart  ?  Wherefore  those  the  Lamb 
leadeth  following  whithersoever  He  shall  have  gone,  in 
whom  first  Himself  shall  have  found  where  to  lay  His  Head. 
For  also  a  certain  proud  and  crafty  person  had  said  to  Him, 
Lord,  I  will  follow   Thee  whithersoever   Thou  shalt  /^ai^eMatt.s, 

19  20 

gone;  to  whom  He  made  answer,  Foxes  have  dens,  and 
fowls  of  heaven  nests :  but  the  Son  of  Man  hath  not  where 
to  lay  His  Head.  By  the  term  of  foxes  He  reproved  wily 
craftiness,  and  by  the  name  of  birds  puffed-up  arrogance, 


9. 


350       Encouragement  and  cautio)i  for  pious  Virgins. 

^^     wherein  He  found  not  pious  humility  to  rest  in.     And  by 
GiNi-  this  no  where  at  all  did  he  follow  the  Lord,  who  had  promised 

££££:_  that  he  would  follow  Hira,  not  unto  a  certain  point  of 
progress,  but  altogether  whithersoever  He  should  have  gone, 
lii.  53.  Wherefore  this  do  ye,  virgins  of  God,  this  do  ye: 
follow  ye  the  Lamb,  whithersoever  He  shall  have  gone.  But 
first  come  unto  Him,  Whom  ye  are  to  follow,  and  learn,  in 
that  He  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.  Come  ye  in  lowly  wise 
unto  the  Lowly,  if  ye  love:  and  depart  not  from  Him,  lest 
ye  fall.     For  whoso  fears  to  depart  from  Him  asks  and  says, 

Ps.  36,  Let  there  not  come  to  me  foot  of  pride.  Go  on  in  the  way 
of  loftiness  with  the  foot  of  lowliness;  Himself  lifteth  up  such 
as  follow  in  lowly  wise,  Who  thought  it  not  a  trouble  to  come 
down  unto  such  as  lay  low.     Commit  ye  His  gifts  unto  Him 

Ps.  59,  to  keep,  '  guard  ye  your  strength  unto  Hira.'  Whatever  of 
evil  through  His  guardianship  ye  commit  not,  account  as 
forgiven  unto  you  by  Him:  lest,  thinking  that  you  have 
little  forgiven  unto  you,  ye  love  little,  and  with  ruinous 
boasting  despise  the  publicans  beating  their  breasts.  Con- 
cerning that  strength  of  yours  which  hath  been  tried  beware, 
that  ye  be  not  puffed  up,  because  ye  have  been  able  to  bear 
something:  but  concerning  that  which  hath  been  untried, 
pray,  that  ye  be  not  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  to  bear. 
Think  that  some  are  superior  to  you  in  secret,  than  whom  ye 
are  openly  better.  When  the  good  things  of  others,  haply 
unknown  to  you,  are  kindly  believed  by  you,  your  own  that 
are  known  to  you  are  not  lessened  by  comparison,  but 
strengthened  by  love  :  and  what  haply  as  yet  are  wanting, 
are  by  so  much  the  more  easily  given,  by  how  much  they  are 
the  more  humbly  desired.  Let  such  among  your  number 
as  persevere  afford  to  you  an  example:  but  let  such  as  fall 
increase  yoMr  fear.  Love  the  one  that  ye  may  imitate  it ;  « 
mourn  over  the  other,  that  ye  be  not  puffed  up.  Do  not  ye 
establish  your  own  righteousness ;  submit  yourselves  unto 
God  Who  justifies  you.  Pardon  the  sins  of  others,  pray  for 
your  own  :  future  sins  shun  by  watching,  past  sins  blot  out 
by  confessing, 
liii.  54.  Lo,  already  ye  are  such,  as  that  in  the  rest  of  your 
conduct  also  ye  correspond  with  the  virginity  which  ye  have 
professed  and  kept.      Lo,  already  not  only   do  ye  abstain 


Hobj  Virgins  must  spend  their  love  on  Christ.       35! 

from  murders,  devilish  sacrifices  and  abominations,  thefts,     »e 

y  I R- 
rapines,  frauds,  peijuries,  drunkennesses,  and  all  luxury  and   gini- 

avarice,  hatreds,  emulations,  impieties,   cruelties ;  Lut  even  '^^'^^- 
those  things,  which  either  are,  or  are  thought,  lighter,  are 
not  found  nor  arise  among  you  :  not  bold  face,  not  wander- 
ing  eyes,   not   unbridled    tongue,   not   petulant    laugh,  not 
scurrilous  jest,  not  unbecoming  mien,  not  swelling  or  loose 
gait;  already  ye  render  not  evil  for  evil,  nor  curse  for  curse;  i  Pet, 
already,  lastly,  ye   fulfil  that  measure  of  love,  that  ye  lay  j'^; 
down  your  lives  for  your  brethren.     Lo,  already  ye  are  such,  16. 
because  also  such  ye  ought  to  be.     These,  being  added  to 
virginity,  set  forth  an  angelic  life  unto  men,  and  the  ways 
of  heaven  unto  the  earth.     But,  by  how  much  ye  are  great, 
whosoever  of  you  are  so  great,  '  by  so  much  humble  your- 
selves in  all   things,  that  ye  may   find  grace  before   God,' 
that  He  resist  you  not  as  proud,  that  He  humble  you  not  as 
lifting  up  yourselves,  that  He  lead  you  not  through  straits 
as  being  puffed  up  :  although  anxiety  be  unnecessary,  that, 
where  Charity  glows,  humility  be  not  wanting. 

55.  If,  therefore,  ye  despise  marriages  of  sons  of  men,  from    liv, 
which  to  beget  sons  of  men,  love  ye  with  your  whole  heart 
Him,  Who  is  fair  of  form  above  the  sons  of  men;  ye  have 
leisure ;  your  heart  is  free  from  marriage  bonds.     Gaze  on 

the  Beauty  of  your  Lover:  think  of  Him  equal  to  the  Father, 
made  subject  also  to  His  Mother:  ruling  even  in  the  heavens, 
and  serving  upon  the  earth  :  creating  all  things,  created 
among  all  things.  That  very  thing,  wdiich  in  Him  the  proud 
mock  at,  gaze  on,  how  fair  it  is :  with  inward  eyes  gaze  on 
the  wounds  of  Him  hanging,  the  scars  of  Him  rising  again, 
the  blood  of  Him  dying,  the  price  of  him  that  believes,  the 
gain  of  Him  that  redeems.  Consider  of  how  great  value  Iv. 
these  are,  weigh  them  in  the  scales  of  Charity;  and  whatever 
of  love  ye  had  to  expend  upon  your  marriages,  pay  back  to 
Him. 

56.  It  is  well  that  He  seeks  your  beanty  within,  where  He  John  i, 
hath  given  unto  you  power  to  become  daughters  of  God :  He 
seeks  not  of  you  a  fair  flesh,  but  fair  conduct,  whereby  to 
bridle  also  the  flesh.     He  is  not  one  unto  Whom  any  one 

can  lie  concerning  you,  and  make  Him  rage  through  jealousy. 
See  with  how  great  security  ye  love  Him,  Whom  ye  fear  not 


352       Christ  the  best  Husband.     HitmiUtij  of  Saints. 

^^     to  offend  by  false  suspicions.     Husband  and  wife  love  each 
GiNi-  other,  in  that  they  see  each  other:  and  what  they  see  nol, 

J^"^^-  that  they  fear  between  themselves :  nor  have  they  sure 
delight  in  what  is  visible,  whilst  in  what  is  concealed  they 
usually  suspect  what  is  not.  Ye  in  Him,  Whom  ye  see  not 
with  the  eyes,  and  behold  by  faith,  neither  have  what  is  real 
to  blame,  nor  fear  lest  haply  ye  offend  Him  by  what  is  false. 
If  therefore  ye  should  owe  great  love  to  husbands,  Him,  for 
Whose  sake  ye  would  not  have  husbands,  how  greatly  ouglit 
ye  to  love  .?  Let  Him  be  fixed  in  your  whole  heart,  Who 
for  you  was  fixed  on  the  Cross  :  let  Him  possess  in  your 
soul  all  that,  whatever  it  be,  that  ye  would  not  have  occupied 
by  marriage.  It  is  not  lawfid  for  you  to  love  little  Him,  for 
Whose  sake  ye  have  not  loved  even  what  were  lawful.  So 
loving  Him  Who  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  I  have  no  fear 
for  you  of  pride. 
Ivi.  57.  Thus,  after  our  small  measure,  we  have  spoken  enough 
both  of  sanctity,  whereby  ye  are  properly  called  '  sancti- 
moniales,'  and  of  humility,  whereby  whatever  great  narpe  ye 
bear  is  kept.  But  more  worthily  let  those  Three  Children, 
unto  whom  He,  Whom  they  loved  with  full  glow  of  heart, 
afforded  refreshing  in  the  fire,  admonish  you  concerning  this 
our  little  work,  much  more  shortly  indeed  in  number  of  words, 
but  much  more  greatly  in  weight  of  authority,  in  the  Hymn 
wherein  God  is  honoured  by  them.  For  joining  humility 
unto  holiness  in  such  as  praise  God,  they  have  most  plainly 
taught,  that  each,  by  how  much  he  make  any  more  holy  pro- 
fession, by  so  much  do  beware  that  he  be  not  deceived  by 
pride.  Wherefore  do  ye  also  praise  Him,  Wlio  grants  unto 
you,  that  in  the  midst  of  the  flames  of  this  world,  althoiiffh 
ye  be  not  joined  in  marriage,  yet  ye  be  not  burned  :  and 

Song  of  praying  also  for  us,  Bless  ye  the  Lord,  ye  holy  and  humble 

B.o\T    ^^^^^  '^•f  heart;  utter  an  hymn,  und  exalt  Him  above  all  for 

Chiidr.  ever. 

65. 


S.     AUGUSTINE 


ON 


THE     GOOD     OF     WIDOWHOOD. 


This  work  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Retractations,  probably  because  it  is  a 
letter,  and  as  such  it  is  reckoned  by  Possidius,  cap.  7.  It  is  also  marked 
as  St.  Augustine's  by  its  references  to  his  other  works,  De  Bono  Conju- 
gali  &c.  cap.  15.  Ep.  to  Proba,  cap.  23.  The  dale  is  marked  by  the 
recent  consecration  of  Demetrias,  which  was  in  413.  The  admonition 
for  which  he  is  thanked  by  Juliana,  Ep.  188,  may  be  that  against 
Pelagianism  in  this  work. 

An  objection  has  been  raised  from  its  disagreement  with  the  fourth  Council 
of  Carthage,  an.  398.  can.  104,  which  excommunicates  widows  who  marry 
again  after  consecration,  and  pronounces  them  guilty  of  adultery,  whereas 
in  cap.  10  and  11,  the  opinion  that  such  marriages  are  no  marriages,  and 
that  they  ought  to  return  to  continence,  is  refuted.  The  two,  however, 
are  not  wholly  irreconcileable,  as  there  may  be  a  guilt  similar  to  that  of 
adultery  incurred,  and  it  may  be  visited  with  a  censure  in  the  form  of 
excommunication,  and  yet  the  marriage  may  remain  valid.  The  16th 
Canon  of  Chalcedon  imposes  such  a  penalty,  with  power  to  the  Bishop  to 
relax  it.     Ab.from  Ben. 


Augustine  the  Bishop,  servant  of  Christ,  and  of  the 
servants  of  Christ,  unto  the  rehgious  handmaiden  of  God, 
Juliana,  in  the  Lord  of  lords  health. 

Not  any  longer  to  be  in  debt  of  my  promise  to  your 
request  and  love  in  Christ,  I  have  seized  the  occasion  as 
I  could,  amid  other  my  very  pressing  engagements,  to  write 
to  you  somewhat  concerning  the  profession  of  holy  widow- 
hood, forasmuch  as,  when  I  was  present,  you  laded  me  with 

A  a 


V 


354     Various  cases  comprehended  in  Scriptural  Teaching. 

DE      entreaty,  and,  when  I  had  not  been  able  to  deny  you  this,  you 
iDui-  often  by  letters  demanded  my  promise.    And  in  this  work  of 


^■^Tis.  ours,  when  you  shall  find  in  reading  that  some  things  pertain 
not  at  all  unto  your  own  person,  or  unto  the  person  of  you, 
who  are  living  together  in  Christ,  nor  are  strictly  necessary 
to  give  counsel  unto  your  life,  it  will  be  your  duty  not  on  this 
account  to  judge  them  superfluous.  Forsooth  this  letter, 
although  it  be  addressed  to  you,  was  not  to  be  written  for 
you  alone ;  but  certainly  it  was  a  matter  for  us  not  to  neglect, 
that  it  should  profit  others  also  through  your  means.  What- 
soever, therefore,  you  shall  find  here,  such  as  either  hath 
been  at  no  time  necessary  for  you,  or  is  not  so  now,  and 
which  yet  you  shall  perceive  to  be  necessary  for  others, 
grieve  not  either  to  possess  or  to  lend  to  read  ;  that  your 
charity  also  may  be  the  profit  of  others. 

2.  Whei'eas^  therefore,  in  every  question,  which  relates  to 
life  and  conduct,  not  only  teaching,  but  exhortation  also  is 
necessary  ;    in  order  that  by  teaching  we  may  know  what  is 
to  be  done,  and  by  exhortation  may  be  incited  not  to  think  it 
irksome  to  do  what  we  already  know  is  to  be  done  ;    what 
more  can  I  teach  you,  than  what  we  read  in  the  Apostle  ? 
For  holy  Scripture  setteth  a  rule  to  our  teaching,  that  we  dare 
so  V.     not  '  be  wise  more  than  it  behoveth  to  be   wise ;'   but  be 
Eom.i2,  wise,  as  himself  saith,  unto    soberness,  according   as  unto 
eacli   God  hath  allotted  the  measure  of  faith.     Be    it   not 
therefore  for  me  to  teach  you  any  other  thing,  save  to  ex- 
pound to  you  the  words  of  the  Teacher,  and  to  treat  of  them 
as  the  Lord  shall  have  given  to  me. 
ii.  .3.  Therefore  (thus)  saith  the  Apostle,  the  teacher  of  the 

re7s,rtus.  Qeutiles,  the  vessel  of  election,  But  I  say  unto  the  unmarried 
s.        '  and  the  widows,  that  it  is  good  for  them,  if  they  shall  have 
so    continued,  even  as  I  also.     These  words  are  to  be   so 
understood,  as  that  we  think  not  that  widows  ought  not  to  be 
called  unmarried,  in  that  they  seem  to  have  made  trial  of 
marriage  :    for  by  the  name  of  unmarried  women  he  means 
those,  vvho   are  not  now  bound  by  marriage,  whether  they 
have  been,  or  whether  they  have  not  been  so.     And  this  in 
w  yuvfi     another  place  he  opens,  where  he  says.  Divided  is  a  ivoman 
TaJ'ws  nnmarried  and  a  virgin.     Assuredly  when  he  adds  a  virgin 
also,    what   would    he    have    understood   by   an   unmarried 


BONO 
IDUI- 


Widows  named  as  ^unmarried.''    Marriage  Faith  good.   855 

woman,  but  a  widow  ?    Whence  also,  in  what  follows,  under     de 
the    one    terra    unmarried   he    embraces    both    professions,  y 
saying,  She  who  is  unmarried  is  careful  of  the  things  of  the  tatis. 
Lord,  hoiv  to  please  the  Lord:    hut  she  who  is  married  is\  "^J' 
careful  of  the  things  of  the  tvorld,  how  to  please  her  husband. 
Certainly  by  the  unmarried  he  would  have  understood,  not 
only  her  who  hath  never  married,  but  her  also,  who,  being 
by   widowhood    set   free  from  the  bond    of  marriage,  hath 
ceased  to  be  married  ;  for  on  this  account  also  he  calleth  not 
married,  save  her,  who  hath  an  husband  ;    not  her  also,  who 
hath    had,  and   hath    not.     Wherefore  every  widow  is  un- 
maiTied  ;    but,  because   not   every  unmarried    woman   is  a 
widow,  for  there  are  virgins  also  ;   therefore  he  hath  here  set 
both,  where  he  says.  But  I  sag  unto  the  unmariied  and  the 
widows ;    as  if  he  should  say.  What  I  say   unto    the    un- 
manied,  I  say  not  unto  them  alone,  who  are   virgins,  but 
unto  them  also  who  are  widows  ;    that  it  is  good  for  them,  i  Cor. 
if  they  shall  have  so  continued,  even  as  also  I.  ' 

4,  Lo,  there  is  your  good  compared  to  that  good,  which  iii- 
the  Apostle  calls  his  own,  if  faith  be  present :  yea,  rather, 
because  faith  is  present.  Short  is  this  teaching,  yet  not  on 
this  account  to  be  despised,  because  it  is  short ;  but  on  this 
account  to  be  retained  the  more  easily  and  the  more  dearly, 
in  that  in  shortness  it  is  not  cheap.  For  it  is  not  every  kind 
of  good  soever,  which  the  Apostle  would  here  set  forth, 
which  he  hath  Unambiguously  placed  above  the  faith  of 
married  women.  But  how  great  good  the  faith  of  married 
women,  that  is,  of  Christian  and  religious  women  joined  in 
marriage,  hath,  may  be  understood  from  this,  that,  when  he 
was  giving  charge  for  the  avoiding  of  fornication,  wherein 
assuredly  he  was  addressing  married  persons  also,  he  saith, 
Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of  Christ  ?  i  Cor. 
So  great  then  is  the  good  of  faithful  marriage,  that  even  the  '  " 
very  members  are  (members)  of  Christ.  But,  forasmuch  as 
the  good  of  widowed  continence  is  better  than  this  good,  the 
purpose  of  this  profession  is,  not  that  a  catholic  widow  be 
any  thing  more  than  a  member  of  Christ,  but  that  she  have 
a  better  place,  than  a  married  woman,  among  the  members 
of  Christ.  Forsooth  the  same  Apostle  says.  For,  as  in  one  Rom. 
body  we  have  many  members,  but  all  members  have  not  the     ' 

A  a  2 


356     The  heller  surpasses,  not  condemns,  the  less  good. 

DE     same  course  of  action  ;    so  being  m.amj  we  are  one  body  in 
YVDvi-  (^^^'I'ist,  and   each    members   one  of  another :    having  gifts 
TATifi.cli verse   according  unto   the  grace,  tvhich  hath  been   given 
unto  us. 

5.  Wherefore  also  when  he  was  advising  married  persons 
not  to  defraud  one  another  of  the  due  of  carnal  intercourse ; 
lest,  by  this  means,  the  one  of  them,  (the  due  of  marriage 
being  denied  to  him,)  being  through  his  own  incontinence 
tempted  of  Satan,  should  fall  away  into  fornication,  he  saith, 

iCoT.7,Jlut  this  I  sag  of  leave,  not  of  command ;  but  I  would  that 
all  men  were  as  I  myself ;  but  each,  one  hath  his  own  proper 
gift  from  God ;  but  one  in  this  way,  and  another  in  that. 
i^-  You  see  that  wedded  chastity  also,  and  the  marriage  faith  of 
the  Christian  bed,  is  a  gift,  and  this  of  God  ;  so  that,  when 
as  carnal  lust  exceeds  somewhat  the  measure  of  sensual 
intercourse,  beyond  what  is  necessary  for  the  begetting  of 
children,  this  evil  is  not  of  marriage,  but  venial  by  reason  of 
the  good  of  marriage.  For  not  concerning  marriage,  which 
is  contracted  for  the  begetting  of  children,  and  the  faith  of 
wedded  chastity,  and  the  sacrament  (indissoluble,  so  long  as 
both  live)  of  matrimony,  all  which  are  good ;  but  concerning 
that  immoderate  use  of  the  flesh,  which  is  recognised  in  the 
weakness  of  married  persons,  and  is  pardoned  by  the  inter- 
vention of  the  good  of  marriage,  the  Apostle  saith,  I  speak 

1  Cor.  7,  o/7e«tv,  not  of  command.  Also,  when  he  says.  The  woman 
is  bound,  so  long  as  her  husband  lives:  but,  in  case  her 
husband  shall  have  died,  she  is  set  free  :  let  her  be  married 
to  whom  she  will,  only  in  the  Lord :  but  she  shall  be  more 
blessed,  if  she  shall  have  so  continued,  according  to  my 
counsel;  he  shews  sufficiently  that  a  faithful  woman  is 
blessed  in  the  Lord,  even  when  she  marries  a  second  time 
after  the  death  of  her  husband,  but  that  a  widow  is  more 
blessed  in  the  same  Lord  ;  that  is,  to  speak  not  only  in  the 
words,  but  by  instances  also,  of  the  Scriptures,  that  Ruth  is 
blessed,  but  that  Anna  is  more  blessed. 

6.  Wherefore  this  in  the  first  place  you  ought  to  know, 
that  by  the  good,  which  you  have  chosen,  second  marriages 
are  not  condemned,  but  are  set  in  lower  honour.  For,  even 
as  the  good  of  holy  virginity,  which  thy  daughter  hath 
chosen,  doth  not  condemn  thy  one   marriage  ;    so  neither 


Second  marriage  laivful,  Holt/  Widowhood  better.     357 

doth   thy   widowhood    the    second   marriage    of  any.      For     de 
hence,  specially,  the  heresies  of  the  Cataphryges  and  of  the  y^ioui- 
Novatians    swelled,    which    Tertullian    also,    inflated    with  tatis. 
cheeks  full  of  sound  not  of  wisdom,  whilst  with  railing  tooth 
he  attacks'  second  marriages,  as  though  unlawful,  which  the' '  con- 
Apostle    with    sober  mind  allows^  to    be  altogether  lawful.  2 1  con- 
From  this  soundness  of  doctrine  let  no  man's  reasoning,  be  cedit.' 
he  unlearned,  or  be  he  learned,  move  thee  ;    nor  do  thou  so 
extol  thy  own  good,  as  to  charge  as  evil  that  of  another's 
which  is  not  evil ;    but  do  thou  rejoice  so  much  the  more  of 
thy  own  good,  the  more  thou  seest,  that,  by  it,  not  only  are 
evils  shunned,  but  some  goods  too  surpassed.     For  adultery 
and  fornication  are  evils.     But  from  these  unlawful  things      v. 
she  is  very  far  removed,  who  hath  bound  herself  by  liberty 
of  vow,  and,  not  by  command  of  law,  but  by  counsel  of 
charity,  hath  brought  to  pass  that  even  things  lawful  should 
not  be  lawful  to  her.     And  marriage  chastity  is  a  good,  but 
widowed  continence  is  a  better  good.     Therefore  this  better 
good  is  honoured  by  the  submission  of  that  other,  not  that 
other  condemned  by  the  praise  of  this  that  is  better. 

7.  But  whereas  the  Apostle,  when  commending  the  fruit 
of  unmarried  men  and  women,  in  that  they  have  thought  of 
the  things  of  the  Lord,  how  to  please  God,  added  and  saith, 
But  this  I  say  for  your  i->roJit^  not  to  cast  a  snare  on  you.  iCor.7, 
that  is,  not  to  force  you;  hut  in  order  to  that  which  is 
honourable ;  w^e  ought  not,  because  he  saith  that  the  good 
of  the  unmanied  is  honourable,  therefore  to  think  that  the 
bond  of  marriage  is  base  ;  otherwise  we  shall  condemn  first 
maniages  also,  which  neither  Cataphryges,  nor  Novatians, 
nor  their  most  learned  upholder  Tertullian  dared  to  call 
base.  But  as,  when  he  says.  But  I  say  unto  the  unmarried iCox.7 , 
and  widows,  that  it  is  good  for  them  if  they  shall  have  so 
continued;  assuredly  he  set  down  '  good'  for  'better,'  since 
every  thing,  which,  when  compared  with  a  good,  is  called 
better,  this  also  without  doubt  is  a  good  ;  for  what  else  is  it 
that  it  is  so  called  better,  save  that  it  is  more  good?  and  yet 
we  do  not  on  this  account  suppose  him  by  consequence  to  have 
thought  that  it  was  an  evil,  in  case  they  married,  in  that  he  said, 
it  is  good  for  them,  if  they  shall  have  so  cotitinued  ;  so  also, 
when  he  says,  hut  in  order  to  that  ichich  is  honest,  he  hath  not 


358  The  married  holy  even  in  body,  as  metnhers  of  Christ. 

DE     shewn  that  marriage  is  base,  but  that  which  was  honester 

viDui-  ^^*^°  (another  thing  also)  honest,  he  hath  commended  by  the 

TATis^  name  of  honest  in  general.  Because  what  is  honester,  save 
what  is  more  honest  ?  But  what  is  more  honest  is  certainly 
honest.     Forsooth  he  plainly  shewed  that  this  is  better  than 

iCor.  7,  tJiaf  other  that  is  good,  where  he  says.  Whoso  giveth  to 
marry,  doelh  ivell ;  but  whoso  giveth  not  to  marry,  doeth 
better.    And  this  more  blessed  than  that  other  that  is  blessed, 

Ver.  40.  whei*e  he  saith.  But  she  shall  be  more  blessed,  if  she  shall ' 
have  so  coiitinued.  As,  therefore,  there  is  than  good  a 
better,  and  than  blessed  a  more  blessed,  so  is  there  than 
honest  an  honester,  which  he  chose  to  call  honest.  For  far 
be  it  that  that  be  base,  of  which  the  Apostle  Peter  speaking 
saith.  Husbands,  nnto  your  wives,  as  unto  the  weaker  and 
subject  vessel,  give  honour,  as  unto  coheirs  of  grace  ;  and 
addressing   the  wives,  he    exhorts  them,  by  the  pattern  of 

iPet.3, Sara,  to  be  subject  unto  their  husbands:  For  so,  saith  he, 
certain  holy  women,  tvho  honied  in  God,  adorned  themselves, 
obeying  their  own  husbands ;  even  as  Sara  obeyed  AbrahafJi, 
calling  him  lord,  whose  daughters  ye  are  made,  well-doing, 
and  not  fearing  any  disturbance. 
vi.         8.  Whence,  also,  what  the  Apostle  Paul  said  of  the  un- 

1  Cor. 7,  married  woman,  that  she  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit ; 

^^'  we  are  not  so  to  understand,  as  though  a  faithful  woman 
being  married  and  chaste,  and  according  to  the  Scriptures 
subject  unto  her  husband,  be  not  holy  in  body,  but  only  in 
spirit.  For  it  cannot  come  to  pass,  that  when  the  spirit  is 
sanctified,  the  body  also  be  not  holy,  of  which  the  sanctified 
spirit  maketh  use :  but,  that  we  seem  not  to  any  to  argue 
rather  than  to  prove  this  by  divine  saying ;  since  the  Apostle 
Peter,  making  mention  of  Sara,  saith  only  holy  tvomen,  and 
saith  not,  and  hi  body ;    let  us  consider  that  saying  of  the 

1  Cor. 6,  same  Paul,  where  forbidding  fornication  he  saith.  Know  ye 
not,  that  your  bodies  are  members  of  Christ  ?  Taking, 
therefore,  members  of  Christ,  shall  I  make  them  members  of 
an  harlot  ?  Far  be  it.  Therefore  let  any  one  dare  to  say 
that  the  members  of  Christ  are  not  holy ;  or  let  him  not  dare  to 
separate  from  the  members  of  Christ  the  bodies  of  the  faithful 
1  Cor.  6,  that  are  married.     Whence,  also,  a  little  after  he  saith,  Your 

19.  20  . 

body  is  the  temple  ivithin  you  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Whom  ye 


Several  parts,  each  good;   the  ivhole  very  good.       359 

have  from  God;  and  ye  are  not  your  oicn;  for  ye  hare  been     de 
bought  icith  a  great  price.     He  saith  that  the  body  of  the  v^idui- 
faithful  is  both  members   of  Christ,  and  the  temple  of  the  tatis. 
Holy  Spirit,  wherein  assuredly  the  faithful  of  both  sexes  are 
understood.      There    therefore   are    married   women,    there 
unmarried  women  also ;  but  distinct  in  their  deserts,  and  as 
members    preferred     to    members,    whilst    yet    neither  are 
separated    from   the    body.      Whereas,  therefore,   he    saith, 
speaking  of  an  unmarried  woman,  tliat  she  may  be  holy  both 
in    body   and   spirit,   he    would    have    understood    a   fuller 
sanctification   both   in   body  and   in    spirit,   and    hath    not 
deprived  the  body  of  married  women  of  all  sanctification. 

9.  Learn,  therefore,  that  thy  good,  yea,  rather,  remember 
what   thou   hast   learned,  that   thy  good   is   more    praised, 
because  there  is  another  good  than  which  this  is  better,  than 
if  this  could  not  on  any  other  condition  be  a  good,  unless 
that  were  an  evil,  or  altogether  were  not.     The  eyes  have 
great  honour  in  the  body,  but  they  would  have  less,  if  they 
were  alone,  and  there  were  not  other  members  of  less  honour. 
In  heaven  itself  the  sun  by  its  light  surpasses,  not  chides,  the 
moon ;    and  star  from  star  differs  in  glory,  not  is  at  variance  i  Cor. 
through  pride.     Therefore,   God  ynade  all  things,  and,  lo.  Gen.  i', 
very  good;  not  only  ^ooc?, but  also  very;  for  no  other  reason,^'- 
than  because  all.     For  of  each  several  work  throughout  it 

was  also  said,  God  sato  that  it  is  good.  But,  when  all  were 
named,  very  was  added  ;  and  it  was  said,  God  sa/c  all  things 
which  He  made,  and,  lo,  very  good.  For  certain  several 
things  were  better  than  other  several ;  but  all  together  better 
than  any  several.  Therefore,  may  the  sound  doctrine  of 
Christ  make  thee  in  His  Body  sound  through  His  Grace, 
that,  what  thou  hast  better  than  others  in  body  and  spirit, 
the  selfsame  thy  spirit,  which  ruleth  the  body,  may  neither 
extol  with  insolence,  nor  distinguish  with  lack  of  know- 
ledge. 

10.  Nor,  because  I  called  Ruth  blessed,  Anna  more 
blessed,  in  that  the  former  married  twice,  the  latter,  being 
soon  widowed  of  her  one  husband,  so  lived  long,  do  you 
straightway  also  think  that  you  are  better  than  Ruth.  For-  vii. 
sooth  different  in  the  times  of  the  Prophets  was  the  dis- 
pensation of  holy  females,  whom  obedience,  not  lust,  forced 


360  Holy  women  married  that  by  them  Christ  might  come. 

DE  to  marry,  for  the  propagation  of  the  people  of  God,  that  in 
viDui-  t^iei^  Prophets  of  Christ  might  be  sent  beforehand  ;  whereas 
Z:*Z'_^  the  People  itself  also,  by  those  things  which  in  figure 
10  n  liappened  among  them,  whether  in  the  case  of  those  who 
knew,  or  in  the  case  of  those  who  knew  not  those  things,  was 
nothing  else  than  a  Prophet  of  Christ,  of  whom  should  be 
born  the  Flesh  also  of  Christ.  In  order  therefore  for  the 
propagation  of  that  people,  he  was  accounted  accursed  by 
Deut.25,  sentence  of  the  Law,  whoso  raised  not  up  seed  in  Israel. 
~  ■  Whence  also  holy  women  were  kindled,  not  by  lust  of  sensual 
intercourse,  but  by  piety  of  bearing;  so  that  we  most  rightly 
believe  of  them  that  they  would  not  haye  sought  sensual  inter- 
course, in  case  a  family  could  haye  come  by  any  other  means. 
And  to  the  husbands  was  allowed  the  use  of  several  wives 
living  ;  and  that  the  cause  of  this  was  not  lust  of  the  flesh, 
but  forethought  of  begetting,  is  shewn  by  the  fact,  that, 
as  it  was  lawful  for  holy  men  to  have  several  wives  living,  it 
was  not  likewise  lawful  for  holy  women  to  have  intercourse 
with  several  husbands  living;  in  that  they  would  be  by  so 
much  the  baser,  by  how  much  the  more  they  sought  what 
would  not  add  to  their  fruitfulness.  Wherefore  holy  Ruth, 
not  having  seed  such  as  at  that  time  was  necessary  in  Israel, 
on  the  death  of  her  husband  sought  another  of  whom  to  have 
it.  Therefore  than  this  one  twice  married,  Anna  once  married 
a  widow  was  on  this  account  more  blessed,  in  that  she 
attained  also  to  be  a  prophetess  of  Christ ;  concerning  whom 
we  are  to  believe,  that,  although  she  had  no  sons,  (which 
indeed  Scripture  by  keeping  silence  hath  left  uncertain,)  yet, 
had  she  by  that  Spirit  foreseen  that  Christ  would  immediately 
come  of  a  virgin,  by  Which  she  was  enabled  to  recognise 
Him  even  as  a  child:  whence,  with  good  reason,  even  without 
sons,  (that  is,  assuming  she  had  none,)  she  refused  a  second 
marriage:  in  that  she  knew  that  now  was  the  time  wherein 
Christ  were  better  served,  not  by  duty  of  bearing,  but  by  zeal 
of  containing :  not  by  fruitfulness  of  married  womb,  but  by 
chastity  of  widowed  conduct.  But  if  Ruth  also  was  aware 
that  by  her  flesh  was  propagated  a  seed,  whereof  Christ 
should  hereafter  have  flesh,  and  by  marrying  set  forth  her 
ministering  to  this  knowledge,  I  dare  not  any  longer  say  that 
the  widowhood  of  Anna  was  more  blessed  than  her  fruitfulness. 


No  need  of  carnal  offspring  in  this  last  time.        361 

11.  But  thou  who  both  hast  sous,  and  Uvest  in  that  end  of    de 
the  world,  wherein  now  is  the  time  not  of  casting  stones,  vidui- 
but  of  gathering ;  not  of  embracing,  but  of  abstaining  from  tatis. 
embracing ;    when  the  Apostle    cries    out.  But   this  I  say,   viii. 
brethren,  the  time  is  short;  it  remains,  that  both  they  loho  ^^^ '  ' 
have  icives  be  as  not  having;  assuredly  if  thou  hadst  sought  a  ^  ^°'"- ''» 
second  marriage,  it  would  have  been  no  obedience  of  pro- 
phecy or  law,  no  carnal  desire  even  of  family,  but  a  mark  of 
incontinence  alone.     For   you  would   have    done  what  the 
Apostle  says,  after  he  had  said.  It  is  good /or  them,  i/theyiCor.T, 
shall  have  so  continued,  even  as  I ;  forsooth  he  straightway 
added,  But  if  they  contain  not  themselves,  let  them  marry  ; 
for  I  had  rather  that  they  tnarry  than  be  burned.     For  this 
he  said,  in  order  that  the  evil  of  unbridled  desire  might  not  be 
carried  headlong  into  criminal  baseness,  being  taken  up  by 
the  honest  estate  of  marriage.     But  thanks  be  to  the  Lord, 
in  that  thou  hast  given  birth  to  what  thou  wouldest  not  be, 
and  the  virginity  of  thy  child  hath  compensated  for  the  loss  of 
thy  virginity.    For  Christian  doctrine,  having  diligent  question 
made  of  it,  makes  answer,  that  a  first  marriage  also  now  at 
this  time  is  to  be  despised,  unless  incontinence  stand  in  the 
way.     For  he,  who  said,  If  they  contain  not  themselves,  let 
them  marry,  could  have  said,  '  If  they  have  not  sons,  let  them 
marry,'  if,  when  now  after  the  Resurrection  and  Preaching  of 
Christ,  there  is  unto  all  nations  so  great  and  abundant  supply 
of  sons  to  be  spiritually  begotten,  it  were  any  such  duty  to 
beget  sons  after  the  flesh,  as  it  was  in  the  first  times.     And, 
whereas  in  another  place  he  saith,  But  I  will  that  the  younger  iTim.6, 
marry,  bear  children,  be  mothers  of  families,  he  commends     '     " 
with  apostolic  sobriety  and  authority  the  good  of  marriage, 
but  doth  not  impose  the  duty  of  bearing,  as  though  in  order 
to  obey  the  law,  even  on  those  who  '  receive'  the  good  of  con- 
tinence.    Lastly,  why  he  had  said  this,  he  unfolds,  when  he 
adds  and  says,  To  give  no  occasion  of  sioeaking  evil  to  the 
adversary ;  for  already  certain  have  turned  back  after  Satan: 
that  by  these  words  of  his  we  may  understand,  that  those, 
whom   he  would   have    marry,  could    have    done   better  to 
contain  than  marry  ;  but  better  to  marry  than  to  go  back 
after  Satan,  that  is,  to  fall  away  from  that  excellent  purpose 
of  virginal  or  widowed  chastity,  by  looking  back  to  things 


362     Second  marriage  not  condemned  save  after  vows; 

DE     that  are  behind,  and  perish.     Wherefore,  such  as  contain  not 

v^Sui-  themselves,  let  them  marry  before  they  make  profession  of 

TATis.  continence,  before  they  voav  unto   God,  what,  if  they  pay 

not,  they  are  justly  condemned.     Forsooth  in  another  place 

iTim.5,he  saith  of  such.  For  when  they  have  lived  in  delights  in 

^^'  ^^'    Christ,  they  wish  to  marry:  having  condemnation,  in  that 

they  have  made  of  none  effect  their  first  faith  ;  that  is,  they 

have  turned  aside  their  \x\\\  from  the  purpose  of  continence 

unto  marriage.     Forsooth  they  have  made  of  none  effect  the 

faith,  whereby  they  formerly  vowed  what  they  were  unwilling 

by  perseverance  to  fulfil.     Therefore  the  good  of  marriage  is 

indeed  ever  a  good :  but  in  the  people  of  God  it  was  at  one 

time  an  act  of  obedience  unto  the  law;  now  it  is  a  remedy  for 

weakness,  but  in  certain  a  solace  of  human  nature.    Forsooth 

to  be  engaged  in  the  begetting  of  children,  not  after  the  fashion 

of  dogs  by  promiscuous  use  of  females,  but  by  honest  order 

of  marriage,  is  not  an  affection  such  as  we  are  to  blame  in  a 

man;    yet   this   affection  itself  the  Christian  mind,  having 

thoughts  of  heavenly  things,  in  a  more  praiseworthy  manner 

surpasses  and  overcomes, 

ix.         12.  But  since,  as  the  Lord  saith,  Not  all  receive  this  word; 

11^'    'therefore  let  her  who  can  receive  it,  receive  it;  and  let  her, 

who  containeth  not,  marry ;   let  her,  who  hath  not  begun, 

deliberate ;   let  her,  who  hath  undertaken  it,  persevere ;  let 

there  be  no  occasion  given  unto  the  adversary,  let  there  be  no 

oblation  withdrawn  from  Christ.     Forsooth  in  the  marriage 

bond  if  chastity  be  preserved,  condemnation  is  not  feared ; 

but  in  widowed  and  virginal  continence,  the  excellence  of  a 

•  rnune-  greater  gift'  is  sought  for:  and,  when  this  has  been  sought, 

™"        and  chosen,  and  by  debt  of  vow  offered,  from  this  time  not 

only  to  enter  upon  marriage,  but,  although  one  be  not  married, 

to  wish  to  marry  is  matter  of  condemnation.     For,  in  order 

iTim.5,  to  shew  this,  the  Apostle  saith  not.  When  they  shall  have 

11    12 

lived  in  delights,  in  Christ  they  marry ;  but  they  wish  to 
marry ;  having,  saith  he,  condemnation,  in  that  they  have 
made  of  none  effect  their  first  faith,  although  not  by- 
marrying,  yet  by  wishing ;  not  that  the  marriages  even  of 
such  are  judged  matter  of  condemnation ;  but  there  is  con- 
demned a  wrong  done  to  purpose,  there  is  condemned  a  broken 
faith  of  vow,  there  is  condemned  not  a  relief  by  lower  good, 


And  even  then  is  good  marriage,  not  adultery.       363 

but  a  fall  from  higher  good :  lastly,  such  are  condemned,  not     de 
because  they  have  entered  upon  marriage  faith  afterwards,  y^j^u"- 
but  because  they  have  made  of  none  efiect  the  first  faith  of  tatis. 
continence.     And  in  order  to  suggest  this  in  few  words,  the 
Apostle  would  not  say,  that  they  have  condemnation,  who 
after  purpose  of  greater  sanctity  marry,  (not  because  they  are 
not  condemned,  but  lest  in  them  marriage  itself  should  be 
thought  to  be  condemned :)  but,  after  he  had  said,  they  wish 
to  marry,  he  straightway  added,  having  condemnation.     And 
he  stated  the  reason,  in  that  they  have  made  of  none  effect 
their  former  faith,  in  order  that  it  may  appear  that  it  is  the 
will  which  fell  away  from  its  purpose,  which  is  condemned, 
whether  marriage  follow,  or  fail  to  follow. 

13.  Wherefore  they  who  say  that  the  marriages  of  such  x. 
are  not  marriages,  but  rather  adulteries,  seem  not  to  me  to 
consider  with  sufficient  acuteness  and  care  what  they  say; 
forsooth  they  are  misled  by  a  semblance  of  truth.  For, 
whereas  they,  who  of  Christian  sanctity  marry  not,  are  said 
to  choose  the  marriage  of  Christ,  hence  certain  argue  saying, 
If  she,  who  during  the  life  of  her  husband  is  married  to 
another,  be  an  adulteress,  even  as  the  Lord  Himself  hath 
laid  down  in  the  Gospel;  therefore,  during  the  life  of  Christ, 
over  Whom  death  hath  no  more  dominion,  if  she  who  had  Rom.  6, 
chosen  His  marriage,  be  mamed  to  a  man,  she  is  an^' 
adulteress.  They,  who  say  this,  are  moved  indeed  with 
acuteness,  but  fail  to  observe,  how  great  absurdity  in  fact 
follows  on  this  reasoning.  For  whereas  it  is  praiseworthy 
that,  even  during  the  life  of  her  husband,  by  his  consent, 
a  female  vow  continence  unto  Christ,  now,  according  to  the 
reasoning  of  these  persons,  no  one  ought  to  do  this,  lest  she 
make  Christ  Himself,  what  is  impious  to  imagine,  an  adulterer, 
by  being  married  to  Him  during  the  life  of  her  husband. 
Next,  whereas  first  marriages  are  of  better  desert  than 
second,  far  be  it  that  this  be  the  thought  of  holy  widows, 
that  Christ  seem  unto  them  as  a  second  husband.  For 
Himself  they  used  heretofore  also  to  have,  (when  they  were 
subject  and  did  faithful  service  to  their  own  husbands,)  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit  a  Husband  ;  unto  Whom 
the  Church  herself,  of  which  they  are  members,  is  the  wife  j 


364     Breach  of  vow  to  Christ  not  adultery,  but  worse. 

DE     who  by  soundness  of  faith,  of  hope,  of  charity,  not  in  holy 

v^iDui-  virgins    alone,   but    in    widows    also,    and    faithful    inarried 

TATis.  vvomen,  is  altogether  a  virgin.     Forsooth  unto  the  universal 

Church,  of  which   they  all  are  members,  the  Apostle  saith, 

•2  Cor.    I  joined  you  xinto  one  husband  a  chaste  virgin  to  present 

'  '  unto  Christ.  But  He  knoweth  how  to  make  fruitful,  without 
marring  of  chastity,  a  wife  a  virgin,  Whom  even  in  the 
flesh  itself  His  Mother  could  without  violation  of  chastity 
conceive.  But  there  is  brought  to  pass  by  means  of  this 
ill-considered  notion,  (whereby  they  think  that  the  marriages 
of  women  who  have  fallen  away  from  this  holy  purpose,  in 
case  they  shall  have  married,  are  no  marriages,)  no  small 
evil,  that  wives  be  separated  from  their  husbands,  as  though 
they  were  adulteresses,  not  wives ;  and  wisliing  to  restore  to 
continence  the  women  thus  separated,  they  make  their 
husbands  real  adulterers,  in  that  during  the  life  of  their  wives 
they  have  married  others. 

xi.  14.  Wherefore  I  cannot  indeed  say,  of  females  who  have 
fallen  away  from  a  better  purpose,  in  case  they  shall  have 
married,  that  they  are  adulteries,  not  marriages;  but  I  plainly 
would  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  departures  and  fallings  away 
from  a  holier  chastity,  which  is  vowed  unto  the  Lord,  are 
woi'se  than  adulteries.  For  if,  what  may  no  way  be  doubted, 
it  pertains  unto  an  offence  against  Christ,  when  a  member  of 
Him  keepetli  not  faith  to  her  husband;  how  much  graver 
offence  is  it  against  Him,  when  unto  Himself  faith  is  not 
kept,  in  a  matter  which  He  requires  when  oflered,  Who  had 
not  required  that  it  should  be  oflered.  For  when  each  fails 
to  render  that  which,  not  by  force  of  command,  but  by  advice 
of  counsel,  he  vowed,  by  so  much  the  more  doth  he  increase 
the  unrighteousness  of  the  wrong  done  to  his  vow,  by  how 
much  the  less  necessity  he  had  to  vow.  These  matters  I 
for  this  reason  treat  of,  that  you  may  not  think  either  that 
second  marriages  are  criminal,  or  that  any  marriages  what- 
,  soever,  being  marriages,  are  an  evil.  Therefore  let  this  be 
your  mind,  not  that  you  condemn  them,  but  that  you  despise 
them.  Therefore  the  good  of  widowed  chastity  is  becoming 
after  a  brighter  fashion,  in  that  in  order  to  make  vow  and 
profession  of  it,  females  may  despise  what  is  both  pleasing 


Marriage  lawful  even  beyond  the  second  time.       365 

and   lawful.     But   after  profession  of  vow  made  they  must     de 
continue  to  rein  in,  and  overcome,  what  is  pleasing,  because  yi'^u'i- 
it  is  no  longer  lawful.  tatis. 

15.  Men  are  wont  to  move  a  question  concerning  a  third    xii. 
or   fourth    marriage,    and    even   more   numerous   marriages 
than    this.      On    which    to    make    answer   strictly,    I    dare 
neither  to  condemn  any  marriage,  nor  to  take  from  these 
the  shame  of  their   great  number.      But,  lest    the   brevity 
of  this    my  answer   may   chance    to    displease  any,    I    am 
prepared  to  listen  to  my  reprover  treating  more  fully.     For 
perliaps  he  alleges  some  reason,  why  second  marriages  be 
not  condemned,  but  third  be  condemned.     For  I,  as  in  the 
beginning  of  this  discourse  I  gave  warning,  dare  not  to  be 
more  wise  than  it  behoveth  to  be  wise.      For   who  am  1,11001.12, 
that   I   should    think  that    that    must   be  defined    which    I^' 
see    that   the    Apostle   hath   not    defined .?     For   he    saith, 
A  icoman  is   bound,  so  long  as  her  husband  liveth.     He  1  Cor. 
said  not,  her  first;  or,  second;   or,  third;  or,  fourth *;  but, f'^j^"^^' 
A  woman,  saith  he,  is  bound,  so  long  as  her  husba7id  liveth;''  or  any 
but  if  her  husband  shall  be  dead,  she  is  set  free  ;  let  her  be^^^  ^^' 
■married  to  whom  she  will,  only  in  the  Lord:   but  she  shall 
be  more  blessed,  if  she  shall  have  so  continued.     I  know  not 
what  can  be  added  to,  or  taken  from,  this  sentence,  so  far  as 
relates  to  this  matter.     Next  I  hear  Himself  also,  the  Master 
and  Lord  of  the  Apostles  and  of  us,  answering  the  Sadducees, 
when  they  had  proposed  to  Him  a  woman  not  once-married, 
or   twice-married,  but,    if  it   can    be    said,  seven-married^, "  septi- 
whose  wife  she  should  be  in  the  I'esurrection  ?    For  rebuking  ^'^^™' 
them,  He  saith,  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  M&tt. 
the  power  of  God.    For  in  the  resurrection  they  shall  neither^'  ^^' 
be  married,  nor  marry  wives  ;  for  they  shall  not  begin  to  die,  Luke20, 
hut   shall  be  equal    to   the   Angels  of  God.     Therefore   He     * 
made   mention   of  their  resurrection,  who   shall  rise   again 
unto  life,  not  who  shall  rise  again  unto  punishment.     There- 
fore He  might  have  said,  Ye  do  err,  knowing  not  the  Scriptures, 
nor  the  power  of  God :  for  in  that  I'esurrection  it  will  not 
be  possible  that  there  be  those  that  were  wives  of  many;  and 
then  added,  that  neither  doth  any  there  marry.     But  neither, 
as  we  see,  did  He  in  this  sentence  shew  any  sign  of  con- 
demning  her   who    was    the    wife    of    so    many   husbands. 


366       Greater  coyitinence  shewn  in  early  widowhood. 

DE  Wherefore  neither  dare  I,  contrary  to  the  feeling  of  natural 
viDui-  shame,  say,  that,  when  her  husbands  are  dead,  a  woman 
'^^'^'^-  marry  as  often  as  she  will;  nor  dare  I,  out  of  my  own  heart, 
beside  the  authority  of  holy  Scripture,  condemn  any  number 
of  marriages  whatever.  But,  what  I  say  to  a  widow,  who 
hath  had  one  husband,  this  I  say  to  every  widow ;  you  will 
be  more  blessed,  if  you  shall  have  so  continued, 
xin.  16,  For  that  also  is  no  foolish  question  which  is  wont 
to  be  proposed,  that  whoso  can  may  say,  which  widow  is  to 
be  preferred  in  desert ;  whether  one  who  hath  had  one 
husband,  who,  after  having  lived  a  considerable  time  with  her 
husband,  being  left  a  widow  with  sons  born  to  her  and  alive, 
hath  made  profession  of  continence;  or  she  who  as  a  young 
woman  having  lost  two  husbands  within  two  years,  having  no 
children  left  alive  to  console  her,  hath  vowed  to  God  conti- 
nence, and  in  it  hath  grown  old  with  most  enduring  sanctity. 
Herein  let  them  exercise  themselves,  if  they  can,  by  dis- 
cussing, and  by  shewing  some  proof  to  us,  who  weigh  the 
merits  of  widows  by  number  of  husbands,  not  by  the  strength 
itself  of  continence.  For,  if  they  shall  have  said,  that  she 
who  hath  had  one  husband  is  to  be  preferred  to  her  who  hath 
had  two ;  unless  they  shall  have  alleged  some  special  reason 
or  authority,  they  will  assuredly  be  found  to  set  before 
excellence  of  soul,  not  greater  excellence  of  soul,  but  good 
fortune  of  the  flesh.  Forsooth  it  pertained  unto  good  fortune 
of  the  flesh,  both  to  live  a  long  time  with  her  husband,  and 
to  conceive  sons.  But,  if  they  prefer  her  not  on  this  account, 
that  she  had  sons ;  at  any  rate  the  very  fact  that  she  lived  a 
long  time  with  her  husband,  what  else  was  it  than  good 
fortune  of  the  flesh?  Further,  the  desert  of  Anna  herself  is 
herein  chiefly  commended,  in  that,  after  she  had  so  soon 
buried  her  husband,  through  her  protracted  life  she  long 
contended  with  the  flesh,  and  overcame.  For  so  it  is  written, 
Luke  2,  And  there  was  Anna,  a  prophetess,  the  daufjlUer  of  Phanuel, 
of  the  tribe  of  Aser  ;  she  was  far  advanced  in  many  days  ; 
and  had  lived  with  her  husband  seven  years  from  her 
virginity ;  and  she  was  a  widow  even  unto  eighty-four  years, 
who  used  not  to  depart  from  the  Temple,  by  fastings  and 
prayers  serving  day  and  night.  You  see  how  the  holy 
widow  is  not  only  commended  in  this,  that  she  had  had  one 


36.  37. 


Different  cases  of  widowhood  comjjared.  367 

husband,  but  also,  that  she  had  lived  few  years  with  a  husband     de 
from  her  virginity,  and  had  with  so  great  service  of  piety  con-  ^jdu". 
tinned  her  office  of  widowed  chastity  even  unto  so  great  age.  tatts. 

17.  Let  us  therefoi'e  set  before   our  eyes   three  widows,    ^^^• 
each  having  one  of  the  things,  the  whole  of  which  were  in 
her:  let  us  suppose  one  who  had  had  one  husband,  in  whose 
case  is  wanting  both  so  great  length  of  widowhood,  in  that 

she  hath  lived  long  with  her  husband,  and  so  great  zeal  of 
piety,  in  that  she  doth  not  so  serve  with  fasts  and  prayers : 
a  second,  who  after  the  very  short  life  of  her  former  husband, 
had  quickly  lost  a  second  also,  and  is  now  long  time  a 
widow,  but  yet  herself  also  doth  not  so  set  herself  to  the 
most  religious  service  of  fasts  and  prayers :  a  third,  who  not 
only  hath  had  two  husbands,  but  also  hath  lived  long  with 
each  of  them  singly,  or  with  one  of  them,  and  being  left  a 
widow  at  a  later  period  of  life,  wherein  indeed,  in  case  she 
had  wished  to  many,  she  might  also  conceive  sons,  hath 
taken  upon  her  widowed  continence ;  but  is  more  intent  on 
God,  more  careful  to  do  always  the  things  that  please  Him, 
day  and  night,  like  Anna,  serving  by  prayers  and  fasts.  If 
a  question  be  raised,  which  of  these  is  to  be  preferred  in 
deserts,  who  but  must  see  that  in  this  contest  the  palm  must 
be  given  to  the  greater  and  more  glowing  piety  ?  So  also  if 
three  others  be  set,  in  each  of  whom  are  two  of  those  three, 
but  one  of  the  three  in  each  wanting,  who  can  doubt  that 
they  will  be  the  better,  who  shall  have  in  a  more  excellent 
manner  in  their  two  goods  pious  humility,  in  order  that  tliere 
may  be  lofty  piety  ? 

18.  No  one  indeed  of  these  six  widows  could  come  up  to 
your  standard.  For  you,  in  case  that  you  shall  have  maintained 
this  vow  even  unto  old  age,  mayest  have  all  the  three  things 
wherein  the  desert  of  Anna  excelled.  For  both  thou  hast 
had  one  husband,  and  he  lived  not  long  with  thee  in  the 
flesh  ;  and,  by  this  means,  in  case  that  thou  shalt  shew  forth 
obedience  to  the  words  of  the  Apostle,  saying.  But  she  who  i  Tim, 
is  a  widow  indeed  and  desolate,  hath  hoped  in  the  Lord,  and  '  '  ' 
persevereth  in  prayers  night  and  day,  and  with  sober  watch- 
fulness shalt  shun  what  follows.  But  she  who  passes  her 
time  in  delights,  living  is  dead,  all  those  three  goods,  which 
were  Anna's,  shall  be  thine  also.     But  you  have  sons  also, 


368     Bringing  up  children.    No  strictness  justijies  error. 

DE     which  haply  she  had  not.     And  yet  you  are  not  on  this 
viDXj"i-  account  to  be  praised,  that  you  have  them,  but  that  you  are 
TATis.  zealous  to  nurture  and  educate  them  piously.     For  that  they 
were  born  to  thee,  was  of  fruitfulness ;  that  they  are  alive,  is 
of  good  fortune  ;  that  they  be  so  brought  up,  is  of  your  will 
1  potes-  and  disj^osal '.     In  the  former  let  men  congratulate  you,  in 
tatis.      ^i^.g  Yqi  them  imitate  you.     Anna,  through  prophetic  know- 
ledge, recognised  Christ  with  His  virgin  Mother ;  thee  the 
grace  of  the  Gospel  hath  made  the  mother  of  a  virgin  of 
Christ,     Therefore  that  holy  virgin  %  whom  herself  willing 
and  seeking  it  ye  have  offered  unto  Christ,  hath  added  some- 
thing of  virginal  desert  also  unto  the  widowed  deserts  of  her 
grandmother  and  mother.     For  ye  who  have  her,  fail  not  to 
have  something  thence;  and  in  her  ye  are,  what  in  yourselves 
ye  are  not.    For  that  holy  virginity  should  be  taken  from  you 
at  your  marriage,  was  on  this  account  brought  to  pass,  in 
order  that  she  should  be  born  of  you. 
XV.         19.  These  discussions,  therefore,  concerning  the  different 
deserts  of  married  women,  and  of  different  widows,  I  would 
not  in  this  work  enter  upon,  if,  what  I  am  writing  unto  you, 
I  were  writing  only  for  you.     But,  since  there  are  in  this 
kind  of  discourse  certain  very  difEcidt  questions,  it  was  my 
wish  to  say  something  more  than  what  properly  relates  to 
you,  by  reason  of  certain,  who  seem  not  to  themselves  learned, 
unless  they  essay,  not  by  passing  judgment  to  discuss,  but  by 
rending  to  cut  in  pieces  the  labours  of  others ;  in  the  next 
place,  that  you  yourself  also  may  not  only  keep  what  you 
have  vowed,  and  make  advance  in  that  good;  but  also  know 
more  carefully  and  more  surely,  that  this  same  good  of  yours 
is  not  distinguished    from  the  evil  of  marriage,  but   is   set 
before  the  good  of  marriage.     For  let  not  such,  as  condemn 
the  marriage  of  widowed   females,  although  they  exercise 
their  continence  in  abstaining  from  many  things,  which  you 
make  use  of,  on  this  account  lead  you  astray,  to  think  what 
they  think,  although  you  cannot  do  what  they  do.     For  no 
one  would  be  a  madman,  although  he  see  that  the  strength 
of  a  madman  is  greater  than  of  men  in  their  sound  senses. 
Chiefly,  therefore,  let  sound  doctrine  both  adorn  and  guard 

*  Demetrias,  whose  grandmother  was     See  S.  Aug,  Ep.  ISO.  and  150.  Ben. 
Proba   Faltonia,  her  mother  Juliana. 


Results  Hummed  up.     All  continence  is  God's  gift.    SOO 

goodness  of  purpose.  Forsooth  it  is  from  this  cause  that  de 
catholic  females,  even  after  that  they  have  been  married  vidui- 
more  than  once,  are  by  just  judgment  preferred,  not  only  to  7!^^^^' 
the  widows  who  have  had  one  husband,  but  also  to  the 
vii-gins  of  heretics.  There  are  indeed  on  these  three  matters, 
of  marriage,  widowhood,  and  virginity,  many  winding 
recesses  of  questions,  many  perplexities;  and  in  order  by 
discussion  to  enter  deeply  into  and  solve  these,  there  is 
required  both  greater  care,  and  a  fuller  discourse;  that  either 
we  may  have  a  right  mind  in  all  those  things,  or,  if  in  any 
matter  we  be  otherwise  minded,  this  also  God  may  reveal 
unto  us.  However,  what  there  also  the  Apostle  saith  next 
aftei-,  JV/tereunfo  ne  have  arrived,  in  that  let  us  tvalk .  Fh\\.  3, 
But  we  have  arrived,  in  what  relates  to  this  matter  on  which 
we  are  speaking,  so  far  as  to  set  continence  before  marriage, 
but  holy  virginity  even  before  widowed  continence  ;  and  not 
to  condemn  any  marriages,  which  yet  are  not  adulteries 
but  man-iages,  by  praise  of  any  purpose  whatever  of  our  own 
or  of  our  friends.  Many  other  things  on  these  matters  we 
have  said  in  a  Book  concerning  the  Good  of  Marriage,  and 
in  another  Book  concerning  Holy  Virginity,  and  in  a  Book 
which  we  composed  with  as  great  pains  as  we  could  against 
Faustus  the  Manichee  ;  since,  by  most  biting  reproaches 
in  his  writings  of  the  chaste  marriages  of  Patriarchs  and 
Prophets,  he  had  turned  aside  the  minds  of  certain  unlearned 
persons  from  soundness  of  faith. 

20.  Wherefore,  forasmuch  as  in  the  beginning  of  this  little  xvi. 
work  I  had  proposed  certain  two  necessary  matters,  and  had 
undertaken  to  follow  them  out;  one  which  related  to  doctrine, 
the  other  to  exhortation;  and  I  have  not  failed  in  the  former 
part,  to  the  best  of  my  power,  according  to  the  business 
which  I  had  undertaken  ;  let  us  come  to  exhortation,  in 
order  that  the  good  which  is  known  wisely,  may  be  pursued 
ardently.  And  in  this  matter  I  give  you  this  advice  first, 
that,  how  great  soever  love  of  pious  continence  you  feel  to 
be  in  you,  you  ascribe  it  to  the  favour  of  God,  and  give  Him 
thanks.  Who  of  His  Holy  Spirit  hath  freely  given  unto  you 
^so  much,  as  that.  His  love  being  shed  abroad  in  your  heart, 
the  love  of  a  better  good  should  take  away  from  you  the 
permission  of  a  lawful  matter.     For  it  was  His  gift  to  you 

B  b 


370     GoiTs  gifts  are  blessings  only  ichen  received  as  His. 
DE     that  you  should  not  wish  to  many,  when  it  was  lawful,  in 


BONO 
VIDUI 
TATIS 


ordei*  that  now  it  should  not  be  lawful,  even  if  you  wished ; 
and  that  by  this  means  the  wish  not  to  do  it  might  be  the 
more  settled,  lest  what  were  now  unlawful  be  done,  which 
was  not  done  even  when  lawful;  and  that,  a  widow  of  Christ, 
you  should  so  far  attain  as  to  see  your  daughter  also  a  virgin 
of  Christ;   for  whilst  you  ai'e  praying  as  Anna,  she  hath 
become   what  Mary  was.     These   by  how  much  the   more 
you  know  them  to  be  gifts  of  God,  by  so  much  the  more 
are  you  by  the  same  gifts  blessed ;  yea,  rather,  you  are  not 
so  otherwise  than  as  you  know  from  .Whom  you  have  what 
you  have.      For  listen   to   what   the    Apostle   said    on   this 
1  Cor.  2,  matter,  ^^^^  we  have  received  not  tlie  spirit  of  this  world, 
^^'         hut  the  Spirit    Which  is  of  God,  that  ive  may  know  tchat 
things  have  been  given  to  iis  by  God.     Forsooth  many  have 
many  gifts  of  God,  and  by  not  knowing  from  Whom  they 
have  them,  come  to  boast  themselves  with  impious  vanity. 
But  there  is  no  one  blessed  with  the  gifts  of  God,  who  is 
ungrateful  to  the   Giver.     Forasmuch   as,  also,   whereas  in 
the  course  of  the  sacred  Mysteries  we  are  bidden  to  '  lift  up 
our  hearts,'  it  is  by  His  help  that  we  are  able,  by  Whose 
bidding  we  are  admonished ;  and  therefore  it  follows,  that, 
of  this  so  great  good  of  the  heart  lifted  up,  we  give  not  the 
glory  to  ourselves  as  of  our  own  strength,  but  render  thanks 
unto  our  Lord  God.     For  of  this  we  are  straightway  admo- 
nished, that '  this  is  meet,'  '  this  is  right.'     You  remember 
whence    these    words    are    taken,   you    recognise   by    what 
sanction"",  and  by  how  great  holiness  they  are  commended 
within.     Therefore  hold  and  have  what  you  have  received, 
and  return  thanks  to  the  Giver.     For,  although  it  be  yours 
to  receive  and  have,  yet  you  have  that,  which  you   have 
received;  forasmuch  as  to  one  waxing  proud,  and  impiously 
glorying  of  that  which  he  had,  as  though  he  had  it  of  him- 
lCor.4,  self,  the  Truth  saith  by  the  Apostle,  But  wJiat  hast  thou, 
^'  which  thou  hast  not  received?     But,  if  thou  hast  received, 

why  boastest  thou,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received? 
xvii.        21.  These  things  I  am  compelled  to  admonish  by  reason 
of  certain   little   discourses  of  some   men,  that   are   to  be 

•=  '  Intus  qua  sanctione,'  al.   '  inter     there  are    other  various    readings  be- 
quas  actiones,' 'amongst  what  actions,'     sides. 


fVe  arc  taiKjhl  io  pray  for  Grace  hecause  we  need  it.    871 

shunned  and  avoided,  which  have  begun  to  steal  through  the     de 
ears  unto  the  minds  of  many,  being  (as  must  be  said  with  vmui. 
tears)  hostile  to  the  grace  of  Christ,  which  go  to  persuade  tatis. 
that  we  count  not  as  necessary  for  us  prayer  unto  the  Lord, 
that  we   enter  not  into  temptation.     For  they  so   essay  to 
defend  the  free  will  of  man,  as  that  by  it  alone,  even  without 
help  of  the    grace   of  God,    we  are    able  to  fulfil    what  is 
commanded  us  of  God.     And  thus  it  follows,  that  the  Lord 
in  vain  said,  JVafch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation;  Matt. 
and  in  vain  daily  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  itself  we  say,  Lead  w^Matt.  6 
vol  into  temptation.     For  if  it  is  of  our  own  power  alone  ^3. 
that  we  be  not  overcome  by  temptation,   why  do  we  pray 
that  we  enter  not,  nor  be  led  into  it  ?    Rather  let  us  do  what 
is  of  our  own  free  will,  and  most  absolute  power ;  and  let  us 
mock  at  the  Apostle,  saying,  God  is  faitlifal,  Who  icill  not  i  Cor. 
suffer  you  to  he  tempted  above  tvhat  ye  are  able  ;  and  let  us     ' 
oppose  him,  and  say,  Why  seek  I  of  the  Lord,  what  He  hath 
set  in  my  own  power?     But  far  be  it,  that  he  be  so  minded, 
who  is  sound  minded.     Wherefore  let  us  seek  that  He  may 
give,  what  He  bids  us  that  we  have.     For  to  this  end  He 
bids  us  have  this,  which  as  yet  we  have  not,  to  admonish  as 
what  to  seek  ;  and  that  when  we  shall  have  found  the  power 
to  do  what  He  hath  bidden,  we  may  understand,  of  this  also, 
whence  we  have  received  it;  lest,  being  puffed  and  lifted  up 
by  the  spirit  of  this  world,  we  know  not  what  things  have 
been  given  unto  us  of  God.     Wherefore  the  free  choice  of 
the  human  will  we  by  no  means  destroy,  when  the  Grace  of 
God,  by  which  the  free  choice  itself  is  helped,  we  deny  not 
with  ungrateful  pride,  but  rather  set  forth  with  grateful  piety. 
For  it  is  ours  to  will:  but  the  will  itself  is  both  admonished 
that  it  may  arise,  and  healed,  that  it  may  have  power  * ;  and  •  or  <  be 
enlarged  that  it  may  receive  ;  and  filled,  that  it  may  have. 
For  were  not  we  to  will,  certainly  neither  should  we  receive 
the  things  that  are   given,  nor  should  we  have.     P'or  who 
would  have  continence,  (among  the  rest  of  the  gifts  of  God 
to  speak  of  this  rather,  of  which   I  am  speaking  to  you,) 
who,  I  say,  would  have  continence,  unless  willing  ?  foras- 
much as  also  no  one  would  receive  unless  willing.     But  if 
you  ask.  Whose  gift  it  is,  that  it  can  be  by  our  will  received 
and  had  ?    listen    to    Scripture ;    yea,  rather,   because    thou 

Bb  2 


372         Need  of  Grace  no  contradiction  to  free  will. 

DE     knowest,  recollect  what  thou  hast  read,   Whereas  I  knew, 
yimn-  saith  he,  that  no  one  can  be  continent,  unless  God  give  it, 
TATJs.  (ind  iJiis  itself  was  of  wisdom,  to  know  whose  gift  it  was. 
Wisd.8,  Qj,g^|.  g^j.g  ^jjggg  ^yyQ  gifts,  wisdom  and  continence  ;  wisdom, 
forsooth,  whereby  we  ai'e  formed  in  the  knowledge  of  God ; 
but   continence,  whereby  we   are   not  conformed  nnto   this 
world.     But  God  bids  us  that  we  be  both  wise  and  continent, 
without  which  goods  we  cannot  be  just  and  perfect.     But 
let    us   pray  that   He  give   what  He    bids,  by  helping  and 
inspiring.  Who  hath  admonished  us  what  to  will  by  com- 
manding and  calling.    Whatsoever  of  this  He  hath  given,  let 
us  pray  that  He  preserve;  but  what  He  hath  not  given  as 
yet,  let  us  pray  that  He  supply ;  yet  let  us  pray  and  give 
thanks  for  what  we  have  received;  and  for  what  we  have  not 
yet  received,  from  the  very  fact  that  we  are  not  ungrateful 
for  what  we  have  received,  let  us  trust  that  we  shall  receive 
it.      For  He,  Who  hath  given  jDower  unto  the  faithful  who 
are    married    to    contain   from    adulteries    and    fornications, 
Himself  hath  given  unto  holy  virgins  and  widows  to  contain 
from  all  sexual  intercourse;  in  the  case  of  which  virtue  now 
1  '  inte-  the  term  inviolate  chastity'  or  continence  is  properly  used. 
gntas.    Qj,  jg  jj   haply  that    from    Him    indeed  we    have    received 
continence,  but  from  ourselves  have  wisdom  .?    What  then  is 
James    it  that  the   Apostle  James  saith.  But   if  any  of  you  lack 
^'  ^'      wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  ITlio  qiveth  unto  oil  liberally, 
and  uphraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  him.     But  on 
this  question,  already  in  other  little  works  of  ours,  so  far  as 
the  Lord  hath  helped  us,  we  have  said  many  things  ;  and  at 
other  times,  so  far  as  through  Him  we  shall  be  able,  when 
opportunity  is  given,  we  will  speak, 
xviii.       22.  Now  it  has  been  my  wish  on    this   account  to   say 
something   on    this    subject,    by    reason    of  certain    of  our 
brethren  most  friendly  and   dear  to  us,  and  without  wilful 
guilt  indeed  entangled  in  this  eiTor,  but  yet  entangled  ;  who 
think,  that,    when    they    exhort    any   to    righteousness    and 
piety,  their  exhortation  will  not  have  force,  unless  the  whole 
of    that,    wherehi   they    would    work   upon   man    that   man 
should  work,  they  set  in  the  power  of  man,  not  helped  by 
the  grace  of  God,  but  put  forth  by  the  alone  choice  of  the 
free  will;  as  though  there  can  be  free  will  to  perform  a  good 


Ex'horlation  implies  will  not  independeni,  though  free.   373 

work,  unless  set  free  by  the  gift  of  God !    And  they  mark     de 
not  that  this  very  thing  themselves  also  have  by  the  gift  of  vidui- 
God,  that   with   such  power  they  exhort,  as  to  excite  the  '^^'^^^- 
dull  wills  of  men  to  enter  upon  a  good  life,  to  enkindle  the 
cold,  to  correct  such  as  are  in  error,  to  convert  such  as  are 
turned  aside,  to  pacify  such  as  are  opposed.     For  thus  they 
are  able  to  succeed  in  persuading  what  they  would  persuade 
to,  or  if  they  work  not  these  things  in  the  wills  of  men,  what 
is  their  work  ?  wherefore  speak  they  ?     Let  them  leave  them 
rather  to  their  own  choice.     But  if  in  them  they  work  these 
things,  what?  I  pray,  doth  man,  in  the  will  of  man,  work  so 
great  things  by  speaking,  and  doth  God  work  nothing  there 
by  helping?    Yea  rather,  with  how  great   soever  power  of 
discourse  man  may  prevail,  as  that  by  skill  of  discussion, 
and  sweetness  of  speech,  he  in  the  will  of  man  implant  truth, 
nourish  charity,   by  teaching  remove  error,  by  exhortation 
remove  sloth.  Neither  he  who  planteth  is  any  thing,  nor  he  i  Cor. 
tvho  icatereth,  but  God  Who  giveth  the  increase.     For  in   ' 
vain  would  the  workman  use  all  means  without,  unless  the 
Creator  should  work  secretly  within.     I  hope  therefore  that 
this  letter  of  mine  by  the  worthy  deed'  of  your  Excellence  will '  merito 
soon  come  into  the  hands  of  such  also;  on  this  account  I 
thought  that    I    ought    to   say   something    on    this    subject. 
Next  that  both  you  yourself,  and  whatsoever  other  widows 
shall  read  this,  or  hear  it  read,  may  know  that  you  make 
more  advance  unto  the  love  and  profession  of  the  good  of 
continence  by  your  own  prayers  than  by  our  exhortations  ; 
forasmuch  as  if  it  be  any  help  to  you  that  our  addresses  also 
are   supplied  to  you,  the  whole  must  be   assigned  to   His 

grace,  in  Whose  Hand,  as  it  is  written,  ate  both  we  and  oicryvisd.7, 

]■  16. 

discourses. 

23.  If,  therefore,  you  had  not   as  yet  vowed   unto  God  ^i^- 

widowed  continence,  we  would  assuredly  exhort  you  to  vow 

it ;  but,  in  that  you  have  already  vowed  it,  we  exhort  you  to 

persevere.     And  yet  I  see  that  I  must  so  speak  as  to  lead 

those  also  who  had  as  yet  thought  of  marriage  to  love  it  and 

to  seize  on  it.     Therefore  let  us  give  ear  unto  the  Apostle, 

She  who  is  unmarried,  saith  he,  is  carefid  about  the  things  i  Cor. 

of  the  Lord,  to  be  holy  both  in  body  and  spirit;  but  she  loho   ' 

is  married  is  careful  about  the  things  of  the  world,  how  to 


374     The  mrmarried  slate  excels  in  care  to  please  the  Lord. 

TIE     please   her  husband.     He   saith   not,  is   careful    about   the 
viDui-  things  of  the  world,  so  as  not  to  be  holy  ;  but  certainly  that 
Z^IIii-that  marriage  holiness''  is  less,  in  regard  of  that  portion  of 
cares,  which  hath   thought    of  the    pleasure   of  the  world. 
Whatevei",  therefore,  of  earnest  purpose   of  mind  would  be 
expended  also  on  these  things  whereby  she  would  have  to 
please  a  husband,  the  unmarried  Christian  woman  ought  in 
a  certain  way  to  gather  and  bring  together  unto  that  earnest 
purpose  whereby  she  is  to  please  the  Lord.     Arid  consider, 
Whom   she  pleases,  who  pleases   the  Lord ;   and  assuredly 
she  is  by  so  much  the  more  blessed  by  how  much  the  more 
she  pleases  Him;  but  by  how  much  the  more  her  thoughts 
are  of  the  things  of  the  world,  by  so  much  the  less  does  she 
please    Him.     Therefore    do    ye   with    all    earnest  purpose 
Ps.45,2.  please  Him,  Who   is  J'air  of  form   above  the  sons  of  men. 
For  that  ye  please  Him,  it  is  by  His  grace  which  is  shed 
abroad   on  His  lips.      Please  ye   Him   in    that    portion    of 
thought  also,  wliich   would  be   occupied  by   the   world,  in 
order  to  please  a  husband.     Please  ye  Him,  Who  displeased 
the  world,  in  order  that  such  as  please  Him  might  be  set  free 
from  the  world.     For  This  One,  fair  of  form  above  the  sons 
Is.  53,2.  of  men,  men  saw  on  the  Cross  of  the  Passion;  and  He  had 
not  form   or   beauty,   but    His  face   cast   dotvn,   and   His 
posture    uiiseetnlu.       Yet    from    this    unseemliness    of    your 
Kedeemer  flowed  the  price  of  your  beauty,  but  of  a  beauty 
Ps.  45,  within,  for  cdl  the  beauty  of  the  Kin fs  daughter  is  within. 
By  this   beauty  please  ye   Him,  ihis  beauty  order  ye  with 
studious  care  and  anxious  thought.     He  loves  not  dyes  of 
deceits  ;  the  Truth  delighteth  in  things  that  are  true,  and 
He,  if  you  recognise  what  you  have  read,  is  called  the  Truth. 
Johnl4,  /  am,  saith   He,   the  IVay,  and  the   Truth,  and  the   Life. 
Run  ye  to  Him  through  Him;  please  ye  Him  of  Him;  live 
ye  with  Him,  in  Him,  of  Him.     With  true  affections  and 
holiest  chastity  love  ye  to  be  loved  by  such  a  Husband. 
24.  Let  the  inner  ear  of  the  virgin  also,  thy  holy  child, 
•one  Ms  hear  these  things.     I  shall  see'  how  far  she  goes  before  you  in 
'Tosee'jj^^  Kingdom  of  That  King:  it  is  another  question.     Yet  ye 
have  found,  mother  and  daughter.  Him,  Whom  by  beauty  of 
chastity  ye   ought  to  please   together,  having  despised,  she 

<*  Most  Ms-s.  '  but  certainly  that  divine  holiness.' 


Virgins  and  W'idoivs  should  adorn  Ihetnselves  for  Christ.  375 

all,  you  second,  marriage.     Certainly  if  there  were  husbands     de 
whom  ye  had  to  please,  by  this  time,  perhaps,  you  would  v^idu°. 
feel  ashamed  to  adorn  yourself  together  with  your  daughter ;  taxis. 
now  let  it  not  shame  3'ou,  to  set  yourselves  to  do  what  may 
adorn  you  both  together  ;  because  it  is  not  matter  of  blame, 
but  of  glory,  that  ye  be  loved  both  together  by  That  One. 
But  white  and  red,  feigned  and  laid  on  with  paints,  ye  would 
not  use,  even  if  ye  had  husbands;  not  thinking  that  they 
were  fit  persons  for  you  to  deceive,  or  yourselves  such  as 
ought   to    deceive ;    now    therefore    That    King,    Who    had 
longed  for  the  beauty  of  His  Only  Spouse,  of  Whom  ye  are 
members,  do   ye   with    all    truth    together  please,  together 
cleave  unto ;   she  with  virginal  chastity,  you  with  widowed 
continence,  both  with   spiritual    beauty.     In  which    beauty 
also  her  grandmother,  and  your  mother-in-law,  who  by  this 
time  surely  hath  grown  old,  is  beautiful  together  with  you. 
Forsooth  whilst  charity  carries  the  vigour  of  this  beauty  into 
things  that  are  before,  length  of  years  causeth  not  in  it  a 
wrinkle.     You  have  with  you  a  holy  aged  woman,  both  in 
your   house    and    in    Christ,  whom  to    consult   concerning 
perseverance ;    how    you   are    to    fight    with    this    or    that 
temptation,  what  you  are  to  do,  that  it  may  be  the  more 
easily  overcome  ;  what  safeguard  you  are  to  take,  that  it  may 
not  easily  again  lay  wait;  and  if  there  be  any  thing  of  this 
sort,  she  teaches  you,  who  is  now  by  time  fixed,  by  love  a 
well-wisher,  by  natural  affection  full  of  cares,  by  age  secure. 
Do  you  specially,  do  you  in  such  things  consult  her,  who 
hath  made  trial  of  what  you  have  made  trial  of.     For  your 
child  sings  that  song,  which  in  the  Apocalypse  none  save  Rev.  14, 
virgins  can  sing.     But  for  both  of  you  she  prays  more  care-  ^'  ^' 
fully  than  for  herself,  but  she  is  more  full  of  care  for  her 
granddaughter,  for  whom  there  I'emains  a  longer  space  of 
years  to  overcome  temptations ;  but  you  she  sees  riearer  to 
her  own  age,  and  mother  of  a  daughter  of  such  an  age,  as 
that,  had  you  seen  her  married,  (which  now  is  not  lawful, 
and  far  be  it  from  her,)  I  think  you  would  have  blushed  to 
bear  children  together  with  her.     How  much  then  is  it  that 
now  remains  to  you  of  a  dangerous  age,  who  are  on  this 
account  not  called  a  grandmother,  in  order  that  together  with 
your  daughter  you  may  be  fruitful  in  offspring  of  holy  thoughts 


BONO 
VIDUI 


376   Conlittence  has  examples  even  in  those  who  do  tiot  seek  it. 

DE  and  works  ?  Therefore  not  without  reason  is  the  grand- 
mother more  full  of  care  for  her,  for  whom  you  also  the 
TATis.  mother;  because  both  what  she  hath  vowed  is  greater,  and 
the  whole  of  what  she  hath  just  now  begun  remains  to  her. 
May  the  Lord  hear  her  prayers,  that  ye  may  holily  follow 
her  good  deserts,  who  in  youth  gave  birth  to  the  flesh  of 
your  husband  %  in  old  age  travaileth  with  the  heart  of  your 
daughter.  Therefore  do  ye  all,  alike  and  with  one  accord, 
by  conduct  please,  by  prayers  press  upon.  That  One  Hus- 
band of  One  Wife,  in  Whose  Body  by  One  Spirit  ye  are 
living. 
XX.  25.  The  past  day  returns  not  hereafter,  and  after  yesterday 
proceeds  to-day,  and  after  to-day  will  proceed  to-morrow ; 
and,  lo,  all  times  and  the  things  of  time  pass  away,  that 
Matt,  there  may  come  the  promise  that  shall  abide ;  and  whoso 
10,  22.  gff^^ii  ]iffi-^  persevered  even  unto  tlie  end,  this  one  shall  be 
saved.  If  the  world  is  now  perishing,  the  married  woman, 
for  whom  beareth  she  ?  Or  in  heart  about  to  bear,  and 
in  flesh  not  about  to  bear,  why  doth  she  marry  ?  But  if  the 
world  is  still  about  to  last,  why  is  not  He  more  loved,  by 
W^hom  the  world  was  made  ?  If  already  enticements  of  this 
life  are  failing,  there  is  not  any  thing  for  a  Christian  soul 
with  desire  to  seek  after  ;  but  if  they  shall  yet  remain,  there 
is  what  with  holiness  he  may  despise.  For  the  one  of  these 
two  there  is  no  hope  of  lust,  in  the  other  greater  glory  of 
charity.  How  many  or  how  long  are  the  very  years,  in 
which  the  flower  of  carnal  age  seems  to  flourish  ?  Some 
females  having  thoughts  of  marriage,  and  with  ardour 
wishing  it,  Avhilst  they  are  being  despised  or  put  off",  on  a 
sudden  have  grown  old,  so  as  that  now  they  would  feel 
shame,  rather  than  desire,  to  marry.  But  many  having 
married,  their  husbands  having  set  out  into  distant  countries 
very  soon  after  their  union,  have  grown  aged  expecting  their 
return,  and,  as  though  soon  left  widows,  at  times  have  not 
even  attained  so  as  at  least  as  old  women  to  receive  their  old 
men  on  their  return.  If  therefore,  when  betrothed  bride- 
grooms despised  or  delayed,  or  when  husbands  were  abroad, 
carnal  desire  could  be  restrained  from  commission  of 
fornication  or  adultery,  why  cannot  it  be  restrained  from 
^  Olibrius,  see  S.  Jerome  to  Demetr.     Beiw 


DaiKjer  of  seeking  solace  in  carnal  tilings.  377 

commission  of  sacrilege  ?    If  it  hath  been  repressed,  when      de 
being  deferred  it  was  glowing,  why  is  it  not  put  down,  when  vmui- 
having  been  cut  off  it  had  grown  cold  ?     For  they  in  greater  tatis. 
measure  endure   glowing  of  desire,  who  despair  not  of  the 
pleasure  of  the  same  desire.     But  whoso  of  unmarried  per- 
sons vow  chastity  to  God,  withdraw  that  very  hope,  which 
is  the  fuel  of  love.     Hence  with  more  ease  is  desire  bridled, 
which  is  kindled  by  no  expectation  ;  and  yet,  unless  against 
this    prayer   be    made,    in    order    to    overcome    it,  itself  as 
unlawful  is  the  more  ardently  wished  for. 

26.  Therefore  let  spiritual   delights  succeed  to  the  place    xxi. 
of  carnal  delights  in  holy  ciiastity  ;  reading,  prayer,  psalm, 
good  thought,  frequency  in  good  works,  hope  of  the  world 
to  come,  and  a  heart  upward  ;  and  for  all  these  giving  of 
thanks  unto  the  Father  of  lights,  from  Whom,  without  any 
doubt,  every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift,  as  Scripture  James 
bears  witness,   cometh   down.      For  when,  in  stead  of  the   ' 
delights  of  married  women,  which  they  have  in  the  flesh  of 
their  husbands,  the  use  of  other  carnal  delights  is  taken,  as 
it  were  to  solace  them,  why  should  I  speak  of  the  evils  which 
follow,  when  the  Apostle  hath  said  in  short,  that  the  widow,  i  Tim. 
who  lives  in  delights,  living  is  dead.     But  far  be  it  from  you,"'  ^' 
that  ye  be  taken  with  lust  of  riches  instead  of  lust  of  marriage, 
or  that  in  your  hearts  money  succeed  to  the  place  of  love  of 
a  husband.     For  looking  into  men's  conversation,  we  have 
often   found   by   experience,  that  in  certain  persons,  when 
wantonness  hath   been   restrained,  avarice    hath    increased. 
For,  as,  in  the  senses  themselves  of  the  body,  they  who  see 
not  hear  more    keenly,  and  discern  many  things  by  touch, 
nor  have  such  as  have  the  use  of  their  eyes  so  great  life  in  their 
touch ;  and  in  this  instance  it  is  understood  that,  when  the 
exertion  of  the  power  of  attention '  hath  been  restrained  in  i  inten- 
one  approach,  that  is,  of  the  eyes,  it  puts  itself  forth  into  other  ^'°°^ 
senses,  more  ready  with  keenness  to  distinguish,  as  though 
it  essayed  to  supply  from  the  one  what  was  denied  in  the 
other ;    thus  also    often    carnal  lust,  being   restrained    from 
pleasure  of  sensual  intercourse,  with  greater  strength  reaches 
itself  forth  to  desire  money,  and  when  turned  away  from  the 
one,  turns  itself  with    more  glow  of  passion  to    the  other. 
But  in  you  let  the  love  of  riches  grow  cold  together  with  the 


378  Comfort  to  be  sought  in  spiritual  labours. 

DE  love  of  marriage,  and  let  a  pious  use  of  what  property  you 
viDm-  possess  be  directed  to  spiritual  delights,  that  your  hberality 
TATis.  wax  warm  rather  in  helping  such  as  are  in  want  than  in 
enriching  covetous  persons.  Forsooth  into  the  heavenly 
treasury  are  sent  not  gifts  to  the  covetous,  but  alms  to  the 
needy,  which  above  measure  help  the  prayers  of  widows. 
Fastings,  also,  and  watchings,  so  far  as  they  disturb  not 
health,  if  they  be  spent  in  praying,  singing  psalms,  reading, 
and  meditating  in  the  Law  of  God,  even  the  very  things 
which  seem  laborious  are  turned  into  spiritual  delights.  For 
no  way  burdensome  are  the  labours  of  such  as  love,  but  even 
of  themselves  delight,  as  of  such  as  hunt,  fowl,  fish,  gather 
grapes,  traffic,  delight  themselves  with  some  game.  It 
matters  therefore  what  be  loved.  For,  in  the  case  of  what 
is  loved,  either  there  is  no  labour,  or  the  labour  also  is  loved. 
And  consider  how  it  should  be  matter  for  shame  and  grief,  if 
there  be  pleasure  in  labour,  to  take  a  wild  beast,  to  fill  cask 
1  cupa    and  purse',  to  cast  a  ball, and  there  be  no  pleasure  in  labours 

et  sac-     .  •      r~>    ,1  I 

cuius      to  wm  God  ! 

xxii.  27.  Indeed  in  all  spiritual  delights,  which  unmarried 
women  enjoy,  their  holy  conversation  ought  also  to  be  with 
caution  ;  lest  haply,  though  their  life  be  not  evil  through 
naughtiness,  their  report  be  evil  through  negligence.  Nor 
are  they  to  be  listened  to,  whether  they  be  holy  men  or 
women,  when  (upon  occasion  of  their  neglect  in  some 
matter  being  blamed,  through  which  it  comes  to  pass  that 
they  fall  into  evil  suspicion,  from  which  they  know  that  their 
life  is  far  removed)  they  say  that  it  is  enough  for  them  their 
conscience  before  God,  despising  what  men  think  of  them, 
not  only  imprudently  ^  but  also  cruelly  ;  when  they  slay  the 
souls  of  others;  v/hether  of  such  as  blaspheme  the  way  of 
God,  who  following  their  suspicion  are  displeased  at  what  is 
the  chaste  lite  of  the  Saints,  as  though  it  were  shameful, 
or  of  such  also  as  make  excuse,  and  imitate,  not  what  they 
see,  but  what  they  think.  Wherefore  whosoever  guards  his 
life  from  charges  of  shameful  and  evil  deeds,  does  good  to 
himself;  but  whosoever  guards  his  character  too,  is  merciful 
also  towards  others.  For  unto  ourselves  our  own  life  is 
necessary,  unto  others  our  character;  and  certainly  even 
f  al.  '  impudenter,'  '  with  lack  of  modesty.' 


Good  report  to  be  kept  for  otlters"  sake.  379 

what  we  mercifully  minister  unto  others,  for  their  health,     de 
abounds  also  to  our  own  profit.     Whence  not  in  vain  the  vidui. 
Apostle,  We  provide  good  things,  saith  he,  not  onlij  before  tatis. 
God,  bat  also  before  men ;  also  he  saith,  P/mse  ye  all  wt-w^f""^"^' 
through  all  things;  even  as  I  also  please  all  men  through  alli  Cor. 
things,  not  seeking  what  is  of  profit  unto  myself,  but  tvhat     ' 
■unto  many,    that    they   may  be  saved.     Also  in  a   certain 
exhortation  he  says,  For  the  rest,brethren,  whatsoever  things ^hU. 4, 
are  true,  tvhatsoever  things  are  holy,  tvhatsoever  things  are 
just,  tvhatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  thitigs  are  most 
dear,  tvhatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if  any  virtue,  if 
any  praise,    these    tilings    think    on,    which    ye   have    both 
learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen  in  me.      You 
see  how  among  many  things,  unto  which  by  exhortation  he 
admonished  them,  he  neglected  not  to  set,  tvhatsoever  tilings 
are  of  good  report ;  and  in  two  words  included  all  things, 
where    he    saith,  if  any  virtue,  if  any  praise.     For  unto 
virtue  pertain  the  good  things  of  which  He  made  mention 
above;  but  good  report  unto  praise.    1  think  that  the  Apostle 
took  not  the  praise  of  men  for  any  great  thing,  saying  in 
another  place.  But  to  me  it  is  the  least   thing,  that  I  be  i  Cox.  a, 
judged  of  you,  or  of  day  of  man;  and  in  another  place.  If  I  q^x,  \^ 
tvere  pleasing  men,  I  should  not  be  a  servant  of  Christ;  and  ^^• 
again.  For  our  glory  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our  conscience. '^Cor.'i, 
But  of  these  two,  that  is,  of  a  good  life,  and  a  good  report, 
or  as  is  said  more  shortly,  of  virtue  and  praise,  the  one  for 
his  own  sake  he  most  wisely  kept,  the  other  for  the  sake  of 
others   he    most   mercifully  provided.      But,   forasmuch    as 
human  caution,  how  great  soever,  cannot  on  every  side  avoid 
most  malevolent  suspicions,  when  for  our  good  report   we 
shall  have  done   whatever  we  rightly  can,  if  any,  either  by 
falsely  pretending  evil  things  of  us,  or  from  believing  evil  of 
us,  endeavour  to  stain  our  fair  fame,  let  there  be  present  the 
solace  of  conscience,  and  clearly  also  the  joy,  in  that  our 
reward  is  great  in  Heaven,  even  when  men  say  many  evil  Matt.  5, 
things  of  us,  and  we  yet  live  godly  and  righteously.     For  that 
reward  is  as  the  pay  of  such  as  serve  as  soldiers,  through  the 
arras  of  righteousness,  not  only  on  the  right  hand,  but  on 
the  left  also;  that  is  to  say,  through  glory  and  mean  estate, 2 Cor. 6, 
through  ill  report  and  good  report.  '   ' 


380        The  unmarried  exhorted  to  forbear  marriage. 

DE  28.  Go  on  therefore  in  your  course,  and  run  with  perse- 
viDui-  ^'erance,  in  order  that  ye  may  obtain  ;  and  by  pattern  of 
TATis.  life^  and  discourse  of  exhortation,  carry  away  with  you  into 
xxiii.  this  same  your  course,  whomsoever  ye  shall  have  had  power. 
Let  there  not  bend  you  from  this  earnest  purpose,  whereby 
ye  excite  many  to  follow,  the  complaint  of  vain  persons, 
who  say.  How  shall  the  human  race  subsist,  if  all  shall 
have  been  continent  ?  As  though  it  were  for  any  other 
reason  that  this  world  is  delayed,  save  that  the  predestined 
number  of  the  Saints  be  fulfilled,  and  were  this  the  sooner 
fulfilled,  assuredly  the  end  of  the  world  would  not  be  put 
off.  Nor  let  it  stay  you  from  your  earnest  purpose  of 
persuading  others  to  the  same  good  ye  have,  if  it  be  said  to 
3"ou,  Whereas  marriage  also  is  good,  how  shall  there  be  all 
goods  in  the  Body  of  Christ,  both  the  greater,  forsooth,  and 
the  lesser,  if  all  through  praise  and  love  of  continence 
imitate  ?  In  the  first  place,  because  with  the  endeavour  that 
all  be  continent,  there  will  still  be  but  few,  for  i\ot  all  receive 
Mat.i9, this  word.  But  forasmuch  as  it  is  written,  Whoso  can 
11.12.  j-Qceive,  let  him  receive;  then  do  they  receive  who  can,  when 
silence  is  not  kept  even  towards  those  who  cannot.  Next, 
neither  ought  we  to  fear  lest  haply  all  receive  it,  and  some 
one  of  lesser  goods,  that  is,  married  life,  be  wanting  in  the 
body  of  Christ.  For  if  all  shall  have  heard,  and  all  shall 
have  received,  we  ought  to  understand  that  this  very 
thing  was  predestinated,  that  married  goods  already  suffice 
in  the  number  of  those  members  which  so  many  have  passed 
out  of  this  life.  For  neither  now,  if  all  shall  have  been 
continent,  will  they  give  the  honour  of  the  continent  to  those 
who  have  already  borne  into  the  garners  of  the  Lord  the  fruit 
thirty-fold,  if  that  be  understood  of  married  good.  There- 
fore all  these  goods  will  have  there  their  place,  although 
from  this  time  no  woman  wish  to  be  married,  no  man  wish 
to  marry  a  wife.  Therefore  without  anxiety  urge  on  whom 
ye  can,  to  become  what  ye  are  ;  and  pray  with  watchfulness 
and  fervour,  that  by  the  help  of  the  Right  Hand  of  the  Most 
High,  and  by  the  abundance  of  the  most  merciful  grace  of 
the  Lord,  ye  may  both  persevere  in  that  which  ye  are,  and 
may  make  advances  unto  that  which  ye  shall  be. 

29.  Next   I  entreat  you,  by  Him,  from  Whom  ye  have 


The  Writer  asks  prayer  on  his  behalf.  381 

both  received  this  gift,  and  hope  for  the  rewards  of  this  gift,     he 
that  ye  be  mindful  to  set  me  also  in  your  prayers  with  all  yipui- 
your  household  Church.     Forsooth  it  hath  come  to  pass  in  taxis. 
most  proper  order,  that  I  should   write  unto  your   Mother 
now  aged  a  letter*  concerning  prayer;  unto  her,  forsooth,  it'  Ep. 
chiefly  pertains  by  praying  to  contend  on  your  behalf,  who  probam. 
is  less  full  of  care  for  herself  than  for  you;  and  that  for  you 
rather  than  for  her  I  should  compose  this  little  work  con- 
cerning widowed  continence;  because  unto  you  it  remaineth 
to  overcome,  what  her  age  hath  already  overcome.     But  the 
holy    virgin    your    child,    if    she    desire    ought    concerning 
her  profession    from    our   labours,  she    hath    a   large  book 
on    Holy   Virginity    to    read.     Concerning    the    reading    of 
which  I  had  also  admonished  you,  forasmuch  as  it  contains 
many  things  necessary  unto  either  chastity,  that  is,  virginal 
and  widowed,  which   things    on   this  account   I   have    here 
partly  touched    on    lightly,   partly  altogether   passed    over, 
because  I  there  discussed  them  more  fully. 
May  you  persevere  in  the  grace  of  Christ. 


S.    AUGUSTINE 

ON 

LYING. 


This  book  appears  from  its  place  in  the  Retractations  to  have  been  written 
about  A.  D.  395,  as  it  is  the  last  work  named  in  the  first  book,  which 
contains  those  which  he  wrote  before  he  was  Bishop.  Some  editions 
represent  it  as  addressed  to  Cousentius,  but  not  the  Mss.  The  latter  are 
probably  right,  as  his  other  work  on  the  subject  was  written  in  answer 
to  the  enquiries  of  Consentius  on  the  case  of  the  Priscillianists  many- 
years  later.     Ben. 


Retractations,  Book  I.  last  Chapter. 

"  I  have  also  written  a  Book  on  Lying,  which  though  it  takes  some  pains  to 
understand,  contains  much  that  is  useful  for  the  exercise  of  the  mind,  and  more 
that  is  profitable  to  morals,  in  inculcating  the  love  of  speaking  the  truth.  This 
also  I  was  minded  to  rtmove  from  my  works,  because  it  seemed  to  me  obscure, 
and  intricate,  and  altogether  troublesome;  for  which  reason  1  had  not  sent  it 
abroad.  And  when  I  had  afterwards  written  another  book,  under  this  title, 
Against  Lying,  much  more  had  I  determined  and  ordered  that  the  former  should 
cease  to  exist;  which  however  was  not  done.  Therefore  in  this  retractation  of 
my  works,  as  T  have  found  this  still  in  being,  [  have  ordered  that  it  should 
remain ;  chiefly  because  therein  are  to  be  found  some  necessary  things  which  in 
the  other  are  not.  Why  the  other  has  for  its  title.  Against  Lying,  but  this, 
Of  Lying,  the  reason  is  this,  that  throughout  the  one  is  an  open  assault  upon 
lying,  whereas  great  part  of  this  is  taken  up  with  the  discussion  of  the  question 
for  and  against.  Both  however  are  directed  to  the  same  object.  This  book 
begins  thus  ;  "  Magna  quastio  est  de  Mendacio." 


1.  There  is  a  great  question  about  Lying,  which  often 
arises  in  the  midst  of  our  every  clay  business,  and  gives  us 
much  trouble,  that  we  may  not  either  rashly  call  that  a  lie 


Question  about  Ikying.     A  joke  or  a  mistake  is  no  lie.    383 

which  is  not  such,  ov  decide  that  it  is  sometimes  right  to  tell 
a  lie,  that  is,  a  kind  of  honest,  well-meant,  charitable  lie. 
This  question  we  will  painfully  discuss  by  seeking  with  them 
that  seek :  whether  to  any  good  purpose,  we  need  not  take 
upon    ourselves    to   affirm,   for    the    attentive    reader   will 
sufficiently  gather  from  the  course  of  the  discussion.     It  is, 
indeed,  very  full  of  dark  corners,  and  hath  many  cavern-like 
windings,  whereby  it  oft  eludes  the  eagerness  of  the  seeker ; 
so  that  at  one  moment  what  was  found  seems  to  slip  out  of 
one's  hands,  and  anon  comes  to  light  again,  and  then  is  once 
more  lost  to  sight.     At  last,  however,  the   chase  will  bear 
down  more  surelv,  and  will  overtake  our  sentence.     Wherein 
if  there  is  any  error,  yet  as  Truth  is  that  which  setteth  free 
from  all  error,  and  Falsehood  that  which  entangleth  in  all 
error,  one  never  errs  more  safely,  methinks,  than  when  one 
errs  by  too  much  loving  the  truth,  and  too  much  rejecting  of 
falsehood.     For  they  who  find  great  fault  say  it  is  too  much, 
whereas  peradventure  Truth  would  say  after  all,  it  is  not  yet 
enough.     But  whoso  readest,  thou  wilt  do  well  to  find  no 
fault  until  thou  have  read  the  whole ;  so  wilt  thou  have  less 
faidt  to  find.     Eloquence  thou  must  not  look  for :  we  have 
been  intent  upon  things,  and  upon  dispatch  in  putting  out  of 
hand  a  matter  which  nearly  concerns  our  every  day  life,  and 
therefore  have  had  small  pains,  or  almost  none,  to  bestow 
upon  words. 

2.  Setting  aside,  therefore,  jokes,  which  have  never  been  ii. 
accounted  lies,  seeing  they  bear  with  them  in  the  tone  of 
voice,  and  in  the  very  mood  of  the  joker  a  most  evident 
indication  that  he  means  no  deceit,  although  the  thing  he 
utters  be  not  true :  touching  which  kind  of  discourse, 
whether  it  be  meet  to  be  used  by  perfect  minds,  is  another 
question  which  we  have  not  at  this  time  taken  in  hand  to 
clear;  but  setting  jokes  apart,  the  first  point  to  be  attended 

to,  is,  that  a  person  should  not  be  thought  to  lie,  who  lieth 
not. 

3.  For  which  purpose  we  must  see  what  a  lie  is.     For    iii. 
not  every  one  who  says  a  false  thing  lies,  if  he  believes  or 
opines  that  to  be  true  which  he  says.    Now  between  believing 
and  opining  there  is  this  difference,  that  sometimes  he  who 
believes  feels  that  he  does  not  know  that  which  he  believes, 


DE 

MEN 


384       Even  truth  thought  false  by  the  sayer  is  a  lie. 

(although   he  may  know  himself  to  be  ignorant  of  a  thing, 
DAcio.  and  yet  have  no  doubt  at  all  concerning  it,  if  he  most  firmly 
believes  it :)  whereas  he  who  opines,  thinks  he  knows  that 
which  he  does  not  know.     Now  whoever  utters  that  which 
he  holds  in   his  mind  either  as  belief  or  as  opinion,  even 
though  it  be  false,  he  lies  not.     For  diis  he  owes  to  the  faith 
of  his  utterance,  that  he  thereby  produce  that  which  he  holds 
in  his  mind,  and  has  in  that  way  in  which  he  produces  it. 
Not  that  he  is  without  fault,  although  he  lie  not,  if  either  he 
believes  what  he  ought  not  to  believe,  or  thinks  he  knows 
what  he  knows  not,  even  though  it  should  be  true:    for  he 
accounts  an  unknown  thing  for  a  known.     Wherefore,  that 
man  lies,  who  has  one  thing  in  his  mind  and  utters  another 
in  words,  or  by  signs  of  whatever  kind.     Whence  also   the 
heart  of  him  who  lies  is  said  to  be  double;  that  is,  there  is  a 
double    thought :    the   one,  of  that    thing  which    he   either 
knows  or  thinks  to  be  true  and  does  not  produce  ;  the  other, 
of  that  thing  which  he  produces  instead  thereof,  knowing  or 
thinking  it  to  be  false.     Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  he 
may  say  a  false  thing  and  yet  not  lie,  if  he  thinks  it  to  be 
so  as  he  says  although  it  be  not  so;  and,  that  he  may  say  a 
true  thing,  and  yet  lie,  if  he  thinks  it  to  be  false  and  utters  it 
for  true,  although  in  reality  it  be  so  as  he  utters  it.     For 
from  the  sense  of  his  own  mind,  not  from  the  verity  or  falsity 
of  the  things  themselves,  is  he  to  be  judged  to  lie  or  not  to 
lie.     Therefore  he  who  utters  a  false  thing  for  a  true,  which 
however  he  opines  to  be  true,  maybe  called  erring  and  rash  : 
but  he  is  not  rightly  said   to    lie ;    because    he   has   not  a 
double   heart  when   he  utters  it,   neitlier    does   he  wish  to 
deceive,  but  is  deceived.     But  the  fault  of  him  who  lies,  is, 
the  desire  of  deceiving  in  the  uttering  of  his  mind ;  whether 
he  do  deceive,  in  that  he  is  believed  when  uttering  the  false 
thing;  or  whether  he  do  not  deceive,  either  in  that  he  is  not 
believed,  or  in  that  he  utters  a  true  thing  with  will  to  deceive, 
which  he  does  not  think  to  be  true :  wherein  being  believed, 
he    does   not  deceive   though  it  was   his  will   to   deceive: 
except  that  he  deceives  in  so  far  as  he  is  thought  to  know  or 
think  as  he  utters. 
iv.         4.  But  it  may  be  a  very  nice  question  whether  in  the  absence 
of  all  will  to  deceive,  lying  is  altogether  absent.     Thus,  put 


What  is  lying  in  one  who  knows  he  is  disbelieved  ?     385 

the  case  that  a  person  shall  speak  a  false  thing,  which  he     de 
esteems  to  be  false,  on  the  ground  that  he  thinks  he  is  not  dacio 
believed,  to  the  intent,  that  in  that  way  falsifying  his  faith  he 
may  deter  the  person  to  whom  he  speaks,  which  person  he 
perceives  does  not  choose  to  believe  him.     For  here  is  a 
person  who  tells  a  lie  with  studied  purpose  of  not  deceiving, 
if  to  tell  a  lie  is  to  utter  any  thing  otherwise  than  you  know 
or  think  it  to  be.     But  if  it  be  no  lie,  unless  when  something 
is  uttered  with  wish  to  deceive,  that  person  lies  not,  who 
says  a  false  thing,  knowing  or  thinking  it  to  be  false,  but 
says  it  on  purpose  that  the  person  to  whom  he  speaks  by  not 
believing  him   may  not  be   deceived,  because  the   speaker 
either    knows    or    thinks    the    other    will    not   believe    him. 
Whence  if  it  appear  to  be  possible  that  a  person  should  say 
a  false  thing  on  purpose  that  he  to  whom  it  is  said  may  not 
be  deceived,  on  the  other  hand  there  is  this  opposite  case, 
the  case  of  a  person  saying  the  truth  on  purpose  that  he  may 
deceive.      For   if  a   man    determines   to    say  a  true    thing 
because  he  perceives  he  is  not  believed,  that  man  speaks 
truth   on   purpose  that  he   may  deceive  :    for  he   knows   or 
thinks  that  what  is  said  maybe  accounted  false,  just  because 
it  is  spoken  by  him.     Wherefore  in  saying  a  true  thing  on 
purpose  that  it  may  be  thought  false,  he  says  a  true  thing  on 
purpose   to   deceive.     So   that  it   may   be   enquired,  which 
rather  lies:    he   who   says   a  false   thing  that  he   may  not 
deceive,  or  he  who  says  a  true  thing  that  he  may  deceive  ? 
the  one  knowing  or  thinking  that  he  says  a  false  thing,  and 
the  other  knowing  or  thinking  that  he  says  a  true  thing? 
For  we  have  already  said  that  the  person  who  does  not  know 
the  thing  to  be  false  which  he  utters,  does  not  lie  if  he  thinks 
it  to  be  true ;    and  that  that  ]^erson  rather  lies  who  utters 
even  a  true  tiling  when  he  thinks  it  false :  because  it  is  by 
the  sense  of  their  mind  that  they  are  to  be  judged.     Con- 
cerning these  persons  therefore,  whom   we  have  set  forth, 
there  is  no  small  question.     The  one,  who  knows  or  thinks 
he  says  a  false  thing,  and  says  it  on  purpose  that  he  may 
not  deceive  :   as,  if  he  knows  a  certain  road  to  be  beset  by 
robbers,  and  fearing  lest  some  person  for  whose  safety  he  is 
anxious  should  go  by  that  road,  which  person  he  knows  does 
not  trust  him,  should  tell  him  that  that  road  has  no  robbers, 

c  c 


MEN 
DACIO 


386     Cases  in  which  knowing  the  Truth  ivere  injurious. 

J'E  on  purpose  that  he  may  not  go  by  it,  as  he  will  think  there 
are  robbers  there  precisely  because  the  other  has  told  hini 
there  are  none,  and  he  is  resolved  not  to  believe  him, 
accomiting  him  a  liar.  The  other,  who  knowing  or  thinking 
that  to  be  true  which  he  says,  says  it  on  purpose  that  he 
may  deceive :  for  instance,  if  he  tells  a  person  who  does  not 
believe  him,  that  there  are  robbers  in  that  road  where  he 
really  knows  them  to  be,  that  he  to  whom  he  tells  it  may  the 
rather  go  by  that  road  and  so  fall  among  robbers,  because 
he  thinks  that  to  be  false  which  the  other  told  him.  Which 
then  of  these  lies  ?  the  one  who  has  chosen  to  say  a  false 
thing  that  he  may  not  deceive?  or  the  other  who  has  chosen 
to  say  a  true  thing  that  he  may  deceive  ?  that  one,  who 
in  saying  a  false  thing  aimed  that  he  to  whom  he  spake 
should  follow  the  truth  ?  or  this  one,  who  in  saying  a  true 
thing  aimed  that  he  to  whom  he  spake  should  follow  a  false- 
hood ?  Or  haply  have  both  lied  ?  the  one,  because  he  wished 
to  say  a  false  thing:  the  other,  because  he  wished  to  deceive? 
Or  rather,  has  neither  lied  ?  not  the  one,  because  he  had  the 
will  not  to  deceive  :  not  the  other,  because  he  had  the  will 
to  speak  the  truth  ?  For  the  question  is  not  now  which  of 
them  sinned,  but  which  of  them  lied:  as  indeed  it  is  presently 
seen  that  the  latter  sinned,  because  by  speaking  a  truth  he 
brought  it  about  that  a  person  should  fall  among  robbers, 
and  that  the  former  has  not  sinned,  or  even  has  done  good, 
because  by  speaking  a  false  thing  he  has  been  the  means  of 
a  person's  avoiding  destruction.  But  then  these  instances 
may  be  turned  the  other  way,  so  that  the  one  should  be 
supposed  to  wish  some  more  grievous  suffering  to  the  person 
whom  he  wishes  not  to  be  deceived ;  for  there  are  many 
cases  of  persons  who  through  knowing  certain  things  to  be 
true,  have  brought  destruction  upon  themselves,  if  the 
things  were  such  as  ought  to  have  continued  unknown  to 
them:  and  the  other  may  be  supposed  to  wish  some  con- 
venience to  result  to  the  person  whom  he  wishes  to  be 
deceived;  for  there  have  been  instances  of  persons  who 
would  have  destroyed  themselves  had  they  known  some  evil 
that  had  really  befallen  those  who  were  dear  to  them,  and 
through  deeming  it  false  have  spared  themselves:  and  so  to 
be  deceived  has  been  a  benefit  to  them,  as  to  others  it  has 


Question  of  definition.     How  far  our  course  is  safe.    387 

been  a  hurt  to  know  the  truth.     The  question  therefore  is     de 
not  with  what  purpose  of  doing  a  kindness  or  a  hurt,  either  dacio. 
the  one  said  a  false  thing  that  he  might  not  deceiv'e,  or  the 
other  a  true  thing  that  he  might  deceive:  but,  setting  apart 
the  convenience  or  inconvenience  of  the  persons  spoken  to, 
in  so    far   as  relates  to   the  ver}'  truth   and   falsehood,  the 
question  is,  whether  both  of  them  or  neither  has  lied.     For 
if  a  lie  is  an  utterance  with  will  of  uttering  a  false  thing,  that 
man  has  rather  lied  who  willed  to  say  a  false  thing,  and  said 
what  he  willed,  albeit  he  said  it  of  set  purpose  not  to  deceive. 
But  if  a  lie  is  any  utterance  whatever  with  will  to  deceive, 
then  not   the  former  has  lied,  but   the   latter,  who  even  in 
speaking  truth  willed  to  deceive.     And  if  a  lie  is  an  utterance 
with  will  of  any  falsity,  both  have  lied  ;  because  both  the 
former  willed  his  utterance  to  be  false,  and  the  latter  willed 
a  false  thing  to  be  believed  concerning  his  utterance  which 
was    true.     Further,   if  a   lie    is    an  utterance   of  a  person 
wishing  to  utter  a  false  thing  that  he  may  deceive,  neither 
has  lied;   because  both  the  former  in  saying  a  false  thing 
had  the  will  to  make  a  true  thing  believed,  and  the  latter  to 
say  a  true  thing  in  order  that  he  might  make  a  false  thing 
believed.     We  shall  be   clear  then  of  all  rashness  and  all 
lying,  if,  what  we  know  to  be  true  or  right  to  be  believed,  we 
utter  when  need  is,  and  wish  to   make  that  thing  believed 
which  we  utter.     If,  however,  either  thinking  that  to  be  true 
which  is  false,  or  accounting  as  known  that  which  is  to  us 
unknown,  or  believing  what  we   ought   not  to  believe,   or 
uttering  it  when  need  is  not,  we  yet  have  no  other  aim  than 
to  make  that  believed  which  we  utter ;  vve  do  not  stand  clear 
indeed  of  the  error  of  temerity,  but  we  do  stand  clear  of  all 
lying.     For  there  is  no  need  to  be  afraid  of  any  of  those 
definitions,  when  the  mind  has  a  good  conscience,  that  it 
utters  that  which  to  be  true  it  either  knows,  or  opines,  or 
believes,  and  that  it  has  no  wish  to  make  any  thing  believed 
but  that  which  it  utters. 

5.  But  whether  a  lie  be  at  some  times  useful,  is  a  much 
greater  and  more  concerning  question.  Whether,  as  above, 
it  be  a  lie,  when  a  person  has  no  will  to  deceive,  or  even 
makes  it  his  business  that  the  person  to  whom  he  says  a 
thing   shall   not   be    deceived,   although    he    did   wish    the 

c  c  2 


388        Ground  taken  for  and  against  well-meant  lies. 

DE     thing  itself  which  he  uttered  to  be  false,  but  this  on  purpose 
DAcio.  ^^^^*  ^^^  might  cause  a  truth  to  be  believed  ;  whether,  again, 
it  be  a  lie  when  a  person  willingly  utters  even  a  truth  for  the 
purpose   of  deceiving ;    this   may  be   doubted.      But   none 
doubts  that  it  is  a  lie  when  a  person  willingly  utters  a  false- 
hood for  the  purpose  of  deceiving:  wherefore  a  false  utter- 
ance put  forth  with  will  to  deceive  is  manifestly  a  lie.     But 
V.      whether  this  alone  be  a  lie,  is  another  question.     Meanwhile, 
taking  this  kind  of  lie,  in  which  all  agree,  let   us   inquire, 
whether  it  be  sometimes  useful  to  utter  a  falsehood  with  will 
to  deceive.     They  who  think  it  is,  advance  testimonies  to 
Gen.  18,  their  opinion,  by  alleging  the  case  of  Sarah,  who,  when  she 
Gen. 27  ^ad   laughed,  denied  to  the   Angels  that  she  laughed  :    of 
19'        Jacob  questioned  by  his  father,  and  answering  that  he  was 
Exod.i,the  elder  son  Esau:  likewise  that  of  the  Egyptian  midwives, 

19   20  •  •  1      • 

who  to  save  the  Hebrew  infants  from  being  slam  at  their 
birth,  told  a  lie,  and  that  with  God's  approbation  and  reward: 
and  many  such  like  instances  ihey  pick  out,  of  lies  told  by 
persons  whom  you  would  not  dare  to  blame,  and  so  must 
own  that  it  may  sometimes  be  not  only  not  blameworthy, 
but  even  praiseworthy  to  tell  a  lie.  They  add  also  a  case 
with  which  to  urge  not  only  those  who  are  devoted  to  the 
Divine  Books,  but  all  men  and  common  sense,  saying, 
Suppose  a  man  should  take  refuge  with  thee,  vvho  by  thy  lie 
might  be  saved  from  death,  wouldest  thou  not  tell  it  ?  If  a 
sick  man  should  ask  a  question  which  it  is  not  expedient 
that  he  should  know,  and  might  be  more  grievously  afflicted 
even  by  thy  returning  him  no  answer,  wilt  thou  venture 
either  to  tell  the  truth  to  the  destruction  of  the  man's  life,  or 
rather  to  hold  thy  peace,  than  by  a  virtuous  and  merciful  lie 
to  be  serviceable  to  his  weak  health  ?  By  these  and  such 
like  arguments  they  think  they  most  plentifully  prove,  that  if 
occasion  of  doing  good  require,  we  may  sometimes  tell  a  lie. 
6.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  say  that  we  must  never 
lie,  plead  much  more  strongly,  using  first  the  Divine  authority, 
Exod.  because  in  the  very  Decalogue  it  is  written,  Thou  slialt  not 
^^'  ^^'  bear  false  witness  ;  under  which  general  term  it  comprises 
all  lying:  for  whoso  utters  any  thing  bears  witness  to  his 
own  mind.  But  lest  any  should  contend  that  not  every  lie 
is  to  be  called  false  witness,  what  will  he  say  to  that  which 


Instances  of  falsehood  in  Old  Testament  accounted  for.    389 

is  written,  The  mouth  that  lieth  slat/eth  the  soul":    and  lest     de 
any  should  suppose  that  this  may  be  understood  with  the  dacio. 
exception  of  some  liars,  let  him  read  in  another  place.  Thou  Wisd.i, 
tvilt  destroy  all  that  speak  leasiug.     AVhence  with  His  ovvUp- 
lips  the  Lord  saith,  Let  your  communication  he  yea,  yea; 5,6. 
nay,  nay  ;  for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  comet h  of  evil.  .^^^^ '   ' 
Hence  the  Apostle  also  in  giving  precept  for  the  putting  off 
of  the  old  man,  under  which  name  all  sins  are  understood, 
says  straightway,   Wherefore  putting  away  lying,  speak  ye  Eph.  4, 
truth. 

7.  Neither  do  they  confess  that  they  are  awed  by  those 
citations  from  the  Old  Testament  which  are  alleged  as 
examples  of  lies :  for  there,  every  incident  may  possibly  be 
taken  figuratively,  although  it  really  did  take  place :  and 
when  a  thing  is  either  done  or  said  figuratively,  it  is  no  lie. 
For  every  utterance  is  to  be  referred  to  that  which  it  utters. 
But  when  any  thing  is  either  done  or  said  figuratively,  it 
utters  that  which  it  signifies  to  those  for  whose  understanding 
it  was  put  forth.  Whence  we  may  believe  in  regard  of  those 
persons  of  the  prophetical  times  who  are  set  forth  as  authori- 
tative, that  in  all  that  is  written  of  them  they  acted  and 
spoke  prophetically ;  and  no  less,  that  there  is  a  prophetical 
meaning  in  all  those  incidents  of  their  lives  which  by  the 
same  prophetic  Spirit  have  been  accounted  worthy  of  being 
recorded  in  writing.  As  to  the  midwives,  indeed,  they 
cannot  say  that  these  women  did  through  the  prophetic 
Spirit,  with  purpose  of  signifying  a  future  truth,  tell  Pharaoh 
one  thing  instead  of  another,  (albeit  that  Spirit  did  signify 
something,  without  their  knowing  what  was  doing  in  their 
persons  :)  but,  they  say  that  these  women  were  according  to 
their  degree  approved  and  rewarded  of  God.  For  if  a  person 
who  is  used  to  tell  lies  for  harm's  sake  comes  to  tell  them  for 
the  sake  of  doing  good,  that  person  has  made  great  progress. 
But  it  is  one  thing  that  is  set  forth  as  laudable  in  itself, 
another  that  in  comparison  with  a  worse  is  preferred.  It  is 
one  sort  of  gratulation  that  we  express  when  a  man  is  in 
sound  health,  another  when  a  sick  man  is  getting  better. 
In  the  Scripture,  even  Sodom  is  said  to  be  justified  in 
comparison  with  the  crimes  of  the  people  Israel.  And  to 
*  Oa  quod  mentitur.     The  mouth  that  belieth,  E.  V.  frifix  nara^tuhai^iiav. 


390      No  deception  nnblamed  in  the  New  Testament. 

DE     this  rule  they  apply  all  the   instances  of  lying  which  are 

DAcio.  produced  from  the  Old  Books,  and  are  found  not  repre- 
hended, or  cannot  be  reprehended:  either  they  are  approved 
on  the  score  of  a  progress  towards  improvement  and  hope 
of  better  things,  or  in  virtue  of  some  hidden  signification 
they  are  not  altogether  lies. 

8.  For  this  reason,  from  the  books  of  the  New  Testament, 
except  the  figurative  presignifications  used  by  our  Lord,  if 
thou  consider  the  life  and  manners  of  the  Saints,  their 
actions  and  sayings,  nothing  of  the  kind  can  be  produced 
which  should  provoke  to  imitation  of  lying.  For  the  simu- 
lation of  Peter  and  Barnabas  is  not  only  recorded,  but  also 

Gal.  2,  reproved  and  corrected.  For  it  was  not,  as  some  suppose ""j 
out  of  the  same  simulation  that  even  Paul  the  Apostle  either 

1  sacra-  circumcised  Timothy,  or  himself  celebrated  Certain  ceremonies' 
according  to  the  Jewish  rite ;  but  he  did  so,  out  of  that 
liberty  of  his  mind  whereby  he  preached  that  neither  are 
the  Gentiles  the  better  for  circumcision,  nor  the  Jews  the 
worse.  Wherefore  he  judged  that  neither  the  former  should 
be  tied  to  the  custom  of  the  Jews,  nor  the  Jews  deterred 
from  the  custom  of  their  fathers.     Whence  are  those  words 

1  Cor.7,  of  his:  Is  avy  man  called  being  circumcised?  let  him  not 
'  become  uncircunicised.  Is  anij  called  in  uncircamcision  ? 
let  him.  not  be  circumcised.  Circumcision  is  nothing,  and 
imcircumcision  is  nothing,  but  the  keeping  of  the  command- 
ments of  God.  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 
ivherein  he  teas  called.  How  can  a  man  become  uncircum- 
cised  after  circumcision  ?  but  let  him  not  do  so,  saith  he : 
let  him  not  so  live  as  if  he  had  become  uncircumcised,  that 
is,  as  if  he  had  covered  again  with  flesh  the  part  that  was 
bared,  and  ceased  to  be  a  Jew;  as  in  another  place  he  saith, 

^om.2,  Thy  circumcision  is  become  uncircumcision.     And  this  the 

25 

Apostle  said,  not  as  though  he  would  compel  either  those  to 
remain  in  uncircumcision,  or  the  Jews  in  the  custom  of  their 
fathers  :  but  that  neither  these  nor  those  should  be  forced  to 
the  other  custom;  and,  each  should  have  power  of  abiding  in 
his  own  custom,  not  necessity  of  so  doing.  For  neither  if 
the  Jew  should  wish,  where  it  would  disturb  no  man,  to 
recede  from  Jewish  observances,  would  he  be  prohibited  by 
b  S.  Jerome  Ep.  inter  Augustinianas,  75,  n.  9 — 11. 


St.  PaiWs  conduct  no  deceit^  St.  Peter''s  wrong.      391 
the  Apostle,  since  the  object  of  his   counselhng  to  abide     de 

MEN" 

therein  was  tliat  Jews  might  not  by  being  troubled  about  dacio. 
superfluous  things  be  hindered  from  coming  to  those  things 
which    are   necessary   to    salvation.      Neither   would    it   be 
prohibited  by  him,  if  any  of  the  Gentiles  should  wish  to  be 
circumcised  for  the  purpose   of  shewing  that  he   does  not 
detest  the  same  as  noxious,  but  holds  it  indifferently,  as  a 
seal,  the  usefulness  of  which  had  already  passed  away  withsigna- 
time;  for  it  did  not  follow  that,  if  there  were  now  no  salvation  ^"^  ^°^ 
to  be  had  from  it,  there  was  destruction  to  be  dreaded  there- 
from.    And  for  this  reason,  Timothy,,  having  been  called  in 
uncircumcision,  yet  because  his  mother  was  a  Jewess  and  he 
was  bound,  in  order  to  gain  his  kindred,  to  shew  them  that 
he  had  not  learnt  in  the  Christian  discipline  to  abominate 
the  sacraments  of  the   old    Law,   was   circumcised  by  the  Acts  16, 
Apostle:  that  in  this  way  they  might  prove  to  the  Jews,  that 
the  reason  why  the  Gentiles  do  not  receive  them,  is  not  that 
they  are  evil  and  were  perniciously  observed  by  the  Fathers, 
but  because  they  are  no  longer  necessary  to  salvation  after 
the  advent  of  that  so  great  Sacrament,  which  through  so  long 
times  the  whole  of  that  ancient  Scripture  in  its  prophetical 
prefigurations    did    travail   in   birth   withal.     For  he   would 
circumcise  Titus  also,  when  the  Jews  urged  this,  but  that  Gal.  2, 
false  brethren,  privily  brought  in,  wished  it  to  be  done  to  the   " 
intent  they  might  have  it  to  disseminate  concerning  Paul 
himself  as  a  token  that  he  had  given  place  to  the  truth  of 
their  preaching,  who  said  that  the  hope  of  Gospel  salvation  is 
in  circumcision  of  the  flesh  and  observances  of  that  kind, 
and  that  without  these  Christ  profiteth  no  man:  whereas  on 
the  contrary  Christ  would  nothing  profit  them,  who  should 
be  circumcised    because    they  thought  that  in   it  was  sal- 
vation;  whence  that  saying,  Behold,  I  Paul  say  unto  yoti,Gah5, 
that  if  ye  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  projit  you  nothing,'^- 
Out  of  this  liberty,  therefore,  did  Paul  keep  the  observances 
of  his  fathers,  but   with  this    one   precaution   and   express 
declaration,  that  people   should    not  suppose   that  without 
these  was  no  Christian  salvation.      Peter,  however,  by  his 
making  as  though  salvation  consisted  in  Judaism,  was  cora- 
pelhng  the  Gentiles  to  judaize  \  as  is  shewn  by  Paul's  words, 
where  he  says.  Why  compellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  Gal.  2, 

14. 


392  Allegory  not  example.  Lying  threatened  with  destruction. 

DE      do  the  Jews  ?    For  they  would   be   under    no   compulsion 


MEN- 
DACIO. 


unless  they  saw  that  he  observed  them  in  such  manner  as  if 
beside  them  could  be  no  salvation.  Peter's  simulation  there- 
fore is  not  to  be  compared  to  Paul's  liberty.  And  while  we 
ought  to  love  Peter  for  that  he  willingly  received  correction, 
we  must  not  bolster  up  lying  even  by  the  authority  of 
Paul,  who  both  recalled  Peter  to  the  right  path  in  the  pre- 
sence of  them  all,  lest  the  Gentiles  through  him  should  be 
compelled  to  judaize;  and  bare  witness  to  his  own  preaching, 
that  whereas  he  was  accounted  hostile  to  the  traditions  of  the 
fathers  in  that  he  would  not  impose  them  on  the  Gentiles,  he 
did  not  despise  to  celebrate  them  himself  according  to  the 
custom  of  his  fathers,  and  therein  sufficiently  shewed  that  this 
has  remained  in  them  at  the  coming  of  Christ;  that  neither 
to  the  Jews  they  are  pernicious,  nor  to  the  Gentiles  necessary, 

1  salu-    nor  henceforth  to  any  of  mankind  means  of  salvation  '. 

^"^^^  9.  But  if  no  authority  for  lying  can  be  alleged,  neither 

from  the  ancient  Books,  be  it  because  that  is  not  a  lie  which 
is  received  to  have  been  done  or  said  in  a  figurative  sense, 
or  be  it  because  good  men  are  not  challenged  to  imitate  that 
which  in  bad  men,  beginning  to  amend,  is  praised  in  com- 
parison with  the  worse  ;  nor  yet  from  the  books  of  the  New 
Testament,  because  Peter's  correction  rather  than  his  simu- 
lation, even  as  his  tears  rather  than  his  denial,  is  what  we 
vi.  must  imitate :  then,  as  to  those  examples  which  are  fetched 
from  common  life,  they  assert  much  more  confidently  that 
there  is  no  trust  to  be  given  to  these.  For  first  they  teach, 
that  a  lie  is  iniquity,  by  many  proofs  of  holy  writ,  especially 

Ps.  5,5.  by  that  which  is  written,  TJion,  Lord,  hat  est  all  workers  of 

^'  iniquity,  thou  shall  destroy  them  that  speak  leasing.     For 

either  as  the  Scripture  is  wont,  in  the  following  clause  it 
expounds  the  former;  so  that,  as  iniquity  is  a  term  of  a 
wider  meaning,  leasing  is  named  as  the  particular  sort  of 
iniquity  intended :  or  if  they  think  there  is  any  difference 
between  the  two,  leasing  is  by  so  much  worse  than  iniquity 
as  thou  wilt  destroy  is  heavier  than  thou  halest.  For  it  may 
be  that  God  hates  a  person  to  that  degree  more  mildly,  as 
not  to  destroy  him,  but  whom  He  destroys  He  hates  the 
more  exceedingly,  by  how  much  He  punisheth  more  severely. 
Now  He  hateth  all  who  work  iniquity :  but  all  who  speak 


JVe  may  not  slay  the  soul  hy  lying  to  save  a  life.     393 
leasing  He  also  destroy eth.     Which  thing  being  fixed,  who      de 


MEN- 
DACIO. 


of  them  which  assert  this  will  be  moved  by  those  examples, 
when  it  is  said,  suppose  a  man  should  seek  shelter  with  tliee 
who  by  thy  lie  may  be  saved  from  death  ?     For  that  death 
which  men  are  foolishly  afraid  of,  who  are  not  afraid  to  sin, 
kills  not  the  soul  but  the  body,  as  the  Lord  teacheth  in  the 
Gospel ;  whence  He  charges  us  not  to  fear  that  death  :  but  Mat.  lo, 
the  mouth  which  lies  kills  not  the  body  but  the  soul.     For 
in  these  words  it  is  most  plainly  written,   The  mouth  //m/Wisd.l, 
lieth  slayelh  the  soul.     How  then  can  it  be  said  without  the  be'neth 
greatest  perverseness,  that  to  the  end  one  man  may  have  life  of  E.  V. 
the  body,  it  is  another  man's  duty  to  incur  death  of  the  soul  ? 
The  love  of  our  neighbour  hath  its  bounds  in  each  man's 
love  of  himself.     Thou  shall  love,  saith  He,  ihii  neiqhhour  asLevit. 

.  19    18 

thyself.  How  can  a  man  be  said  lo  love  as  himself  that]y[at.22 
man,  for  whom  that  he  may  secure  a  temporal  life,  himself  39. 
loseth  life  eternal  ?  Since  if  for  his  temporal  life  he  lose  but 
his  own  temporal  life,  that  is  not  to  love  as  himself,  but  more 
than  himself:  which  exceeds  the  rule  of  sound  doctrine. 
Much  less  then  is  he  by  telling  a  lie  to  lose  his  own  eternal 
for  another's  temporal  life.  His  own  temporal  life,  of  course, 
for  his  neighbour's  eternal  life  a  Christian  man  will  not 
hesitate  to  lose :  for  this  example  has  gone  before,  that  the 
Lord  died  for  us.  To  this  point  He  also  saith.  This  is  my  johni5, 
commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another  as  I  have  loved  you.  ^^'  ^^' 
Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down 
his  life  for  his  friends.  For  none  is  so  foolish  as  to  say  that 
the  Loi'd  did  other  than  consult  for  the  eternal  salvation  of 
men,  whether  in  doing  what  He  hath  charged  us  to  do,  or 
in  charging  us  to  do  what  Himself  hath  done.  Since  then 
by  lying  eternal  life  is  lost,  never  for  any  man's  temporal  life 
must  a  lie  be  told.  And  as  to  those  who  take  it  ill  and  are 
indignant  that  one  should  refuse  to  tell  a  lie,  and  thereby 
slay  his  own  soul  in  order  that  another  may  grow  old  in  the 
flesh  ;  what  if  by  our  committing  theft,  what  if  by  committing 
adultery,  a  person  might  be  dehvered  from  death :  are  we 
therefore  to  steal,  to  commit  whoredom?  They  cannot  prevail 
with  themselves  in  a  case  of  this  kind  :  namely,  if  a  person 
should  bring  a  halter  and  demand  that  one  should  yield 
to  his  carnal  lust,  declaring  that  he  will  hang  himself  unless 


MEN- 
DACIO 


394         Lying  wrong  even  to  save  corporal  chastity. 

DE     his  request  be  granted :  they  cannot  prevail  with  themselves 
to  comply  for  the  sake  of,  as  they  say,  saving  a  life.     If  this 
is  absiu-d  and  wicked,  why  should  a  man  corrupt  his  own 
soul  with  a  lie  in  order  that  another  may  live  in  the  body, 
when,  if  he  were  to  give  his  body  to  be  corrupted  with  such 
an  object,  he  would  in  the  judgment  of  all   men  be  held 
guilty  of  nefarious  turpitude?    Therefore  the  only  point  to  be 
attended  to  in  this  question    is,  whether  a  he  be  iniquity. 
And  since  this  is  asserted  by  the  texts  above  rehearsed,  we 
must  see  that  to  ask,  whether  a  man  ought  to  tell  a  lie  for 
the  safety  of  another,  is  just  the  same  as  asking  whether  for 
another's  safety  a  man  ought  to  commit  iniquity.     But  if  the 
salvation  of  the  soul  rejects  this,  seeing  it  cannot  be  secured 
but  by   equity,   and  would    have  us    prefer  it  not   only  to 
another's,  but  even  to  our  own   temporal  safety :    what  re- 
mains, say  they,  that  should  make  us  doubt  that  a  lie  ought 
not  to  be  told  under  any  circumstances  whatsoever  ?     For  it 
cannot  be  said  that  there  is  aught  among  temporal  goods 
greater    or    dearer   than    the    safety  and  life    of  the  body. 
Whei'efore  if  not  even  that  is  to  be  preferred  to  truth,  what 
can  be  put  in  our  way  for  the  sake  of  which  they  who  think 
it  is  sometimes  right  to  lie,  can  urge  that  a  lie  ought  to  be 
told  ? 
vii.         10.  As  concerning  purity  of  body;   here  indeed  a  very 
honourable  regard  seems  to  come  in  the  way,  and  to  demand 
a  lie  in  its  behalf;  to  wit,  that  if  the  assault  of  the  ravisher 
may  be  escaped  by  means  of  a  lie,  it  is  indubitably  right  to 
tell  it:  but  to  this  it  may  easily  be  answered,  that  there  is  no 
purity  of  body  except  as  it  depends  on  integrity  of  mind  ; 
this  being  broken,  the  other  must  needs  fall,  even  though  it 
seem  intact;  and  for  this  reason  it  is  not  to  be  reckoned 
among  temporal  things,  as  a  thing  that  might  be  taken  away 
from  people  against  their  will.     By  no  means  therefore  must 
the  mind  corrupt  itself  by   a  lie  for  the  sake   of  its  body, 
which  it  knows  remaineth  incorrupt  if  from  the  mind  itself 
incorruptness  depart  not.     For  that  which  by  violence,  with 
no  lust  foregoing,  the  body  suffereth,  is  rather  to  be  called 
deforcement  than  corruption.     Or  if  all  deforcement  is  cor- 
ruption, then  not  every  corruption  hath  turpitude,  but  only 
that  which  lust  hath  procured,  or  to  which  lust  hath  con- 


Purity  of  soul  cannot  he  lost  without  consent.        395 

senled.     Now  by  how  mucli  the  mind  is  more  excellent  than      de 
the  body,  so  much   the  more  heinous  is  the  wickedness  ifnido. 
that  be   corrupted.     There,  then,  purity  can  be  preserved, 
because    there   none  but  a  voluntary   corruption  can    have 
place.     For  assuredly  if  the  ravisher  assault  the  body,  and 
there  is  no  escaping  him  either  by  contrary  force,  or  by  any 
contrivance  or  lie,  we  must  needs  allow  that  purity  cannot  be 
violated  by  another's  lust.     Wherefore,  since  no  man  doubts 
that  the  mind  is  belter  than  the  body,  to  integrity  of  body 
we  ought  to  prefer  integrity  of  mind,  which  can  be  preserved 
for  ever.     Now  who  will  say  that  the  mind  of  him  who  tells 
a  lie  hath  its  integrity  ?    Indeed  lust  itself  is  rightly  defined, 
An  appetite  of  the  mind  by  which   to   eternal  goods  any 
temporal  goods  whatever  are  preferred.     Therefore  no  man 
can  prove  that  it  is  at  any  time  right  to  tell  a  lie,  unless  he  be 
able  to  shew  that  any  eternal  good  can  be  obtained  by  a  lie. 
But  since  each  man  departs  from  eternity  just  in  so  far  as  he 
departs  from  truth,  it  is  most  absurd  to  say,  that  by  departing 
therefrom  it  is  possible  for  any  man  to  attain  to  any  good. 
Else  if  there  be  any  eternal  good  which  truth  compriseth  not, 
it  will  not  be  a  true  good,  therefore  neither  will  it  be  good, 
because  it  will  be  false.     But  as  the  mind  to  the  body,  so 
must  also  truth  be  preferred  to  the  mind  itself,  so  that  the 
mind  should  desire  it  not  only  more  than  the  body,  but  even 
more  than  its  own  self.     So  will  the  mind  be  more  entire 
and  chaste,  when   it  shall  enjoy   the   immutability  of  truth 
rather   than    its    own    mutability.      Now    if  Lot,   being   so  Gen.  19, 
righteous  a  man  that  he  was  meet'  to  entertain  even  Angels, f',^^ 
offered  his  daughters  to  the  lust  of  the  Sodomites,  to   the  mere- 
intent,  that  the  bodies  of  women  rather  than  of  men  might ^^  ^^' 
be  corrupted   by  them  ;  how  much  more  diligently  and  con- 
stantly ought  the  mind's  chasteness  in  the  truth  to  be  pre- 
served, seeing  it  is  more  truly  preferable  to  its  body,  than 
the  body  of  a  man  to  the  body  of  a  woman  ? 

11.  But  if  any  man  supposes  that  the  reason  why  it  is  viii. 
right  for  a  person  to  tell  a  lie  for  another  is,  that  he  may  live 
the  while,  or  not  be  offended  in  those  things  which  he  much 
loveth,  to  the  end  he  may  attain  unto  eternal  truth  by  being 
taught :  that  man  doth  not  understand,  in  the  first  place,  that 
there   is  no   flagitious   thing  which  he  may  not  upon    the 


396      A  Teacher  false  in  one  thing  loses  all  authority. 

DE     same  ground  be  compelled  to  commit,  as  has  been  above 
DAcio.  demonstrated  ;  and  in  the  next  place,  that  the  authority  of 
the  doctrine  itself  is  cut  off  and  altogether  undone  if  those 
whom  we  essay  to  bring  thereunto,  are  by  our  lie  made  to 
think  that  it  is   somewhiles  right  to   lie.      For  seeing  the 
doctrine  which  bringeth  salvation  consistelh  partly  in  things 
to  be  believed,  partly  in  things  to  be  understood ;  and  there 
is  no  attaining  unto  those  things  which  are  to  be  understood, 
unless    first   those    things    are    believed,    which    are    to    be 
believed  ;  how  can  there  be  any  believing  one  who  thinks  it 
is  sometimes  right  to  lie,  lest  haply  he  lie  at  the  moment 
when  he  teacheth  us  to  believe  ?    For  how  can  it  be  known 
whether  he  have  at  that  moment  some  cause,  as  he  thinks, 
'officios!  for  a  well-meant'  lie,  deeming  that  by  a  false  story  a  man 
may   be   frightened   and    kept   from   lust,  and    in    this    way 
account   that   by  telling  a  lie    he  is  doing  good   even    in 
spiritual    things?     Which   kind    of  lie    once    admitted   and 
approved,  all  discipline  of  faith  is  subverted  altogether;  and 
this  being  subverted,  neither  is  there  any  attaining  to  under- 
standing, for  the  receiving  of  which  that  discipline  nurtureth 
the  babes  :  and  so  all  the  doctrine  of  truth  is  done  away, 
giving  place  to  most  licentious  falsehood,  if  a  lie,  even  well- 
meant,  may  from  any  quarter  have  place  ©iDened  for  it  to 
enter   in.     For   either  whoso  tells   a   lie   prefers    temporal 
advantages,  his  own  or  another's,  to  truth ;  than  which  what 
can  be  more  perverse .?  or  when  by  aid  of  a  lie  he  wishes  to 
make  a  person  fit  for  gaining  the  truth,  he  bars  the  approach 
2aptus    to  truth,  for  by  wishing  when  he  lies  to  be  accommodating-, 
it  comes  to  pass  that  when  he  speaks  the  truth,  he  cannot  be 
depended    upon.     Wherefore,  either    we    must    not  believe 
good  men,  or  we  must  believe  those  whom  we  think  obliged 
sometimes  to  tell  a  lie,  or  we  must  not  believe  that  good  men 
sometimes  tell  lies :  of  these  three  the  first  is  pernicious,  the 
second  foolish;  it  remains  therefore  that  good  men  should 
never  tell  lies. 
ix.  12.  Thus  has  the  question  been  on  both  sides  considered 

and  treated  ;  and  still  it  is  not  easy  to  pass  sentence :  but 
we  must  further  lend  diligent  hearing  to  those  who  say,  that 
no  deed  is  so  evil,  but  that,  in  avoidance  of  a  worse  it  ought  to 
be  done ;  moreover  that  the  deeds  of  men  include  not  only  what 


!^  Supposed  alternatives  with  sacrijicing  to  idols.      397 

they  do,  but  whatever  they  consent  to  be  done  unto  them,  de 
Wherefore,  if  cause  have  arisen  that  a  Christian  man  should  dacio. 
choose  to  burn  incense  to  idols,  that  he  might  not  consent 
to  bodily  defilement  which  the  persecutor  threatened  him 
withal,  unless  he  should  do  so,  they  think  they  have  a  right 
to  ask  why  he  should  not  also  tell  a  lie  to  escape  so  foul  a 
disgrace.  For  the  consent  itself  to  endure  violation  of  the 
person  rather  than  to  burn  incense  to  idols,  this,  they  say,  is 
not  a  passive  thing,  but  a  deed;  which  rather  than  do,  he 
chose  to  burn  incense.  How  much  more  readily  then  would 
he  have  chosen  a  lie,  if  by  a  lie  he  might  ward  oif  from  a 
holy  body  so  shocking  a  disgrace  } 

13.  In  which  proposition  these  points  may  well  deserve  to 
be  questioned  :  whether  such  consent  is  to  be  accounted  as 
a  deed  :  or  whether  that  is  to  be  called  consent  which  hath 
not  approbation :  or  whether  it  be  approbation,  when  it  is 
said,  '  It  is  expedient  to  suffer  this  rather  than  do  that;'  and 
whether  the  person  spoken  of  did  right  to  burn  incense 
rather  than  suffer  violation  of  his  body ;  and  whether  it 
would  be  right  rather  to  tell  a  lie,  if  that  was  the  alternative 
proposed,  than  to  burn  incense  ?  But  if  such  consent  is  to 
be  accounted  as  a  deed,  then  are  they  murderers  who  have 
chosen  rather  to  be  put  to  death  than  bear  false  witness,  yea, 
what  is  worse,  they  arc  murderers  of  themselves.  For  why, 
at  this  rate,  should  it  not  be  said  that  they  have  slain  them- 
selves, because  they  chose  that  this  should  be  done  to  them 
that  they  might  not  do  what  they  were  urged  to  do  ?  Or,  if 
it  be  accounted  a  worse  thing  to  slay  another  than  himself, 
what  if  these  terms  were  offered  to  a  Martyr,  that,  upon  his 
refusing  to  bear  false  witness  of  Christ  and  to  sacrifice  to 
demons,  then,  before  his  eyes,  not  some  other  man,  but  his 
own  father  should  be  put  to  death  ;  his  father  intreating  him 
that  he  would  not  by  his  persevering  permit  that  to  be  done  ? 
Is  it  not  manifest,  that,  upon  his  remaining  stedfast  in  his 
purpose  of  most  faithful  testimony,  they  alone  would  be  the  • 
murderers  who  should  slay  his  father,  and  not  he  a  parricide 
into  the  bargain  ?  As  therefore,  in  this  case,  the  man  would 
be  no  party  to  this  so  heinous  deed,  for  choosing,  rather  than 
violate  his  faith  by  false  testimony,  that  his  own  father 
should  be  put  to  death  by  others,  (yea,  though  that  father 


398     How  far  what  we  alloiv  to  he  done  is  our  own  act. 

DE  were  a  sacrilegious  person  whose  soul  would  be  snatched 
DAcio.  ^■way  to  punishment ;)  so  the  like  consent,  in  the  former 
case,  would  not  make  him  a  party  to  that  so  foul  disgrace,  if 
he  refused  to  do  evil  himself,  let  others  do  what  they  might 
in  consequence  of  his  not  doing  it.  For  what  do  such 
persecutors  say,  but,  '  Do  evil  that  we  may  not  ?'  If  the 
case  were  so,  that  our  doing  evil  would  make  them  not  to 
have  done  it,  even  then  it  would  not  be  our  duty  by  doing 
wickedness  ourselves  to  vote  them  harmless ;  but  as  in  fact 
'al.when  they  are  already  doing  it  when  they  say  nothing  of  the  kind', 
such^'^"^  why  are  they  to  have  us  to  keep  them  company  in  wickedness 
things,  rather  than  be  vile  and  noisome  by  themselves?  For  that  is 
not  to  be  called  consent;  seeing  that  we  do  not  approve 
what  they  do,  always  wishing  that  they  would  not,  and,  as 
much  as  in  us  lies,  hindering  them  that  they  should  not  do 
it,  and,  when  it  is  done,  not  only  not  committing  it  with 
them,  but  with  all  possible  detestation  condemning  the  same. 
14.  '  How,'  sayest  thou,  '  is  it  not  his  doing  as  well  as 
theirs,  when  they  would  not  do  this,  if  he  would  do  that  ?' 
Why,  at  this  rate  we  go  housebreaking  with  house-breakers, 
because  if  we  did  not  shut  the  door,  they  would  not  break  it 
open  :  and  we  go  and  murder  with  highwaymen,  if  it  chance 
we  know  that  they  are  going  to  do  it,  because  if  we  killed 
them  out  of  hand,  they  would  not  kill  others.  Or,  if  a 
person  confess  to  us  that  he  is  going  to  commit  a  parricide, 
we  commit  it  along  with  him,  if,  being  able,  we  do  not  slay 
him  before  he  can  do  the  deed  when  we  cannot  in  some 
other  way  prevent  or  thwart  him.  For  it  may  be  said,  word 
for  word  as  before,  '  Thou  hast  done  it  as  well  as  he  ;  for 
he  had  not  done  this,  hadst  thou  done  that.'  With  my  good 
will,  neither  ill  should  be  done ;  but  only  the  one  was  in  my 
power,  and  I  could  take  care  that  this  should  not  be  done ; 
the  other  rested  with  another,  and  when  by  my  good  advice 
I  could  not  quench  the  purpose,  I  was  not  bound  by  my 
evil  deed  to  thwart  the  doing.  It  is  therefore  no  approving 
of  a  sinner,  that  one  refuses  to  sin  for  him  ;  and  neither  the 
one  nor  the  other  is  liked  by  him  who  would  that  neither 
were  done  ;  but  in  that  which  pertains  to  him,  he  hath  the 
power  to  do  it  or  not,  and  with  that  he  perpetrateth  it  not; 
in  that  which  pertains  to  another,  he  hath  only  the  will  to 


Ttie  sin  is  with  the  actual  doer  of  the  deed.  399 

wish  it  or  not,  and  with  that  he  condemneth.  And  there-  de 
fore,  on  their  offering  those  terms,  and  saying,  '  If  thou  burn  dIcio. 
not  incense,  this  shalt  thou  suffer;'  if  he  should  answer, 
'  For  me,  I  choose  neither,  I  detest  both,  I  consent  unto  you 
in  none  of  these  things:'  in  uttering  these  and  the  hke  words, 
wliich  certainly,  because  they  would  be  true,  would  afford 
them  no  consent,  no  approbation  of  his,  let  him  suffer  at 
their  hands  what  he  might,  to  his  account  would  be  set 
down  the  receipt  of  wrongs,  to  theirs  the  commission  of 
sins.  '  Ought  he  then,'  it  may  be  asked,  '  to  suffer  his  person 
to  be  violated  rather  than  burn  incense  ?'  If  the  question  be 
what  he  ought,  he  ought  to  do  neither.  For  should  I  say 
that  he  ought  to  do  any  of  these  things,  I  shall  approve  this 
or  that,  whereas  I  reprobate  both.  But  if  the  question  be, 
which  of  these  he  ought  in  preference  to  avoid,  not  being 
able  to  avoid  both  but  able  to  avoid  one  or  other :  I  will 
answer,  '  His  own  sin,  rather  than  another's ;  and  rather  a 
lighter  sin  being  his  own,  than  a  heavier  being  another's.' 
For,  reserving  the  point  for  more  diligent  inquiry,  and 
granting  in  the  mean  while  that  violation  of  the  person  is 
worse  than  burning  incense,  yet  the  latter  is  his  own,  the 
former  another's  deed,  although  he  had  it  done  to  him;  now, 
whose  the  deed,  his  the  sin.  For  though  murder  is  a  greater 
sin  than  stealing,  yet  it  is  worse  to  steal  than  to  suffer 
murder.  Therefore,  if  it  were  proposed  to  any  man  that,  if 
he  would  not  steal  he  should  be  killed,  that  is,  murder 
should  be  committed  upon  hiui;  being  he  could  not  avoid 
both,  he  would  prefer  to  avoid  that  which  would  be  his  own 
sin,  rather  than  that  which  would  be  another's.  Nor  would 
the  latter  become  his  act  for  being  committed  upon  him,  and 
because  he  might  avoid  it  if  he  would  commit  a  sin  of  his  own. 
15-  The  whole  stress,  then,  of  this  question  comes  to  this; 
whether  it  be  true  universally  that  no  sin  of  another,  com- 
mitted upon  thee,  is  to  be  imputed  to  thee,  if,  being  able  to 
avoid  it  by  a  lighter  sin  of  thine  own,  thou  do  it  not;  or 
whether  there  be  an  exception  of  all  bodily  defilement.  No 
man  says  that  a  person  is  defiled  by  being  murdered,  or  cast 
into  prison,  or  bound  in  chains,  or  scourged,  or  afflicted 
with  other  tortures  and  pains,  or  proscribed  and  made  to 
suffer   most    grievous   losses   even    to   utter   nakedness,   or 


400  Is  corporal  defilement  an  excepted  case  ? 

DE     stripped   of  honours,   and    subjected   to   great   disgrace    by 


MEN- 
DACIO. 


reproaches  of  whatsoever  kind ;  whatever  of  all  these  a  man 
may  have  unjustly  suffered,  no  man  is  so  senseless  as  to 
say  that  he  is  thereby  defiled.  But  if  he  have  filth  poured 
all  over  him,  or  poured  into  his  mouth,  or  crammed  into 
him,  or  if  he  be  carnally  used  like  a  woman;  then  almost  all 
men  regard  him  with  a  feeling  of  horror,  and  they  call  him 
defiled  and  unclean.  One  must  conclude  then  that  the  sins 
of  others,  be  they  what  they  may,  those  always  excepted 
which  defile  him  on  whom  they  are  committed,  a  man  must 
not  seek  to  avoid  by  sin  of  his  own,  either  for  himself  or  for 
any  other,  but  rather  he  must  put  up  with  them,  and  suffer 
bravely ;  and  if  by  no  sins  of  his  own  he  ought  to  avoid 
them,  therefore  not  by  a  lie :  but  those  which  by  being 
committed  upon  a  man  do  make  him  imclean,  these  we  are 
bound  to  avoid  even  by  sinning  ourselves;  and  for  this 
reason  those  things  are  not  to  be  called  sins,  which  are  done 
for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  that  uncleanness.  For  whatever 
is  done,  in  consideration  that  the  not  doing  it  were  just 
cause  of  blame,  that  thing  is  not  sin.  Upon  the  same  principle, 
neither  is  that  to  be  called  uncleanness  when  there  is  no 
way  of  avoiding  it ;  for  even  in  that  extremity  he  who  suffers 
it  has  what  he  may  do  aright,  namely,  patiently  bear  vvhat 
he  cannot  avoid.  Now  no  man  while  acting  aright  can  be 
defiled  by  any  corporal  contagion.  For  the  unclean  in  the 
sight  of  God  is  every  one  who  is  unrighteous ;  clean  there- 
fore is  every  one  who  is  righteous;  if  not  in  the  sight  of 
men,  yet  in  the  sight  of  God,  Who  judges  without  error. 
Nay,  even  in  the  act  of  suffering  that  defilement  with  power 
given  of  avoiding  it,  it  is  not  by  the  mere  contact  that  the 
man  is  defiled  ;  but  by  the  sin  of  refusing  to  avoid  it  when 
he  might.  For  that  would  be  no  sin,  whatever  might  be 
done  for  the  avoiding  of  it.  Whoever  therefore,  for  the  avoid- 
ing of  it,  shall  tell  a  lie,  sinneth  not. 

16.  Or,  are  some  lies,  also,  to  be  excepted,  so  that  it  were 
better  to  suffer  this  than  to  commit  those  ?  If  so,  then  not 
every  thing  that  is  done  in  order  to  the  avoiding  of  that 
defilement  ceases  to  be  sin ;  seeing  there  are  some  lies  to 
commit  which  is  worse  than  to  suffer  that  foul  violence. 
For,  suppose  quest  be  making  after  a  person  that  his  body 


Case  of  defaming  one  to  save  another.  401 

may  be  deflowered,  and  that  it  be  possible  to  screen  him  by  de 
a  lie ;  who  dares  to  say  that  even  in  such  a  case  a  lie  ought  dacio. 
not  be  told?  But,  if  the  He  by  which  he  may  be  concealed 
be  one  which  may  hurt  the  fair  fame  of  another,  by  bringing 
upon  him  a  false  accusation  of  that  very  uncleanness,  to 
suffer  which  the  other  is  sought  after ;  as,  if  it  should  be  said 
to  the  enquirer, '  Go  to  such  an  one,'  (naming  some  chaste 
man  who  is  a  stranger  to  vices  of  this  kind,)  '  and  he  will 
procure  for  you  one  whom  you  will  find  a  more  willing 
subject,  for  he  knows  and  loves  such ;'  and  thereby  the 
person  might  be  diverted  from  him  whom  he  sought:  I  know 
not  whether  one  man's  fair  fame  ought  to  be  violated  by  a 
lie,  in  order  that  another's  body  may  not  be  violated  by  lust 
to  which  he  is  a  stranger.  And  in  general,  it  is  never  right 
to  tell  a  lie  for  any  man,  such  as  may  hurt  another,  even  if 
the  hurt  be  slighter  than  would  be  the  hurt  to  him  unless 
such  a  lie  were  told.  Because  neither  must  another  man's 
bread  be  taken  from  him  against  his  will,  though  he  be  in 
good  health,  and  it  is  to  feed  one  who  is  weak  ;  nor  must  an 
innocent  man,  against  his  will,  be  beaten  with  rods,  that 
another  may  not  be  killed.  Of  course,  if  they  are  willing,  let 
it  be  done,  because  they  are  not  hurt  if  they  be  willing  that 
so  it  should  be :  but  whether,  even  with  his  own  consent,  a  x. 
man's  fair  fame  ought  to  be  hurt  with  a  false  charge  of  foul 
lusts,  in  order  that  lust  may  be  averted  from  another's  body, 
is  a  great  question.  And  I  know  not  whether  it  be  easy  to 
find  in  what  way  it  can  be  just  that  a  man's  fair  fame,  even 
with  his  consent,  should  be  stained  with  a  false  charge  of 
lust,  any  more  than  a  man's  body  should  be  polluted  by  the 
lust  itself  against  his  will. 

17.  But  yet  if  the  option  were  proposed  to  the  man  who 
chose  to  burn  incense  to  idols  rather  than  yield  his  body  to 
abominable  lust,  that,  if  he  wished  to  avoid  that,  he  should 
violate  the  fame  of  Christ  by  some  lie ;  he  would  be  most 
mad  to  do  it.  I  say  more  :  that  he  would  be  mad,  if,  to 
avoid  another  man's  lust,  and  not  to  have  that  done  upon  his 
person  which  he  would  suffer  with  no  lust  of  his  own,  he 
should  falsify  Christ's  Gospel  with  false  praises  of  Christ; 
more  eschewing  that  another  man  should  corrupt  his  body, 
than  himself  to  corrupt  the  doctrine  of  sanctification  of  souls 

Dd 


402      No  falsehood  admissible  in  Religions  Teaching. 

DE     and  bodies.     Wherefore,  from  the  doctrine  of  religion,  and 
D™o  f^'o™  ^^^°^^  utterances  universally,  which  are  uttered  on  behalf 

-of  the  doctrine  of  rehgion,  in  the  teaching  and  learning  of 

the  same,  all  lies  must  be  utterly  kept  aloof.  Nor  can  any 
cause  whatever  be  found,  one  should  think,  why  a  lie  should 
be  told  in  matters  of  this  kind,  when  in  this  doctrine  it  is  not 
right  to  tell  a  lie  for  the  very  purpose  of  bringing  a  person  to 
it  the  more  easily.  For,  once  break  or  but  slightly  diminish 
the  authority  of  truth,  and  all  things  will  remain  doubtftd: 
which  unless  they  be  believed  true,  cannot  be  held  as  certain. 
It  is  lawful  then  either  to  him  that  discourses,  disputes,  and 
preaches  of  things  eternal,  or  to  him  that  narrates  or  speaks 
of  things  temporal  pertaining  to  edification  of  religion  and 
piety,  to  conceal  at  fitting  time  whatever  seems  fit  to  be 
concealed:  but  to  tell  a  lie  is  never  lawful,  therefore  neither 
to  conceal  by  telling  a  lie. 
xi.  18.  This  being  from  the  very  first  and  most  firmly  esta- 
blished, touching  other  lies  the  question  proceeds  more 
securely.  But  by  consequence  we  must  also  see  that  all  lies 
must  be  kept  aloof  which  hurt  any  man  unjustly:  because  no 
man  is  to  have  a  wrong,  albeit  a  lighter  one  is  done  to  him,  that 
another  may  have  a  heavier  kept  from  him.  Nor  are  those 
lies  to  be  allowed,  which,  though  they  hurt  not  another,  yet 
do  nobody  any  good,  and  are  hurtful  to  the  persons  themselves 
who  gratuitously  tell  them.  Indeed,  these  are  the  persons 
who  are  properly  to  be  called  liars.  For  there  is  a  difference 
between  lying  and  being  a  liar.  A  man  may  tell  a  lie  un- 
willingly ;  but  a  liar  loves  to  lie,  and  inhabits  in  his  mind  in 
the  delight  of  lying.  Next  to  such  are  those  to  be  placed 
who  by  a  lie  wish  to  please  men,  not  that  they  may  do  wrong 
or  bring  reproach  upon  any  man ;  for  we  have  already  before 
put  away  that  kind;  but  that  they  may  be  pleasant  in  con- 
versation. These  differ  from  the  class  in  which  we  have 
placed  liars  in  this  respect,  that  liars  delight  in  lying,  re- 
joicing in  deceit  for  its  own  sake  :  but  these  lust  to  please 
by  agreeable  talk,  and  yet  would  rather  please  by  saying 
things  that  were  true,  but  when  they  do  not  easily  find 
true  things  to  say  that  are  pleasant  to  the  hearers,  they 
choose  rather  to  tell  lies  than  to  hold  their  tongues.  Yet  it 
is  difficult  for  these  sometimes  to  undertake  a  story  which  is 


Useless  lying  clearly  wrong.      Where  the  question  begins.  403 

the  whole  of  it  false ;  but  most  commonly  they  interweave  de 
falsehood  with  truth,  where  they  are  at  a  loss  for  something  d^cio. 
sweet.  Now  these  two  sorts  of  lies  do  no  harm  to  those  who 
believe  them,  because  they  are  not  deceived  concerning  any 
matter  of  religion  and  truth,  or  concerning  any  profit  or 
advantage  of  their  own.  It  suffices  them,  to  judge  the  thing 
possible  which  is  told,  and  to  have  faith  in  a  man  of  whom 
they  ought  not  rashly  to  think  that  he  is  telling  a  lie.  For 
where  is  the  hann  of  believing  that  such  an  one's  father  or 
grandfather  was  a  good  man,  when  he  was  not?  or  that  he 
has  served  with  the  army  even  in  Persia,  though  he  never  set 
foot  out  of  Rome  ?  But  to  the  persons  who  tell  these  lies, 
they  do  much  harm :  to  the  former  sort,  because  they  so 
desert  truth  as  to  rejoice  in  deceit:  to  the  latter,  because 
they  want  to  please  people  better  than  the  truth. 

19.  These  sorts  of  lies  having  been  without  any  hesitation    xii. 
condemned,  next  follows  a  sort,  as  it  were  by  steps  rising  to 
something  better,  which    is    commonly  attributed   to  well- 
meaning  and   good  people,  when  the   person  who  lies  not 
only  does  no  harm  to  another,  but  even  benefits  somebody. 
Now  it  is  on  this  sort  of  lies  that  the  whole  dispute  turns, 
whether  that  person    does   harm   to    himself,  who   benefits 
another  in  such  sort  as  to  act  contrary  to  the  truth.     Or,  if  that 
alone  maybe  called  truth  which  illustrateth  the  very  minds 
of  men  with  an  intimate  and  inconnnutable  light,  at  least  he 
acts  contrary  to  some  true  thing,  because  although  the  bodily 
senses  are  deceived,  yet  he  acts  contrary  to  a  true  thing  who 
says  that  a  thing  is  so  or  not  so,  whereof  neither  his  mind 
nor  senses  nor  his  opinion  or  belief  giveth  him  any  report. 
^Vhether  therefore  he  does  not  hurt  himself  in  so  profiting 
another,  or  in  that  compensation  not  hurt  himself  in  which 
he  profiteth  the  other,  is  a  great  question.     If  it  be  so,  it 
should  follow  that  he  ought  to  profit  himself  by  a  lie  which 
damages    no   man.     But   these    things   hang  together,    and 
if  you    concede    that    point,    it    necessarily    draws   in    its 
train   some    very  embarrassing    consequences.     For  should 
it  be  asked,  what  harm  it  does  to  a  person  rolling  in  super- 
fluous wealth,  if  from    countless  thousands    of  bushels   of 
wheat  he  lose  one  bushel,  which  bushel  may  be  profitable 
as  necessary  food  to  the  person  stealing  it ;  it  will  follow 

Dd  2 


404  7^  every  lie  ahonl  another  'false  witness  T 

DE     that  theft  also  may  be  committed  without  blame,  and  false 


MEN- 
DACIO. 


witness  borne  without  sin.  Than  which,  what  can  be  men- 
tioned  more  perverse  ?  Or  truly,  if  another  had  stolen  the 
bushel,  and  thou  sawest  it  done,  and  wert  questioned, 
wouldcst  thou  tell  a  lie  with  honesty  for  the  poor  man,  and  if 
thou  do  it  for  thine  own  poverty  wilt  thou  be  blamed  ?  As  if 
it  were  thy  duty  to  love  another  more  than  thyself.  Both 
then  are  disgraceful,  and  must  be  avoided. 

20.  But  haply  some  may  think  that  there  is  an  exception 
to  be  added  ;  that  there  be  some  honest  lies  which  not  only 
hurt  no  man,  but  profit  some  man,  excepting  those  by  which 
crimes  are  screened  and  defended  :  so  that  the  reason  w-hy 
the  aforesaid  lie  is  disgraceful,  is  that,  although  it  hurt  no 
man,  and  profit  the  poor,  it  screens  a  theft;  but  if  it  should 
in   such   sort  hurt  nobody  and  profit  somebody  as  not  to 
screen  and  defend  any  sin,  it  would  not  be  morally  wrong. 
As,  put  the  case  that  some  one  should  in  thy  sight  hide  his 
money  that  he  might  not  lose  it  by  theft  or  violence,  and 
thereupon  being  questioned  thou  shouldest  tell  a  lie ;  thou 
wouldest  hurt  no  man,  and  wonkiest  serve  him  who  had  need 
that  his  money  were  hidden,  and  wouldest  not  have  covered 
a  sin  by  telling  a  lie.     For  it  is  no  sin  if  a  man  hide  his 
property  which  he  fears  to  lose.     Bat,  if  we  therefore  sin  not 
in  telling  a  lie,  for  that,  while  covering  no  man''s  sin,  we 
hurt  nobody  and  do  good  to  somebody,  what  are  we  about 
as  concerning  the  sin  itself  of  a  lie  .''     For  where  it  is  laid 
Exorlus  down,  Ttiou  slialt  not  steal,  there  is  also  this,  T/ioii  shall  not 
J(j'   "'■   hear  false  witness.     Since  then  each  is  severally  prohibited, 
why  is  false  witness  culpable  if  it  cover  a  theft  or  any  other 
sin,  but  if  without  any  screening  of  sin  it  be  done  by  itself, 
then  not  culpable,  whereas  stealing  is  culpable  in  and  by 
itself,  and  so  other  sins  ?    Or  is  it  so  that  to  hide  a  sin  is  not 
lawful ;  to  do  it,  lawful .'' 

21.  If  this  be  absurd,  what  shall  we  say  .f*  Is  it  so,  that 
there  is  no  '  false  witness,'  but  when  one  tells  a  lie  either  to 
invent  a  crime  against  some  man,  or  to  hide  some  man's 
crime,  or  in  any  way  to  oppress  any  man  in  judgment  .f'  For 
a  witness  seems  to  be  necessary  to  the  judge  for  cognizance 
of  the  cause.  But  if  the  Scripture  named  a  '  witness'  only 
]  Cor.    so  far  as  that  goes,  the  Apostle  would  not  say,  Yea,  and  tee 

J  0>    10* 


Supposed  cacej)l ions  pressed  to  their  results.         JOS 

are  found  false  icitnesses  of  God;  because  ice  have  testijied  of    de 
God  that  He  raised  up  Christ :  ivhom  He  raised  not  up.  ^ 


MEN- 
ACIO. 


For  so  he  shews  that  it  is  false  witness  to  tell  a  lie,  yea,  in 
falsely  praising  a  person. 

Or  peradventure,  doth  the  person  who  lies  then  utter  false  xiii. 
witness  when  he  either  invents  or  hides  any  man's  sin,  or 
hurts  any  man  in  whatever  way  ?  For,  if  a  lie  spoken  against 
a  man's  temporal  life  is  detestable,  how  much  more  one 
against  eternal  life?  as  is  every  lie,  if  it  take  place  in  doctrine 
of  religion.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Apostle  calls 
it  false  witness,  if  a  man  tell  a  lie  about  Christ,  yea,  one 
which  may  seem  to  pertain  to  His  praise.  Now  if  it  be  a 
lie  that  neither  inventeth  or  hideth  any  man's  sin,  nor  is 
answered  to  a  question  of  the  judge,  and  hurteth  no  man, 
and  profits  some  man,  are  we  to  say  that  it  is  neither  false 
witness,  nor  a  reprehensible  lie  ? 

22.  What  then,  if  a  homicide  seek  refuge  with  a  Christian, 
or  if  he  see  where  the  homicide  have  taken  refuge,  and  be 
questioned  of  this  matter  by  him  who  seeks,  in  order  to 
bring  to  punishment  a  man,  the  slayer  of  man  ?    Is  he  to  tell 
a  lie  ?    For  how  does  he  not  hide  a  sin  by  lying,  when  he  for 
whom  he  lies  has  been  guilty  of  a  heinous   sin  }    Or  is  it 
because  he  is  not  questioned  concerning  his  sin,  but  about 
the  place  where  he  is  concealed  ?    So  then  to  lie  in  order  to 
hide  a  person's  sm  is  evil ;  but  to  lie  in  order  to  hide  the 
sinner  is  not  evil  ?    '  Yea,  surely :'  says  some  one :   '  for  a 
man  sins  not  in  avoiding  punishment,  but  in  doing  something- 
worthy  of  punishment.     Moreover,  it  pertaineth  to  Christian 
discipline  neither  to  despair  of  any  man's  amendment,  nor  to 
bar  against  any  man  the  way  of  repentance.'    What  if  thou  be 
led  to  the  judge,  and  then  questioned  concerning  the  very 
place  where  the  other  is  in  hiding?   Art  thou  prepared  to  say, 
either,  '  He  is  not  there,'  when  thou  knowest  him  to  be  there; 
or, '  I  know  not,  and  have  not  seen,'  what  thou  knowest  and 
hast  seen?    Art  thou  then  prepared  to  bear  false  witness,  and 
to  slay  thy  soul  that  a  manslayer  may  not  be  slain  ?     Or,  up 
to  the  pi-esence  of  the  judge  wilt  thou  lie,  but  when  the 
judge   questions  thee,  then  speak  truth  that  thou  be  not  a 
false  witness  ?    So  then  thou  art  going  to  slay  a  man  thyself 
by  betraying  him.     Surely  the  betrayer  too  is  one  whom  the 


MF.N- 
DAC 


406  Choice  of  false  ivitness  or  betrayal  avoided  by  a  sacrifice. 

DE  divine  Scripture  detesteth.  Or  hapl}^  is  he  no  betrayer,  who 
^J  in  answer  to  the  judge's  interrogation  gives  true  information ; 
but  would  be  a  betrayer,  if,  unasked,  he  should  delate  a  man 
to  his  destruction  ?  Put  the  case  with  respect  to  a  just  and 
innocent  man,  that  thou  know  where  he  is  in  hiding,  and  be 
questioned  by  the  judge;  which  man,  however,  has  been 
ordered  to  be  taken  to  execution  by  a  higher  power,  so  that 
he  who  interrogates  is  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  law, 
not  the  author  of  the  sentence  ?  Will  it  be  no  false  witness 
that  thou  shalt  lie  for  an  innocent  man,  because  the  inter- 
rogator is  not  a  judge,  but  only  charged  with  the  execution  ? 
What  if  the  author  of  the  law  interrogate  thee,  or  any  unjust 
judge,  making  quest  of  an  innocent  man  to  bring  him  to 
punishment?  What  wilt  thou  do?  wilt  thou  be  false  witness, 
or  betrayer?  Or  will  he  be  a  betrayer,  who  to  a  just  judge 
shall  ultroneously  delate  a  lurking  homicide ;  and  he  not  so, 
who  to  an  unjust  judge,  interrogating  him  of  the  hiding-place 
of  an  innocent  man  whom  he  seeks  to  slay,  shall  inform 
against  the  person  who  has  thrown  himself  upon  his  honour? 
Or  between  the  crime  of  false  witness  and  that  of  betrayal, 
wilt  thou  remain  doubtful  and  unable  to  make  up  thy  mind? 
Or  by  holding  thy  peace  or  professing  that  thou  wilt  not  tell, 
wilt  thou  make  up  thy  mind  to  avoid  both  ?  Then  why  not 
do  this  before  thou  come  to  the  judge,  that  thou  may  est 
shun  the  lie  also  ?  For,  having  kept  clear  of  a  lie,  thou  wilt 
escape  all  false  witness ;  whether  every  lie  be  false  witness, 
or  not  every  :  but  by  keeping  clear  of  all  false  witness  in  thy 
sense  of  the  word,  thou  wilt  not  escape  all  lying.  How 
much  braver  then,  how  much  more  excellent,  to  say,  '  I  will 
neither  betray  nor  lie  ?' 

23.  This  did  a  former  Bishop  of  the  Church  of  Thagasta, 
Firmus  by  name,  and  even  more  firm  in  will.  For,  when  he 
was  asked  by  command  of  the  emperor,  through  officers  sent 
bv  him,  for  a  man  who  was  taking  refuge  with  him,  and 
whom  he  kept  in  hiding  with  all  i)ossible  care,  he  made 
answer  to  their  questions,  that  he  could  neither  tell  a  lie,  nor 
betray  a  man ;  and  when  he  had  suffered  so  many  torments 
of  body,  (for  as  yet  emperors  were  not  Christian,)  he  stood 
firm  in  his  purpose.  Thereupon  being  brought  before  the 
emperor,  his  conduct  appeared  so  admirable,  that  he  without 


Lying  itself  forbidden.    Case  when  silence  would  hetraij.  407 

any  difficulty  obtained  a  pardon  for  the  man  whom  he  was  de 
trying  to  save.  What  conduct  could  be  more  brave  and  ^j^do. 
constant  ?  But  peradventure  some  more  timid  person  may 
say,  '  I  can  be  prepared  to  bear  any  torments,  or  even  to 
submit  to  death,  that  I  may  not  sin;  but,  since  it  is  no  sin  to 
tell  a  lie  such  that  you  neither  hurt  any  man,  nor  bear  false 
witness,  and  benefit  some  man,  it  is  foolish  and  a  great  sin, 
voluntarily  and  to  no  purpose  to  submit  to  torments,  and, 
when  one's  health  and  life  may  haply  be  useful,  to  fling 
them  away  for  nothing  to  people  in  a  rage,'  Of  whom  I  ask; 
Why  he  feai's  that  which  is  written,  Tliou  shall  not  bear  false  Exod. 
witness,  and  fears  not  that  which  is  said  unto  God,  Thou  p^'^  q 
tvilt  destroy  all  them  that  speak  leasing  ?  Says  he,  '  It  is 
not  written,  Every  lie :  but  I  vuiderstand  it  as  if  it  were 
written,  Thou  wilt  destroy  all  that  speak  false  witness.'  But 
neither  there  is  it  said.  All  false  witness.  '  Yes,  but  it  is  set 
there,'  saith  he,  '  where  the  other  things  are  set  down  which 
are  in  every  sort  evil.'  What,  is  this  the  case  with  what  is 
set  down  there,  Thou  shall  not  kill?  If  this  be  in  every  sortExod. 
evil,  how  shall  one  clear  of  this  crime  even  just  men,  who,  '  ' 
upon  a  law  given,  have  killed  many  ?  '  But,'  it  is  rejoined, 
'  that  man  doth  not  himself  kill,  who  is  the  minister  of  some 
just  command.'  These  men's  fear,  then,  I  do  accept,  that 
I  still  think  that  laudable  man  who  would  neither  lie,  nor 
betray  a  man,  did  both  better  understand  that  which  is 
written,  and  what  he  understood  did  bravely  put  in  practice. 
25.  But  one  sometimes  comes  to  a  case  of  this  kind,  that 
we  are  not  interrogated  where  the  person  is  who  is  sought, 
nor  forced  to  betray  him,  if  he  is  hidden  in  such  manner  that 
he  cannot  easily  be  found  unless  betrayed  :  but  we  are 
asked,  whether  he  be  in  such  a  place  or  not.  If  we  know 
him  to  be  there,  by  holding  our  peace  we  betray  him,  or 
even  by  saying  that  we  uill  in  no  wise  tell  whether  he  be 
there  or  not :  for  from  this  the  questioner  gathers  that  he  is 
there,  as,  if  he  were  not,  nothing  else  would  be  answered  by 
him  who  would  not  lie  nor  betray  a  man,  but  only,  that  he  is 
not  there.  So,  by  our  either  holding  our  peace,  or  saying 
such  words,  a  man  is  betrayed,  and  he  who  seeks  him  hath 
but  to  enter  in,  if  he  have  the  power,  and  find  him :  whereas 
he  might  have  been  turned  aside  from  finding  him  by  our 


408    Five  kinds  of  his  condemned,  question  of  two  more. 

DE     telling  a  lie.     Wherefore  if  thou  know  not  where  he  is,  there 
DAcio.  ^^  °o  cause  for  hiding  the  truth,  but  thou  must  confess  that 
thou  knowest  not.     But,  if  thou  know  where  he  is,  whether 
he  be  in  the  place  which  is  named  in  the  question  or  else- 
where J  thou  must  not  say,  when  it  is  asked  whether  he  be 
there  or  not,  '  I  will  not  tell  thee  what  thou  askest,'  but  thou 
must  say, '  I  know  where  he  is,  but  I  will  never  shew.'    For 
if,  touching  one  place  in   particular  thou  answer  not  and 
profess  that  thou  wilt  not  betray,  it  is  just  as  if  thou  shouldest 
point  to  that  same  place  with  thy  finger:  for  a  sure  suspicion 
is  thereby  excited.     But  if  at  the  first  thou  confess  that  thou 
know  where  he  is,  but  will  not  tell,  haply  the  inquisitor  may 
be  diverted  from  that  place,  and  begin  now  to  ply  thee  that 
the  place  where  he  is  maybe  betrayed.    For  which  good  faith 
and  humanity  whatever  thou  shalt  bravely  bear,  is  judged  to 
be  not  only  not  culpable,  but  even  laudable;  save  only  these 
things  which  if  a  man  suffer  he  is  said  to  suffer  not  bravely, 
but  immodestly  and  foully.     For  this  is  the  last  description 
of  lie,  concerning  which  we  must  treat  more  diligently, 
xiv.        25.  For  first  to  be  eschewed  is  that  capital  lie  and  far  to 
be  fled  from,  which  is  done  in  doctrine  of  religion ;  to  which 
lie  a  man  ought  by  no  consideration  to  be  induced.     The 
second,  that  he  should  hurt  some  man  unjustly  :    which  is 
such  that  it  profits  no  man  and  hurts  some  man.     The  third, 
which  so  profits  one  as  to  hurt  another,  but  not  in  corporal 
defilement.     The  fourth,  that  which  is  done    through  only 
lust  of  lying  and  deceiving,  which  is  an  unmixed  lie.     The 
fifth,  what  is  done  with  desire  of  pleasing  by  agreeableness 
in  talk.     All  these  being  utterly  eschewed  and  rejected,  there 
follows  a  sixth  sort  which  at  once  hurts  nobody  and  helps 
somebody;  as  when,  if  a  person's  money  is  to  be  unjustly 
taken  from  him,  one  who  knows  where  the  money  is,  should 
say  that  he  does  not  know,  by  whomsoever  the  question  be 
put.      The   seventh,   which    hurts    none    and   profits  some : 
except  if  a  judge  interrogate:  as  when,  not  wishing  to  betray 
a  man  who  is  sought  for  to  be  put  to  death,  one  should  lie  ; 
not  only  a  just  and  innocent,  but  also  a  culprit;  because  it 
belongs  to  Christian  discipline  neither  to  despair  of  any  man's 
amendment,  nor  to  bar  tlie  way  of  repentance  against  any. 
Of  which  two  sorts,  which  are  wont  to  be  attended  with  gi'eat 


Case  of  the  alternatloe  of  corporal  dejikment.       409 

controversy,  we  have  sufficiently  treated,  and  have  shewn  de 
what  was  our  judgment;  that  by  taking  the  conscf^uences,  ^^cTo. 
which  are  honourably  and  bravely  borne,  these  kinds  also 
should  be  eschewed  by  brave  and  faithful  and  truthful  men 
and  women.  The  eighth  sort  of  lie  is  that  which  hurts 
no  man,  and  does  good  in  the  preserving  somebody  from 
corporal  defilement,  at  least  that  defilement  which  we  have 
mentioned  above.  For  even  to  eat  with  unwashcn  hands 
the  Jews  thought  defilement.  Or  if  a  person  think  this  also 
a  defilement,  yet  not  such  that  a  lie  ought  to  be  told  to  avoid 
it.  But  if  the  lie  be  such  as  to  do  an  injury  to  any  man, 
even  though  it  screen  a  man  from  that  uncleanness  which  all 
men  abhor  and  detest ;  whether  a  lie  of  this  kind  may  be 
told  provided  the  injury  done  by  the  lie  be  such  as  consists 
not  in  that  sort  of  uncleanness  with  which  we  are  now  con- 
cerned, is  another  question :  for  here  the  question  is  no 
longer  about  lying,  but  it  is  asked  whether  an  injury  ought  to 
be  done  to  any  man,  even  otherwise  than  by  a  lie,  that  the 
said  defilement  may  be  warded  off  from  another.  Which 
I  should  by  no  means  think :  though  the  case  proposed  be 
the  slightest  wrongs,  as  that  which  I  mentioned  above,  about 
a  single  measure  of  w'hcat;  and  though  it  be  very  embarrass- 
ing whether  it  be  our  duty  not  to  do  even  such  an  injury 
to  any  man,  if  thereby  another  may  be  defended  or  screened 
from  a  lustful  outrage  upon  his  person.  But,  as  I  said,  this 
is  another  question  :  at  present  let  us  go  on  with  what  we  xv. 
have  taken  in  hand:  whether  a  lie  ought  to  be  told,  if  even 
the  inevitable  condition  be  proposed  that  we  either  do  this, 
or  suffer  the  deed  of  lust  or  some  execrable  pollution  j  even 
though  by  lying  we  do  no  man  harm. 

26.  Touching  which  matter,  there  will  be  some  place  open 
for  consideration,  if  first  the  divine  authorities  which  forbid 
a  lie  be  diligently  discussed :  for  if  these  give  no  place,  wc 
vainly  seek  a  loophole;  for  we  are  bound  to  keep  in  every 
way  the  command  of  God,  and  the  will  of  God  in  all  that 
through  keeping  His  command  we  may  suffer,  it  is  our  duty 
with  an  even  mind  to  follow :  but  if  by  some  relaxation  any 
outlet  be  allowed,  in  such  a  case  we  are  not  to  decline  a  lie. 
The  reason  why  the  Divine  Scriptures  contain  not  only 
God's  commands,  but  the  life  and  character  of  the  just,  is 


410    What  examples  may  be  used  to  interpret  precepts. 
DE      this:  that,  if  haply  it  be  hidden  in  what  way  we  are  to  take 

MEN-      ,1       .         1         1       .  .      .  ,      ,  ,  '' 

DAcio.  that  which  is  enjoined,  by  the  actions  of  the  just  it  may  be 
understood.  With  the  exception,  therefore,  of  those  actions 
which  one  may  refer  to  an  allegorical  significance,  although 
none  doubts  that  they  really  took  place,  as  is  the  case  with 
almost  all  the  occurrences  in  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, For  who  can  venture  to  affirm  of  any  thing  there, 
that  it  does  not  pertain  to  a  figurative  foretelfing?  Seeing 
the  Aposde,  speaking  of  the  sons  of  Abraham,  of  whom  of 
course  it  is  most  easily  said  that  they  were  born  and  did  live 
in  the  natural  order  of  propagating  the  people,  (for  not 
monsters  and  prodigies  were  born,  to  lead  the  mind  to  some 
presignification,)  nevertheless  asserteth  that  they  signify  the 

Gal.  4,   two  Testaments  ;  and  saith  of  that  marvellous  benefit  which 

22 24 

God  bestowed  upon  His  people  Israel  to  rescue  them  out  of 
the  bondage  in  which  they  in  Egypt  were  oppressed,  and  of 
the  punishment  which  avenged  their  sin  on  their  journey, 

iCor.iOjthat  these  things  befel  them  in  a  figure:  what  actions  wilt 
■~  ■  thou  find,  from  which  thou  mayest  set  aside  that  rule,  and 
take  upon  thee  to  affirm  that  they  are  not  to  be  reduced  to 
some  figure.?  Excepting  therefore  these,  the  things  which  in 
the  New  Testament  are  done  by  the  Saints,  where  there  is  a 
most  evident  commending  of  manners  to  our  imitation,  may 
avail  as  examples  for  the  understanding  of  the  Scrijotures, 
which  things  are  digested  in  the  commands. 

Matt. 5,  27.  As,  when  we  read  in  the  Gospel,  Thou  hast  received  a 
blow  in  the  face,  make  ready  the  other  cheek.  Now  as  an 
example  of  patience  can  none  be  found  than  that  of  the 
Lord  Himself  more  potent  and  excellent ;  but  He,  when 
smitten   on   the  cheek,  said  not,  Behold  here  is  the  other 

Johnis,  cheek,  but  He  said,  ///  have  spoken  ill,  bear  witness  of  the 

22   23 

evil;  but  if  ivell,  ivhy  smitest  thou  Me?  Where  He  shews 
that  the  preparation  of  the  other  cheek  is  to  be  done  in  the 
heart.  Which  also  the  Apostle  Paul  knew :  for  he,  too,  when 
he  was  smitten  on  the  face  before  the  high  priest,  did  not 
Acts 23, say,  Smite  the  other  cheek:  but,  God,  saith  he,  shall  smite 
thee,  thou  ichited  wall:  and  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  accord- 
ing to  law,  and  contrary  to  huv  commandest  me  to  be 
smitten?  with  most  deep  insight  beholding  that  the  priest- 
hood of  the  Jews  was  already  become  such,  that  in  name  it 


Instances  of  swearing,  and  providing  for  the  morrow.    411 

outwardly  was  clean  and  fair,  but  within  was  foul  with  muddy  oe 
lusts ;  which  priesthood  he  saw  in  spirit  to  be  ready  to  pass  dIc^o 
away  through  vengeance  of  the  Lord,  when  he  spake  those 
words :  but  yet  he  had  his  heart  ready  not  only  to  receive 
other  blows  on  the  cheek,  but  also  to  suffer  for  the  truth  any 
torments  whatever,  with  love  of  them  from  whom  he  should 
suffer  the  same. 

28.  It  is  also  written,  But  I  say  imto  you,  Sivear  not  «^Rom.  9, 
all.     But  the  Apostle  himself  has  used  oaths  in  his  Epistles,  pi^jj  j 
And  so  he  shews  how  that  is  to  be  taken  which  is  said,  /  say^- 
unto  yoti,  Swear  nut  at  all:    that  is,  lest  by  swearing  one 20.     ' 
come  to  a  facility  in  swearing,  from  facility  to  a  custom,  and 

so  from  a  custom  there  be  a  downfal  into  perjury.  And 
therefore  he  is  not  found  to  have  sworn  except  in  writing, 
where  there  is  more  wary  forethought,  and  no  precipitate 
tongue  withal.  And  this  indeed  came  of  evil,  as  it  is  said, 
1\  Jiatcicr  is  more  than  these  is  of  evil:  not  however  from  evil  Matt  5, 
of  his  own,  but  from  the  evil  of  infirmity  which  was  in  them,  ' 
in  whom  he  even  in  this  way  endeavoured  to  work  faith.  For 
that  he  used  an  oath  in  speaking,  while  not  writing,  I  know 
not  that  any  Scripture  has  related  concerning  him.  And 
yet  the  Lord  says.  Swear  not  at  all:  for  He  hath  not  granted 
license  thereof  to  persons  \vTiting.  Howbeit,  because  to 
pronounce  Paul  guilty  of  violating  the  commandment, 
especially  in  Epistles  written  and  sent  forth  for  the  spiritual 
life  and  salvation  of  the  nations,  were  an  impiety,  we  must 
understand  that  word  which  is  set  down,  At  all,  to  be  set 
down  for  this  purpose,  that  as  much  as  in  thee  lies,  thou 
affect  not,  love  not,  nor  as  though  it  were  for  a  good  thing, 
with  any  delight  desire,  an  oath. 

29.  As  that.  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  and,  TaAe  Matt.  6, 
therefore  no  thought  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall     ' '^^' 
drink,  or  what  ye  shall  put  on.     Now  when  we  see  that  the 
Lord  Himself  had  a  bag  in  which  was  put  what  was  given,  JohDi2 
that  it  might  be  kept  for  necessary  uses  as  the  time  should  ^* 
require ;  and  that  the  Apostles  themselves  made  much  pro- 
vision  for  the  indigence  of  the  brethren,  not  only  for  the 
morrow,  but  even  for  the  more  protracted  time  of  impending 
dearth,  as  we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles;  it  is  suffi-Actsii, 
ciently  clear  that  these  precepts  are  so  to  be  understood,  that^^""^^* 


412    Living  hy  the  Gospel.      What  tnouth'a  lying  slayeih. 
DE      we  are  lo  do  nothing  of  our  woiJ<  as   matter  of  necessity, 


MEN 
DACIO 


through  love  of  obtaining  temporal  things,  or  fear  of  want. 

30.  Moreover,  it  was  said  to  the  Apostles  that  they  should 

s'^&io  ^^^^  nothing  with  them  for  their  journey,  but  should  live  by 

4.' 7,     'the  Gospel.     And  in  a  certain  place  too  the  Lord  Himself 

Mat.  10,  signified  why  He  said  this,  when  He  added,  The  labourer  is 
worthy  of  his  hire:  where  He  sufficiently  shews  that  this  is 
permitted,  not  ordered;  lest  haply  he  who  should  do  this, 
namely,  that  in  this  work  of  preaching  the  word  he  should 
take  ought  for  the  uses  of  this  life  from  them  to  whom  he 
preached,  should  think  ho  was  doing  any  thing  unlawful. 
And  yet  that  it  may  more  laudably  not  be  done  is  sufficiently 

Gal.  6,  proved  in  the  Apostle  Paul:  who,  while  he  said,  Let  him 
thai  is  taught  in  the  tvord,  communicate  unto  him  that 
teacheth  in  all  things,  and  shewed  in  many  places  that  this 
is  wholesomely  done  by  them  to  whom  he  preached  the  word, 

iCoT.9, Nevertheless,  saith  he,  /  have  not  used  this  power.  The 
Lord,  therefore,  when  He  spake  those  words,  gave  power, 
not  bound  men  by  a  command.  So  in  general,  what  in  words 
we  are  not  able  to  understand,  in  the  actions  of  the  Saints  we 
gather  how  it  is  meet  to  be  taken,  which  would  easily  be 
drawn  to  the  other  side,  unless  it  were  recalled  by  an  example, 
xvi.        31.  Thus   then   what   is  vvtittten,   The  viouth   that  lieth, 

11."  '  'slcyffh  file  soul;  of  what  moutli  it  spcaketh,  is  the  question. 
For  in  general  when  the  Scrij)ture  sjjeaks  of  the  mouth,  it 

'  con-     signifies  the  very  seat  of  our  conception  '  in  the  heart,  vvhere 

C6ptn.-  ^^  t  ±  J 

cuhim  is  approved  and  decreed  whatever  also  by  the  voice,  when 
we  speak  the  truth,  is  uttered :  so  that  he  lieth  with  the 
heart  who  approveth  a  lie  ;  yet  that  man  may  possibly  not  lie 
with  the  heart,  who  uttereth  other  than  is  in  his  mind,  in  such 
sort  that  he  knows  it  to  be  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  a  "reater 
evil  that  he  admitteth  an  evil,  disapproving  withal  both  the 
one  and  the  other.     And  they  who  assert  this,  say  that  thus 

Ps  15,2.  also  is  to  be  understood  that  which  is  written,  He  that  speak- 
eth  the  truth  in  his  heart :  because  always  in  the  heart  truth 
must  be  spoken  ;  but  not  always  in  the  mouth  of  the  body,  if 
any  cause  of  avoiding  a  greater  evil  require  that  other  than  is 
in  the  mind  be  uttered  with  the  voice.  And  that  there  is 
indeed  a  mouth  oi'  the  heart,  may  be  understood  even  from 
this,  that  where  there  is  speccJ!,   there  a  mouth  is  with  no 


Holy  Scripture  speaks  of  a  '  inoutli  of  the  heart.     413 

absurdity  understood :  nor  would  it  be  right  to   say,   Who    de 
speakelh  in  his  heart,  unless  it  were  right  to  understand  j,^  ''^" 


)ACIO. 


that  there  is  also  a  mouth  in  the  heart.     Though  in  that  very 
place  where  it  is  written,  TJte  mouth  that  lieth,  slaijclh  the 
soul,  if  the  context  of  the  lesson  be  considered,  it  may  per- 
adventure  be  taken  for  no  other  than  the  mouth  of  the  heart. 
For  there  is  an  obscure  response  there,  where  it  is  hidden  from 
men,  to  whom  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  unless  the  mouth  of 
the  body  sound  therewith,  is  not  audible.     But  that  mouth, 
the  Scripture  in  that  place  saith,  doth  reach  to  the  hearing  of 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  Who  hath  fdled  the  whole  earth;  at 
the  same  time  mentioning  lips  and  voice  and  tongue  in  that 
place ;  yet  all  these  the  sense  permitteth  not  to  be  taken, 
but  concerning  the  heart,  because  it  saith  of  the  Lord,  that 
what  is  spoken  is  not  hidden  from  Him  :  now  that  which  is 
spoken  with  that  sound  which  reacheth  to  our  ears,  is  not 
hidden  from  men  either.     Thus,  namely,  is  it  written  :   77«?"Wisd.  ], 
Spirit  of  wisdom   is  loving,  and  ivill  not  acquit  an  evil-  ~ 
speaker  of  his  lips:  for  of  his  reins  God  is  witness,  and  of 
his  heart  a  true  searcher,  and  of  his  tongue  a  hearer.     For 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  filled  the  icliole  earth,  and  that 
ivhich  containeth  all   things  hath  knowledge   of  the  voice. 
Therefore  he  that   speaketh   unrighteous   things  cannot   be 
hid:  hut  neither  shall  the  judgment  when  it  punisheth  pass 
bg  him.     For  in  the  thoughts  of  the  ungodly  shall  there  be 
interrogation  ;  and  the  hearing  of  his  words  shall  come  from 
the  Lord,  to  the  punishment  of  his  iniquities.     For  the  earaDomi- 
of  jealousy  heareth  all  things,  and  the  tumult  of  murmur- "j'^^l^^^^^^ 
ings  will  not  be  hid.     Therefore  keep  yourselves  from  mur-^-^- 
muring,  which  prqfiteth  nothing,  and  from  backbiting  refrain 
your  tongue :   because  an  obscure  response  will  not  go  into 
the  void''.     But  the  mouth  that  lieth,  slayeth  the  soul.     It 
seems  then  to  threaten  them  who  think  that  to  be  obscure 
and  secret,  which  they  agitate  and  turn  over  in  their  heart. 
And  this,  it  would  shew,  is  so  clear  to  the  ears  of  God,  that 
it  even  calls  it  '  tumult.' 

32.  Manifestly  also  in  the  Gospel  we  find  the  mouth  of 

"  Ohscurtim  responsinn  in  vncnum     that  shall  go  for  7ioi<(]ht,^,Y. 
nan  ibit.     There  is  no  word  so  secret 


414  All  sin  is  from  the  hearfs  mouth.    Detraction  in  heart. 

DE  the  heart:  so  that  in  one  place  the  Lord  is  found  to  have 
DAcio.  mentioned  the  mouth  both  of  the  body  and  of  the  heart, 
Mat.  15,  where  he  saith,  Are  ye  also  yet  without  understanding  ? 
~~  '  Do  ye  not  yet  understand,  that  ivhatsoever  entereth  in  at  the 
mouth,  (joeth  into  the  belly,  and  is  cast  out  into  the  drangld? 
but  those  things  u-hich  proceed  out  of  the  mouth  come  fortlt 
from  the  heart,  and  tliey  defile  the  man.  For  out  of  the 
heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  fornications, 
thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies :  these  are  the  things  which 
dejile  a  man.  Here  if  thou  understand  but  one  mouth,  that 
of  the  body,  how  wilt  thou  understand,  Those  things  which 
proceed  out  of  the  mouth,  come  forth  from  the  heart;  since 
spitting  also  and  vomiting  proceed  out  of  the  mouth  ?  Unless 
peradventure  a  man  is  but  then  defiled  when  he  eateth  ought 
unclean,  but  is  defiled  when  he  vomits  it  up.  But  if  this  be 
most  absurd,  it  remains  that  we  understand  the  mouth  of  the 
heart  to  have  been  expounded  by  the  Lord,  when  He  saith. 
The  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  mouth,  come  fortlt  from 
the  heart.  For  being  that  theft  also  can  be,  and  often  is, 
pei']:)etrated  with  silence  of  the  bodily  voice  and  mouth ;  one 
must  be  out  of  his  mind  so  to  understand  it  as  then  to 
account  a  person  to  be  contaminated  by  the  sin  of  theft, 
when  he  confesses  or  makes  it  known,  but  when  he  commits 
it  and  holds  his  peace,  then  to  think  him  undefiled.  But,  in 
truth,  if  we  refer  what  is  said  to  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  no 
sin  whatever  can  be  committed  tacitly :  for  it  is  not  com- 
mitted unless  it  proceed  from  that  mouth  which  is  within. 

33.  But,  like  as  it  is  asked  of  what  mouth  the  Scripture 
saith.  The  mouth  that  lieth.,  slayeth  the  soul,  so  it  may  be 
asked,  of  what  lie.  For  it  seems  to  speak  of  that  lie  in  par- 
ticular, which  consists  in  detraction.  It  says,  Keep  yourselves 
from  murmur  in  g,  ichich  profileth  notliing,  and  from  detrac- 
tion refrain  your  tongue.  Now  this  detraction  takes  jjlace 
through  malevolence,  when  any  man  not  only  with  mouth 
and  voice  of  the  body  doth  utter  what  he  forgeth  against 
any,  but  even  without  speaking  wishcth  him  to  be  thought 
such ;  which  is  in  truth  to  detract  with  the  mouth  of  the 
heart;  which  thing,  it  saith,  cannot  be  obscure  and  hidden 
from  God. 


Distinction  of  lying  willingly  and  unwillingly.       415 

34.  For  what  is  written  in  another  place,  Wish  not  to  use  dk 
evei-y  lie^' ;  they  say  is  not  of  force  for  this,  that  a  person  is  d'acio. 
not  to  use  any  he.  Therefore,  when  one  man  shall  say,  that 
according  to  this  testimony  of  Scripture  we  must  to  that 
degree  hold  every  sort  and  kind  of  lie  in  detestation,  that 
even  if  a  man  wish  to  lie,  yea,  though  he  lie  not,  the  very 
wish  is  to  be  condemned;  and  to  this  sense  interpreteth,  that 
it  is  not  said,  Do  not  use  every  lie,  but,  Do  not  wish  to  use 
every  lie ;  that  one  must  not  dare  not  only  to  tell,  but  not 
even  to  wish  to  tell,  any  lie  whatever :  sailh  another  man,  xvii. 
'  Nay,  in  that  it  saith.  Do  not  msh  to  use  every  lie,  it  vvilleth 
that  from  the  mouth  of  the  heart  we  exterminate  and  estrange 
lying :  so  that  while  from  some  lies  we  must  abstain  with  the 
mouth  of  the  body,  as  are  those  chiefly  which  pertain  to  doctrine 
of  religion  ;  from  some,  we  are  not  to  abstain  with  the  mouth 
of  the  body,  if  reason  of  avoiding  a  greater  evil  require ;  but 
with  the  mouth  of  the  heart  we  must  abstain  utterly  from 
every  lie.'  Where  it  behoveth  to  be  understood  what  is  said, 
Do  not  wish :  namely,  the  will  itself  is  taken  as  it  were  the 
mouth  of  the  heart,  so  that  it  concerneth  not  the  mouth  of 
the  heart  when  in  shunning  a  greater  evil  we  lie  unwillingly. 
There  is  also  a  third  sense  in  which  thou  mayest  so  take  this 
word,  not  every,  that,  except  some  lies,  it  giveth  thee  leave 
to  lie.  Like  as  if  he  should  say,  wish  not  to  believe  every 
man  :  he  would  not  mean  to  advise  that  none  should  be 
believed;  but  that  not  all,  some  however,  should  be  believed. 
And  that  which  follows,  For  assiduity  thereof  will  not  profit 
for  good,  sounds  as  if,  not  lying,  but  assiduous  lying,  that  is, 
the  custom  and  love  of  lying,  should  seem  to  be  that  which 
he  would  prohibit.  To  which  that  person  will  assuredly 
slide  down,  who  either  shall  think  that  every  lie  may  be'abuten- 
boldly  used  (for  so  he  will  shun  not  that  even  which  is  """ 
committed  in  the  doctrine  of  piety  and  religion ;  than  which 
what  more  abominably  wicked  thing  canst  thou  easily  find, 
not  among  all  lies,  but  among  all  sins  r)  or  to  some  lie  (no 
matter  how  easy,  how  harmless,)  shall  accommodate  the  in- 
clination of  the  will ;  so  as  to  lie,  not  unwillingly  for  the  sake  of 


*>  Ecclu??.  7.  13.  /ih  ffh.s  ■^'ii^iaSai  ^a,*     dacium.     Une  not  to  make  any  manner 
■^ivioi   noli   velte   mentiri   omne   men-     oflie,'E.V,   '  Every' is  used  for  '  any-' 


416       Difference  helween  the  perfect  and  beginners. 

DE  escaping  a  greater  evil,  but  willingly  and  with  liking.  So, 
DAcio.  s^eeing  there  be  three  things  which  inay  be  understood  in 
this  sentence,  either  *  Every  lie,  not  only  tell  thou  not,  but 
do  not  even  wish  to  tell :'  or, '  Do  not  wish,  but  even  unwil- 
lingly tell  a  lie  when  ought  worse  is  to  be  avoided:*  or,  '  Not 
ever'y,'  to  wit,  that  except  some  lies,  the  rest  are  admitted : 
one  of  these  is  found  to  make  for  those  who  hold  that  one  is 
never  to  lie,  tvvo  for  those  who  think  that  sometimes  one 
may  tell  a  lie.  But  yet  what  follows.  For  assiduity  thereof 
will  not  profit  to  good,  I  know  not  whether  it  can  counte- 
nance the  first  sentence  of  these  three;  except  haply  so,  that 
while  it  is  a  precept  for  the  perfect  not  only  not  to  lie,  but 
not  even  to  wish ;  assiduity  of  lying  is  not  permitted  even  to 
beginners.  As  if,  namely,  on  laying  down  the  rule  at  no  time 
whatever  not  merely  to  lie  but  so  much  as  to  have  a  wish  to 
lie,  and  this  being  gainsaid  by  examples,  in  regard  that  there 
are  some  lies  which  have  been  even  approved  by  great 
authority,  it  should  be  rejoined  that  those  indeed  are  lies  of 
beginners,  which  have,  in  regard  of  this  life,  some  kind  of 
duty  of  mercy  ;  and  yet  to  that  degree  is  every  lie  evil,  and  by 
perfect  and  spiritual  minds  in  every  way  to  be  eschewed,  that 
not  even  beginners  are  permitted  to  have  assiduous  custom 
thereof.  For  we  have  already  spoken  concerning  the  Egyp- 
tian midwives,  that  it  is  in  respect  of  the  promise  of  growth 
and  proficiency  to  better  things  that  they  while  lying  are 
spoken  of  with  approval :  because  it  is  some  step  towards 
loving  the  true  and  eternal  saving  of  the  soul,  when  a  person 
doth  mercifully  for  the  saving  of  any  man's  albeit  mortal  life 
even  tell  a  lie. 
Ps. 5, 6.  35.  Moreover  what  is  written,  Thoti  uilt  destroy  all  that 
speak  leasing:  one  saith  that  no  lie  is  here  excepted,  but  all 
condemned.  Another  saith :  Yea  verily :  but  they  who 
speak  leasing  from  the  heart,  as  we  disputed  above ;  for  that 
man  speaketh  truth  in  his  heart,  who  hatcth  the  necessity  of 
lying,  which  he  understands  as  a  penalty  of  the  mortal  life. 
Another  saith :  All  indeed  will  God  destroy  who  sj^eak 
leasing,  but  not  all  leasing :  for  there  is  some  leasing  which 
the  Prophet  was  at  that  time  insinuating,  in  which  none  is 
spared ;  that  is,  if  refusing  to  confess  each  one  his  sins,  he 

'  agere  ,       ., 

pceni-    defend  them  rather,  and  will  not  do  penance';  so  that  not 

tentiam 


MEN- 
ACIO. 


What  is  false  witness,  and  tvhat  not.    FurlJier  question.  417 

content  to  work  iniquity,  he  must  needs  wish  to  be  thought     de 
just,  and  succumb  not  to.  the  medicine  of  confession :  as  the  ^ 
very  distinction  of  the  words  may  seem  to  intimate  no  other, 
T/iOH  hatest  all  that   work  iniquity;    but  wilt  not  destroy  Ps.  6, 5. 
them  if  upon  repenting  they  speak  the  truth  in  confession, 
that  by  doing  that  truth  they  may  come  to  the  light;  as  is 
said  in  the  Gospel   according  to  John,  But  he  that  doeth  John  3, 
truth  Cometh  unto  the  light.      Thou  wilt  destroy  all  tvho  notp^  ^  - 
only  work  what  Thou  hatest,  but  also  speak  leasing ;  in  hold- 
ing out  before  them  false  righteousness,  and  not  confessing 
their  sins  in  penitence. 

36.  For,  concerning  false  witness,  which  is  set  down  in  the 
ten  commands  of  the  Law,  it  can  indeed  in  no  wise  be  con- 
tended that  love  of  truth  may  at  heart  be  preserved,  and  false 
witness  brought  forth  to  him  unto  whom  the  witness  is  borne. 
For,  when  it  is  said  to  God  only,  then  it  is  only  in  the  heart 
that  the  truth  is  to  be  embraced:  but  when  it  is  said  to  man, 
then  must  we  with  the  mouth  also  of  the  body  bring  forth 
truth,  because  man  is  not  an  inspector  of  the  heart.  But 
then,  touching  the  witness  itself,  it  is  not  unreasonably 
asked,  to  whom  one  is  a  witness  ?  For  not  to  whomsoever 
we  speak  unto  are  we  witnesses,  but  to  them  to  whom  it  is 
expedient  and  due  that  they  by  our  means  should  come  to 
know  or  believe  the  truth  ;  as  is  a  judge,  that  he  may  not 
err  in  judging;  or  he  who  is  taught  in  doctrine  of  religion, 
that  he  may  not  err  in  faith,  or  by  very  authority  of  the 
teacher  waver  in  doubt.  But  when  the  person  who  inter- 
rogates thee  or  wishes  to  know  ought  from  thee  seeks  that 
which  concerneth  him  not,  or  which  is  not  expedient  for 
him  to  know,  he  craveth  not  a  witness,  but  a  betrayer. 
Therefore  if  to  him  thou  tell  a  lie,  from  false  witness  perad- 
venture  thou  wilt  be  clear,  but  from  a  lie  assuredly  not.  So  xviii. 
then  with  this  salvo,  that  to  bear  false  witness  is  never  law- 
ful, the  question  is,  whether  it  be  lawful  sometimes  to  tell  a 
lie.  Or  if  it  be  false  vvitness  to  lie  at  all,  it  is  to  be  seen 
whether  it  admit  of  compensation,  to  wit,  that  it  be  said  for 
the  sake  of  avoiding  a  greater  sin  :  as  that  which  is  written, 
Honour  father  and  mother,  under  stress  of  a  preferable  dutyExod. 
is  disregarded ;    whence  the  paying  of  the  last  honours  of  ^°'  ^^' 

E  e 


MEN 
DACTO 


418  Truth  kept  to  please  God  is  kept  always. 

DE     sepulture  to  a  fatlier,  is  forbidden  to  that  man  who  by  the 
Lord  Himself  is  called  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Prov.         37.  Likewise,  touching  that  which  is  written,  A  son  which 
^^'^''   receivelh    tlic    icord   shall    be  far  from    destruction:    hut 
receicinf},  he  receireth  it  for  himself  and  no  falsehood  pro- 
ceedeih.  out  of  his  mouth' :   some  one  may  say,  that  what  is 
here   set  down,  A  son   tvhich  receivcth  the  word,  is  to  be 
taken   for  no  other  than  the  word  of  God,  which  is  truth. 
Therefore,  A  son  receiving  the  truth  shall  be  far  from  de- 
struction, refers  to  that  which  is  written,  Thou  ivilt  destroy 
all  that  speak  leasing.     But  when  it  follows.  Receiving  he 
receivelh  for  himself,  what   other  doth  this  insinuate  than 
Gal.  6,   what  the  Apostle  saith.  But  let  every  man  prove  his  own 
^'  work,  and  then  he  shall  have  glorying  in  himself  and  not  in 

another  ?  For  he  that  receiveth  the  word,  that  is,  truth,  not 
for  himself,  but  for  men-pleasing,  keepeth  it  not  when  he 
sees  they  can  be  pleased  by  a  lie.  But  whoso  receiveth  it 
for  himself,  no  falsehood  proceedeth  out  of  his  mouth: 
because  even  when  the  way  to  please  men  is  to  lie,  that  man 
lieth  not,  who  receiving  the  truth  not  thereby  to  please  them 
but  to  please  God,  hath  received  it  for  himself  Therefore 
there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  be  said  here.  He  will 
destroy  all  who  speak  leasing,  but  not  all  leasing:  because 
all  lies,  universally,  are  cut  off  in  this  saying,  And  no  false- 
hood proceedeth  out  of  his  mouth.  But  another  saith,  it  is 
to  be  so  taken  as  the  Apostle  Paul  took  our  Lord's  saying, 
M2.ii.5,  But  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all.  For  here  also  all 
^^'  swearing  is  cut  off;  but  from  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  that  it 
should  never  be  done  with  approbation  of  the  will,  but 
through  necessity  of  the  weakness  of  another ;  that  is,  '  from 
the  evil'  of  another,  when  it  shews  that  he  cannot  otherwise 
be  got  to  believe  what  is  said,  unless  faith  be  wrought  by  an 
oath ;  or,  from  that  '  evil'  of  our  own,  that  while  as  yet 
involved  in  the  skins  of  this  mortality  we  are  not  able  to 
shew  our  heart:  which  thing  were  we  able  to  do,  of  swearing 
there  were  no  need.     Though  moreover  in  this  whole  sen- 

■^  Prov.  29,  27-  Lat.  Not  in  the  ^tx»ftt*i>s  Ss  iVt^aro  auriv.  Mtihh  ■^tu^as 
Hebrew,  but  LXX.  24,  2.3.  koyov  a-ro  yXurffns  (ianXius  Xty'iirSu,  xai  auih 
ipuXaf<roiJi.uiii    vti}  aTuXuat  Ixro;  'itrrar      ■^iShtf  a.'ri  y\ufir*>s  aurav  ei)  fin  \S,it.(if. 


False  estimates  of  greater  and  lesser  evil.  419 

tence,  if  the  saying,  A  son  receiving  the  word  shall  he  far  de 
from  destruction,  be  said  of  none  other  than  that  Truth''  by  dacio. 
Whom  all  things  were  made,  which  remaineth  ever  incom- 
mutable ;  then,  because  the  doctrine  of  Religion  strives  to 
bring  men  to  the  contemplation  of  this  Truth,  it  may  seem 
that  the  saying,  And  no  falsehood  proceedeth  out  of  Ins  month, 
is  said  to  this  purpose,  that  he  speaketh  no  falsehood  that 
pertaineth  to  doctrine.  Which  sort  of  lie  is  upon  no  com- 
pensation whatever  to  be  gone  into,  and  is  utterly  and  before 
all  to  be  eschewed.  Or  if  the  sajdng,  No  falsehood,  is  ab- 
surdly taken  if  it  be  not  referred  to  every  lie,  the  saying, 
From  his  month,  should,  as  was  argued  above,  be  taken  to 
mean  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  in  the  opinion  of  him  who 
accounts  that  sometimes  one  may  tell  a  lie. , 

38.  Certain  it  is,  albeit  all  this  disputation  go  from  side  to 
side,  some  asserting  that  it  is  never  right  to  lie,  and  to  this 
effect  reciting  divine  testimonies:  others  gainsaying,  and 
even  in  the  midst  of  the  very  words  of  the  divine  testimonies 
seeking  place  for  a  lie ;  yet  no  man  can  say,  that  he  finds 
this  either  in  example  or  in  word  of  the  Scriptures,  that  any 
lie  should  seem  a  thing  to  be  loved,  or  not  had  in  hatred  ; 
howbeit  sometimes  by  telling  a  lie  thou  must  do  that  thou 
hatest,  that  what  is  more  greatly  to  be  detested  may  be 
avoided.  But  then  here  it  is  that  people  err;  they  put  the 
precious  beneath  the  vile.  For  when  thou  hast  granted  that 
some  evil  is  to  be  adir)ittecl,  that  another  and  more  grievous 
may  not  be  admitted;  not  by  the  rule  of  truth,  but  by  his  own 
cupidity  and  custom  doth  each  measure  the  evil,  accounting 
that  to  be  the  more  grievous,  which  himself  more  greatly 
dreads,  not  which  is  in  reality  more  greatly  to  be  fled  from. 
All  this  fault  is  engendered  by  perversity  of  loving.  For 
being  there  are  two  lives  of  ours;  the  one  eternal,  which  is 
promised  of  God;  the  other  temj^oral,  in  which  we  now  are  : 
when  a  man  shall  have  begun  to  love  this  temporal  more 
than  that  eternal,  for  the  sake  of  this  which  he  loveth  he 
thinks  all  things  right  to  be  done ;  and  there  are  not  any,  in 
his  estimation,  more  grievous  sins  than  those  which  do 
injury  to  this  life,  and  either  take  away  from  it  any  com- 
modity unjusdy  and  unlawfully,  or  by  inflicting  of  death  take 

^  Or  '  of  Him  who  is  Truth  itself.' 
E  e  2 


420  Temporal  loss  of  no  account.    WJiat  must  not  he  given  up. 
DK     it  utterly  away.     And  so  thieves,  and  robbers,  and  rufBans, 


MEN- 
DACIO. 


and  torturers,  and  slayers,  are  more  hated  of  them  than  las- 
civious,  drunken,  luxurious  men,  if  these  molest  no  man. 
For  they  do  not  understand  or  at  all  care,  that  these  do 
wrong  to  God;  not  indeed  to  any  inconvenience  of  Him,  but 
to  their  own  pernicious  hurt;  seeing  they  corrupt  His  gifts 
bestowed  upon  them,  even  His  temporal  gifts,  and  by  their 
very  corruptions  turn  away  from  eternal  gifts ;  above  all,  if 
they  have  already  begun  to  be  the  Temple  of  God  •  which  to 
1  Cor. 3, all  Christians  the  Apostle  saith  thus:  Know  tie  not  that  tie 
''  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  tJtat  the  Spirit  of  God  dicelleth 
in  you  ?  IVhoso  shall  corrupt  God^t  temple,  God  will  corrupt 
him.  For  the  temple  of  God  is  holij :  wtiich  temple  are  ye. 
39.  And  all  these  sins,  truly,  whether  such  whereby  an 
injury  is  done  to  men  in  the  comforts  of  this  life,  or  whereby 
men  corrupt  themselves  and  hurt  none  against  his  will:  all 
these  sins,  then,  even  though  they  seem  to  mean  well  by  this 
temporal  life  to  the  procuring  of  any  delight  or  profit,  (for  no 
man  commits  any  of  these  things  with  any  other  purpose 
and  end  ;)  yet  in  regard  of  that  life  which  is  for  ever  and 
ever,  they  do  entangle  and  in  all  ways  hinder.  But  there  are 
some  of  these  that  hinder  the  doers  only,  others  likewise 
those  on  whom  they  are  done.  For  as  to  the  things  which 
people  keep  safe  for  the  sake  of  utility  to  this  life,  when 
these  are  taken  away  by  injurious  persons,  they  alone  sin 
and  are  hindered  from  eternal  life  who  do  this,  not  they 
to  whom  they  do  it.  Therefore,  even  if  a  person  con- 
sent to  the  taking  of  them  from  him,  either  that  he  may  not' 
do  some  evil,  or  that  he  may  not  in  these  very  things  suffer 
some  greater  inconvenience;  not  only  does  he  not  sin,  but  in 
the  one  case  he  acts  bravely  and  laudably,  in  the  other  use- 
fully and  unblameably.  But  as  to  those  things  which  are 
kept  for  the  sake  of  sanctity  and  religion,  when  injurious 
persons  wish  to  violate  these,  it  is  riglit,  if  the  condition  be 
proposed  and  the  means  given,  to  redeem  them  even  by  sins 
of  lesser  moment,  yet  not  by  wrongs  to  other  men.  And 
then  do  these  things  thenceforth  cease  to  be  sins,  which 
are  undertaken  in  order  to  the  avoidance  of  greater  sins. 
For  as  in  things  useful,  for  instance  in  pecuniary  or  any 
other  corporal  commodity,  that  is  not  called  a  loss  which  is 


Puri/y  kept  in  the  tcill.     Truth  how  to  he  preserved.    421 
parted  with  in  order  to  a  greater  gain  ;   so  in  things  holy,     de 

MEN" 

that  is  not  called  sin  which  is  admitted  lest  a  worse  be  ad-  dacio, 
niittcd.  Or  if  that  is  called  loss,  which  one  foregoes  that  he 
may  not  forego  more  ;  let  this  also  be  called  sin,  while  how- 
ever the  necessity  of  nndertaking  it  in  order  to  the  eschew  ing 
of  a  greater  is  no  more  to  be  doubted,  than  that,  in  order  to 
avoid  a  greater  loss,  it  is  right  to  suffer  a  smaller  one. 

40.  Now  the  things  which  are  to  be  kept  safe  for  sanctity's    xix. 
sake  are  these:  pudicity  of  body,  and  chastity  of  soul",  and'animffi 
verity  of  doctrine.     Pudicity  of  bod}',  without  consent  and 
permission  of  the  soul,  doth  no  man  violate.     For,  whatever 
against  our  will  and  without  our  empowering  the  same  is  by 
greater  force  done  upon  our  body,  is  no  lewdness.     Howbeit, 
of  permitting  there  may  be  some  reason,  but  of  consenting, 
none.     For  we  consent,  when  we  approve  and  wish :  but  we 
permit  even  not  willing,  because  of  some  greater  turpitude  to 
be  eschewed.     Consent,  truly,  to  corporal  lewdness  violates 
also  chastity  of  mind.      For  the  mind's^  chastity  consists  in  2  animi 
a  good  will  and  sincere  love,  which  is  not  corrupted,  unless 
when  we  love  and  desire  that  which  Truth  teaches  ought 
not  to  be  loved  and  desired.     We  have  therefore  to  guard 
the  sincerity  of  love  toward  God  and  our  neighbour;  for  in 
this  is  chastity  of  miud  sanctified :  and  we  must  endeavour 
with  all  the  strength  in  our  power,  and  with  pious  sup])li- 
cation,  that,  when  the  pudicity  of  our  body  is  sought  to  be 
violated,  not  even  that  outermost  sense  of  the  souP,  which  issanimae 
entangled  with  the  flesh,  may  be  touched  with  any  delight; 
but  if  it  cannot  this,  at  least  the  mind  and  thoughf*  in  not^  mentis 
consenting    may  have  its    chastity   preserved    entire.     Now 
what  we  have  to  guard  in  chastity  of  mind^,  is,  as  pertaining ^  animi 
to  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  innocence  and  benevolence  ; 
as  pertaining  to  the  love  of  God,  piety.     Innocence  is  that 
we  hurt  no  man  ;  benevolence,  that  we  also  do  good  to  whom 
we  can ;  piety,  that  we  worship  God.     But  as  for  verity  of 
doctrine,  of  religion  and  piety,  that  is  not  violated  unless  by 
a  lie ;  whereas  the  highest  and  inmost  Verity  Itself,  Whose 
that  doctrine  is,  can  in  no  wise  be  violated :  which  Truth 
to  attain  unto,  and  in  It  on  every  wise  to  remain,  and  to  It 
thoroughly  to  cleave,  will  not  be  permitted,  but  when  this 
corruptible  shall  have  put  on  incorruplion,  and  this  mortal 


422       A  harmless  lie  lo  save  chastity  not  condemned. 

i^K  shall  have  put  on  immortality.  But,  because  all  piety  in  this 
DAcio.  life  is  practice  by  which  we  tend  to  that  life,  which 
practice  hath  a  guidance  afforded  unto  it  from  that  doctrine, 
>  signa- which  in  human  words  and  signs'  of  corporal  sacraments 
doth  insinuate  and  intimate  Truth  herself:  for  this  cause 
this  also,  which  by  lying  is  possible  to  be  corrupted,  is  most 
of  all  to  be  kept  incorrupt;  that  so,  if  ought  in  that  chastity 
of  mind  be  violated,  it  may  have  that  wherefrom  it  may  be 
repaired.  For  once  corrupt  authority  of  doctrine,  and  there 
can  be  none  either  course  or  recourse  to  chastity  of  mind. 

41.  There  resulteth  then  from  all  these  this  sentence,  that 
a  lie  which  doth  not  violate  the  doctrine  of  piety,  nor  piety 
itself,  nor  innocence,  nor  benevolence,  may  on  behalf  of 
pudicity  of  body  be  admitted.  And  yet  if  any  man  should 
propose  to  himself  so  to  love  truth,  not  only  that  which 
consists  in  contemplation,  but  also  in  uttering  the  true 
thing,  which  each  in  its  own  kind  of  things  is  true,  and  no 
otherwise  to  bring  forth  with  the  mouth  of  the  body  his 
thought  than  in  the  mind  it  is  conceived  and  beheld;  so  that 
he  should  prize  the  beauty  of  truth-telling  honesty,  not  only 
above  gold  and  silver  and  jewels  and  jjleasant  lands,  but 
above  this  temporal  life  itself  altogether  and  every  good  thing 
of  the  body,  I  know  not  whether  any  could  wisely  say  that 
that  man  errs.  And  if  he  should  prefer  this  and  prize  it 
more  than  all  that  himself  hath  of  such  things;  rightly  also 
would  he  prefer  it  to  the  temporal  things  of  other  men, 
whom  by  his  innocence  and  benevolence  he  was  bound  to 
keej)  and  to  help.  For  he  would  love  perfect  faith,  not  only 
of  believing  aright  those  things  which  by  an  excellent 
authority  and  worthy  of  faith  should  to  himself  be  spoken, 
but  also  of  faithfully  uttering  what  himself  should  judge  right 
to  be  spoken,  and  should  speak.  For  faith  hath  its  name  in 
the  Latin  tongue,  from  that  the  thhig  is  done  which  is  said^: 
and  thus  it  is  manifest  that  one  doth  not  exhibit  when  telling 
a  lie.  And  even  if  this  faith  be  less  violated,  when  one  lies 
in  such  sort  that  he  is  believed  to  no  inconvenience  and  no 
pernicious  hurt,  with  added  intention  moreover  of  guarding 
either  one's  life  or  corporal  purity ;  yet  violated  it  is,  and  a 
thing  is  violated  which  ought  to  be    kept  safe  in  chastity 

*  '  Fides,  quia^^  quod  dicitur.' 


Yet  truth  has  the  clahn  of  depending  on  our  oivn  act.    423 

and  sanctity  of  mind.     Whence  we  are  constrained,  not  by     dk 
opinion  of  men,  which  for  the  most  part  is  in  error,  but  by   ^^^' 
truth  itself,  truth  which  is  eminent  above  all,  and  alone  is 
most  invincible,  to   prefer  even   to  purity  of  body,  perfect 
faith.     For  chastity  of  mind  is,  love   well  ordered,  which 
does  not  place  the  greater  below  the  smaller.     Now  it  is  less, 
whatever  in  the  body  than  whatever  in  the  mind  can  be  vio- 
lated.   For  assuredly  when  for  corporal  chasteness  a  man  tells 
a  lie,  he  sees  indeed  that  his  body  is  threatened  with  corruption, 
not  from  his  own,  but  from  another's  lust,  but  is  cautious  lest 
by  permitting  at  least,  he  be  a  party.    That  permission,  how- 
ever, where  is  it  but  in  the  mind }    So  then,  even  corporal 
chasteness  cannot  be  corrupted  but  in  the  mind  ;  which  not 
consenting  nor  permitting,  it  can  by  no  means  be  rightly 
said   that  corporal   chasteness  is  violated,  whatever  in  the 
body  be  perpetrated  by  another's  lust.    Whence  it  is  gathered, 
that  much  more  must  the  chastity  of  the  mind  be  preserved 
in  the  mind,  in  the  which  is  the  guardianship  of  the  pudicity 
of  the  body.     Wherefore,  what  in  us  lies,  both  the  one  and 
the  other  must  by  holy  manners  and  conversation  be  walled 
and  hedged  round,  lest  from  another  quarter  it  be  violated. 
But  when  both  cannot  be,  which  is  to  be  slighted  in  com- 
parison of  which,  who  doth  not  see.''  when  he  seeth  which 
to  which  is  to  be  preferred,  the  mind  to  the  body,  or  the 
body  to  the  mind  ;  and  which  is  more  to  be  shunned  among 
sins,  the  permitting  of  another's  deed,  or  the  committing  of 
the  deed  thyself. 

42.  It  clearly  appears  then,  all  being  discussed,  that  those    xxi, 
testimonies  of  Scripture  have  none  other  meaning  than  that 
we  must  never  at  all  tell  a  lie  :  seeing  tliat  not  any  examples 
of  lies,  worthy  of  imitation,  are  found  in  the  manners  and 
actions  of  the  Saints,  as  regards  those  Scriptures  which  are 
referred  to  no  figurative  signification,  such  as  is  the  history 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.     For  all  those  sayings  of  our 
Lord  in  the  Gospel,  which  to  more  ignorant  minds  seem 
lies,  are  figurative  significations.     And  as  to  what  the  Apostle 
says:  I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  niiglit  gain  i  Cox. 9, 
all;  the  right  understanding  is,  that  he  did  this  not  by  lying,  ^^' 
but  by  sympathy ;  so  that  he  dealt  with  them  in  liberating 
them  with  so  great  charity,  as  if  he  were  himself  in  that  evil 


4'24    All  kinds  of  lying  urong,  hut  some  worse  than  others. 

DE     from  which  he  wished  to  make  ihem  whole.     There  must 
DAcio.  therefore  be  no  lying  in  the  doctrine  of  piety:  it  is  a  heinous 
wickedness,  and  the  first  sort  of  detestable  lie.     There  must 
be  no  lying  of  the  second  sort ;  because  no  man  must  have 
a  wrong  done  to  him.     There  must  be  no  lying  of  the  third 
sort ;  because  we  are  not  to  consult  any  man's  good  to  the 
injury  of  another.     There  must  be  no  lying  of  the  fourth  sort, 
that  is,  for  the  lust  of  lyinc^,  which  of  itself  is  vicious.     There 
must  be  no  lying  of  the  fifth  sort,  because  not  even  the  truth 
itself  is  to  be   uttered   with  the  aim   of  men-pleasing,  Iioay 
much  less  a  lie,  which  of  itself,  as  a  lie,  is   a  foul   thing  ? 
There  must  be  no  lying  of  the  sixth  sort ;  for  it  is  not  right 
that  even  the  truth  of  testimony  be  corrupted  for  any  man's 
temporal  convenience  and  safety.     But  unto  eternal  salvation 
none  is  to  be  led  by  aid  of  a  lie.     P"or  not  by  the  ill  manners 
of  them   that  convert  him  is  he  to  be  converted   to   good 
manners:    because    if  it  is  meet  to  be  done  towards  him, 
himself  also  ought  when  converted  to  do  it  toward  others; 
and  so  is  he  converted  not  to  good,  but  to  ill  manners,  seeing 
that  is   held  out   to  be  imitated    by  him  when    converted, 
which  was  done  unto  him  in  converting  him.     Neither  in 
the  seventh  sort  must  there  be  any"  lying ;  for  it  is  meet  that 
not  any  man's  commodity  or  tcunporal  welfare  be  prefen'ed 
to  the  perfecting  of  faith.     Not  even  if  any  man  is  so  ill 
moved  by  our  right  deeds  as  to  become  worse  in  his  mind, 
and  far  more  remote  from  piety,  are  right  deeds  therefore  to 
be  foregone  :  since  what  we  are  chiefly  to  hold  is  that  where- 
unto  we  ought  to  call  and  invite  them  whom  as  our  own 
selves  we  love ;   and  with  most  courageous  mind  we  must 
2Cor.  2,  drink  in  that  apostolic  sentence:   To  some  we  are  a  savour  of 
life  unto  life,  to  otlters  a  savour  of  death  unto  death;  and 
who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?    Nor  in  the  eighth  sort  must 
there  be  lying  :  because  both  among  good  things  chastity  of 
mind  is  greater  than  pudicity  of  body  ;  and  among  evil  things, 
that  which  ourselves  do,  than  that  which  we  suffer  to  be  done. 
In  these  eight  kinds,  however,  a  man  sins  less  when  he  tells  a 
lie,  in  pro])ortion  as  he  emerges  to  the  eighth  :  more,  in  pro- 
portion as  he  diverges  to  the  first.    But  whoso  shall  think  there 
is  any  sort  of  lie  that  is  not  sin,  will  deceive  hin)self  foully, 
while  he  deems  himself  honest  as  a  deceiver  of  other  men. 


False  reasons  of  those  who  say  it  maybe  a  sin  not  to  lie.  425 

43.  So  great  blindness,  moreover,   bath    occupied  men's     de 
minds,  that  to  them  it  is  too  little  if  we  pronounce  some  lies  p^cio. 


not  to  be  sins ;  but  they  must  needs  pronounce  it  to  be  sin 
in  some  things  if  we  refuse  to  lie :  and  to  such  a  pass  have 
they  been  brought  by  defending  lying,  that  even  that  first 
kind  which  is  of  all  the  most  abominably  wicked  they  pro- 
nounce to  have  been  used  by  the  Apostle  Paul.     For  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  written  as  it  was,  like  the  rest,  for 
doctrine  of  religion  and  piety,  they  say  that  he  has  told  a 
lie,  in    the    passage   where  he  says  concerning  Peter  and 
Barnabas,  Whe?i  I  saiv  that  they  walked  not  uprightly  ac-Gal.  2, 
cording  to  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.     For,  while  they  wish  to 
defend  Peter  from  error,  and  from  that  pravity  of  way  into 
which  he  had  fallen  ;  the  very  way  of  religion  in  which  is 
salvation   for  all  men,  they   by   breaking  and   mincing   the 
authority    of    the    Scriptures    do    endeavour    themselves   to 
overthrow.     In   which  they  do  not  see  that  it  is  not  only 
lying,  but  perjury  that  they  lay  to  the  charge  of  the  Apostle 
in  the  very  doctrine  of  piety,  that  is,  in  an  Epistle  in  which 
he  preaches  the  Gospel ;  seeing  that  he  there  saith,  before 
he  relates  that  matter.  What  I  icrite  unto  you,  behold,  before  Ga\.  \, 
God,  I  lie  not.     But  it  is  time  that  we  set  bounds  to  this     ' 
disputation :    in    the    consideration    and    treatment   whereof 
altogether  there  is  nothing  more  meet  to  be,  before  all  else, 
borne  in  mind  and  made  our  prayer,  than  that  which  the  same 
Apostle  saith :  God  isfaithfid.  Who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  i  Cor. 
tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  to  bear,  but  will  with  the^^'^^' 
temptation  make  also  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able 
to  bear  it. 


S.    AUGUSTINE 

TO   CONSENTIUS:    AGAINST    LYING. 


From  the  Retractations,  Book  ii.  Chap.  60. 

"  Theu  2  also  I  wrote  a  Book  against  Ljdng,  the  occasion  of  which  work 
was  this.  In  order  to  discover  the  Priscillianist  heretics,  who  think  it 
right  to  conceal  their  heresy  not  only  hy  denial  and  lies,  hut  even  hy 
perjury,  it  seemed  to  certain  Catholics  that  they  ought  to  pretend  them- 
selves Priscillianists,  in  order  that  they  might  penetrate  their  lurking 
places.  In  prohihition  of  which  thing,  I  composed  this  book.  It  begins: 
Multa  mihi  legenda  misisti.'^ 


1.  A  great  deal  for  me  to  read  hast  thou  sent,  ray  dearest 
brother  Cousentius :  a  great  deal  for  me  to  read :  to  the 
which  while  I  am  preparing  an  answer,  and  am  drawn  off 
first  by  one,  then  by  another,  more  urgent  occupation,  the 
year  has  measured  out  its  course,  and  has  thrust  me  into 
such  straits,  that  I  must  answer  in  what  sort  1  may,  lest  the  time 
for  sailing  being  now  favourable,  as  d  the  bearer  desirous  to 
return,  1  should  too  long  detain  him.  Having  therefore 
unrolled  and  read  through  all  that  Leonas,  servant  of  God, 
brought  me  from  thee,  both  soon  after  I  received  it,  and 
afterwards  when  about  to  dictate  this  reply,  and  having 
weighed  it  with   all   the  consideration   in   my  power,  I  am 

*  i.  e.  A.D.  420,  the  work  mentioned  and  ep.  120,  and  205,  are  addressed  to 

just  before  belonging  to  the  early  part  him.      This  is    the    work    referred    to 

of  that  year.     Consentius  is  thought  to  in  the  Enchiridion,  §.  6.  p.  96,     Ben. 
be  the  writer  of  ep.  119,  to  Augustine, 


Lying  forbidden,  even  if  to  detect  Heretics.  427 

greatly  delighted  with  thy  eloquence,  and  memory  of  the  contra 
holy  Scripture,  and  cleverness  of  wit,  and  the  resentment '*'^'^jy^*' 
with  which  thou  bitest  negligent  Catholics,  and  the  zeal 
with  which  thou  gnashest  against  even  latent  heretics.  But 
I  am  not  persuaded  that  it  is  right  to  unearth  them  out  of 
their  hiding  places  by  our  telling  lies.  For  to  what  end  do 
we  take  such  ])ains  in  tracking  them  out  and  running  them 
down,  but  that  having  taken  them  and  brought  them  forth 
into  open  day,  we  may  either  teach  them  the  truth,  or  at 
least  having  convicted  them  by  the  truth,  may  not  allow  them 
to  hurt  others  ?  to  this  end,  therefore,  that  their  lie  may  be 
blotted  out,  or  shunned,  and  God's  truth  increased.  How 
then  by  a  lie  shall  I  rightly  be  able  to  prosecute  lies  ?  Or  is 
it  by  robbery  that  robberies,  and  by  sacrilege  that  sacrileges, 
and  by  adultery  that  adulteries,  are  to  be  prosecuted  ?  But  i/^om.3, 
the  truth  of  God  shall  abound  by  my  lie,  are  we  too  to  say/' 
Let  vs  do  evil  that  good  may  come  ?  A  thing  which  thou 
seest  how  the  Apostle  detesteth.  For  what  else  is,  '  Let  us 
lie,  that  we  may  bring  heretic  liars  to  the  truth,'  but,  Let  us 
do  evil  that  good  may  come?  Or,  is  a  lie  sometimes  good,  or 
sometimes  a  lie  not  evil?  Why  then  is  it  written.  Thou  Ps.  5,6. 
hatest,  L.ord,  all  that  trork  iniquity  ;  Thou  wilt  destroy  all 
that  speak  leasing ".  For  he  hath  not  excepted  some,  or 
said  indefinitely.  Thou  wilt  destroy  them  that  speak  leasing; 
so  as  to  permit  some,  not  all,  to  be  understood :  but  it  is  an 
universal  sentence  that  he  hath  passed,  saying.  Thou  wilt 
destroy  all  zaho  speak  leasing.  Or,  because  it  is  not  said, 
Thou  wilt  destroy  all  who  speak  all  leasing,  or,  who  speak 
any  leasing  whatsoever;  is  it  therefore  to  be  thought  that 
there  is  place  allowed  for  some  lie  ;  to  wit,  that  there  should 
be  some  leasing,  and  them  who  speak  it,  God  should  not 
destroy,  but  destroy  them  all  which  speak  unjust  leasing,  not 
what  lie  soever,  because  there  is  found  also  a  just  lie,  \vhich 
as  such  ought  to  be  matter  of  praise,  not  of  crime  ? 

2.  Perceivest  thou  not  how  much   this   reasoning  aidetli      ii- 
the  very  persons  whom  as  great  game  we  make  ado  to  catch 
by  our  lies?     For,  as  thyself  hast  shewn,  this  is  the  sentiment 
of  the  Priscillianists:  to  prove  which,  they  apply  testimonies 

*  Psalm  5,  6.  7.  T/wu  wilt  dcsfroi/     rev;  XaXtiJirus  to  yptultf,  LXX. 
them  that  speak  a  lie,  Heb.     crdvTat 


428       I'jling  to  those  without,  a  Priscillianist  notion. 

CONTRA  fi-om  the  Scvi])tures  exhorting  their  followers  to  lie,  as  though 
cum.   by  the  examples  of  Patriarchs,  Prophets,  Apostles,  Angels ; 
not  hesitating  to  add  even  the  Lord  Christ  Himself;    and 
deeming  that  they  cannot   otherwise   prove   their  falsehood 
truthful,  unless  they  |)rononnce  Truth  to  be  a  liar.     It  must 
be  refuted,  this;  not  imitated:  nor  ought  we  to  be  partners 
with  the  Priscillianists  in  that  evil  in  which  they  are  con- 
victed to  be  worse  than  other  heretics.     For  they  alone,  or 
at  least  they  in   the    greatest  degree,  are  found  to  make  a 
dogma  of  lying  for  the  purpose  of  hiding  then*  truth,  as  they 
call  it:  and  this  so  great  evil  therefore  to  esteem  just,  because 
they  say  that  in  the  heart  must  be  held  that  which  is  true, 
but  with  the  mouth  to  utter  unto  aliens  a  false  thing,  is  no 
Ps. 15,2.  sin  ;  and  that  this  is  written,  Wito  speaketh  the  trxith  in  his 
heart:   as  though  this  were  enough  for  righteousness,  even 
though  a  person  do  with  his  mouth  speak  a  lie,  when  not  his 
neighbour  but  a  stranger  is  he  that  heareth  it.     On  this  ac- 
Eph,  4,  count  they  think  the  Apostle  Paul,  when  he  had  said.  Putting 
^^'         aicaij  tying,  speak    ye   truth,  to   have  immediately   added, 
Every  man  with  Itis  neigt)t)nur,  for  we  are  inembers  one  of 
another.     Meaning,  that  with  them  who  are  not  our  neigh- 
1  com-    hours  in  society  of  the  truth,  nor,  so  to  say,  our  co-members  ', 
mem-     |j.  jg  jaYyfy]  ajjc]  right  to  speak  a  lie. 

3.  Which   sentence   dishonoureth   the  holy  Martyrs,  nay 
rather  taketh  away  holy  martyrdoms  altogether.     For  they 
would  do  more  justly  and  wisely,  according  to  these  men, 
not  to  confess  to  their  persecutors  that  they  were  Christians, 
and    by   confessing  make   them   murderers :    but  rather   by 
telling  a  lie,  and  denying  wliat  they  were,  should  both  them- 
selves keep  safe  the  convenience  of  the  flesh  and  purpose  of 
the  heart,  and  not  allow  those  to  accomplish  the  wickedness 
which  they  had  conceived  in  their  mind.      For  they  were 
not  their  neighbours  in  the  Christian  faith,  that  with  them  it 
should  be  their  duty  to  speak  the  truth  in  their  mouth  which 
they  spake  in  their  heart ;  but  moreover  enemies  of  Truth 
itself     For  if  Jehu  (whom  it  seems   they  do  prudently  to 
single  out  unto  themselves  to  look  unto  as  an   example  of 
lying)  falsely  gave  himself  out  for  a  servant  of  Baal,  that  he 
might  slay  Baal's  servants  :  how  much  more  justly,  according 
to  their  perversity,  might,  in  time  of  persecution,  the  servants 


The  Martyrs  are  to  be  imitated,  not  Jehu.  4'29 

of  Christ  falsely  give  themselves  out  for  servants  of  demons,  contra 
that  the  servants  of  demons  might  not  slay  servants  of^^iuM? 
Christ;  and  sacrifice  to  idols  that  men  might  not  be  killed,  ' 

if  Jehu  sacrificed  to  Baal  that  he  might  kill  men?     For  what 
harm  would  it  do  them,  according  to  the  egregious  doctrine 
of  these  speakers  of  lies,  if  they   should  lyingly  pretend  a 
worship  of  the  Devil  in  the  body,  when  the  worship  of  God  was 
preserved  in  the  heart  ?     But  not  so  have  the  Martyrs  under- 
stood the  Apostle,  the  true,  the  holy  Martyrs.     They  saw  and 
held  that  which  is  written,    With  the  heart  man  belie veth  Roxa.xo, 
unto  righteousness,  and  tvith  the  mouth  confession  is  made    ' 
unto  salvation;    and,  In   their  nyouth   was  found  no  ^/e  ^ ;  Rom.l4, 
and  so  they  departed  irreproachable,  to  that  place  where  to^' 
be  tempted  by  liars  any  further  they  will  not  fear;  because 
they  will  not  have  liars  any  more  in  their  heavenly  assem- 
blies, either  for  strangers  or  neighbours.      As  for  that  Jehu, 
by  an  impious  lie  and  a  sacrilegious  sacrifice  making  inqui- 
sition for  impious  and  sacrilegious  men  for  to  kill  them,  they 
would  not  imitate  him,  no,  not   though   the   Scripture   had 
said  nothing  concerning  him,  what  manner  of  man  he  was. 
But,  seeing  it  is  written  that  he  had  not  his  heart  right  with  2  Kings 
God;  what  profited  it  him,  that  for  some   obedience  which,     '     ' 
concerning  the  utter  destruction  of  the  house  of  Ahab,  he 
exhibited  for  the  lust  of  his   own  domination,  he  received 
some  amount  of  transitory  wages  in  a  temporal  kingdom  } 
Let,  rather,  the  truth-telling  sentence  of  the  Martyrs  be  thine 
to  defend  :   to  this  I  exhort  thee,  my  brother,  that  tiiou  mayest 
be  against  liars,  not  a  teacher  of  lying,  but  an   assertor  of 
truth.     For,  I  pray  thee,  attend  diligently  to  what  1  say,  that 
thou  mayest  find  how  needful  to  be  shunned  is  that  which, 
with  laudable  zeal  indeed  towards  impious  men,  that  they 
may  be  caught  and  corrected,  or  avoided,  but  yet  too  incau- 
tiously, is  thought  fit  to  be  taught. 

4.  Of  lies  are  many  sorts,  which  indeed  all,  universally,  we  iii- 
ought  to  hate.  For  there  is  no  lie  that  is  not  contrary  to 
truth.  For,  as  light  and  darkness,  piety  and  impiety,  justice 
and  iniquity,  sin  and  right-doing,  health  and  weakness,  life 
and  death,  so  are  truth  and  a  lie  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other.     Whence  by  how   much  we  love  the  former,  by  so 

•>  Rev.  14,  5.  •v^swSof  Griesbacli;  Vo\<it  text  rec;  guile  E.V. 


430        Believing  a  falsehood,  except  in  faith,  no  sin. 

CONTRA  much  ought  we  to  hate  the  latter.  Yet  in  truth  there  be 
ciuM.  some  lies  which  to  believe  does  no  harm :  although  even  by 
such  sort  of  lie  to  wish  to  deceive,  is  hurtful  to  him  that  tells 
it,  not  to  him  that  believes  it.  As  though,  if  that  brother, 
the  servant  of  God,  Fronto,  in  the  information  which  he  gave 
thee,  should  (though  far  be  the  thought !)  say  some  things 
falsely ;  he  would  have  hurt  himself  assuredly,  not  thee, 
although  thou,  without  iniquity  of  thine,  hadst  believed  all, 
upon  his  telling  it.  Because,  whether  those  things  did  so 
take  place  or  not  so,  yet  they  have  not  any  thing,  which  if  a 
person  believe  to  have  been  so,  though  it  were  not  so,  he  by 
the  rule  of  truth  and  doctrine  of  eternal  salvation  should  be 
judged  worthy  of  blame.  Whereas,  if  a  person  tell  a  lie 
which  if  any  believe  he  will  be  an  heretic  against  the 
doctrine  of  Christ,  by  so  much  is  he  who  tells  the  lie  more 
hurtful,  by  how  much  he  that  believes  it  is  more  miserable. 
See  then,  what  manner  of  thing  it  is,  if  against  the  doctrine 
of  Christ  we  shall  tell  a  lie  which  whoso  believes  shall  perish, 
in  order  that  we  may  catch  the  enemies  of  the  same  doctrine, 
to  the  end  we  may  bring  them  to  the  truth,  while  we  recede 
from  it;  nay  rather,  when  we  catch  liars  by  lying,  teach 
worse  lies.  For  it  is  one  thing  what  they  say  when  they  lie, 
another  when  they  are  deceived.  For,  when  they  teach 
their  heresy,  they  speak  the  things  in  which  they  are  deceived ; 
but  when  they  say  that  they  think  what  they  do  not  think, 
or  that  they  do  not  think  what  tbey  do  think,  they  say 
the  things  in  which  they  lie.  In  that  any  believeth  them, 
what  though  he  do  not  find  them  out,  himself  perish- 
eth  not.  For  it  is  no  receding  from  the  catholic  rule,  if, 
when  a  heretic  lyingly  professes  the  catholic  doctrines,  one 
believes  him  to  be  a  catholic  :  and  therefoi'e  it  is  not  per- 
nicious to  him  ;  because  he  is  mistaken  in  the  mind  of  a 
man,  of  which,  when  latent,  he  cannot  judge,  not  in  the 
faith  of  God  which  it  is  his  duty  to  keep  safe  planted  within 
him.  Moreover,  when  they  teach  their  heresy,  whoso  shall 
believe  them,  in  thinking  it  truth,  will  be  partaker,  as  of  their 
error,  so  of  their  damnation.  So  it  comes  to  pass,  that  when 
they  fable  their  nefarious  dogmas  in  which  they  are  with 
deadly  error  deceived,  then  whoso  believeth  them  is  lost: 
whereas  when  we  preach  catholic  dogmas,  in  which  we  hold 


MENDA- 
CIUM. 


Feigned  error  may  breed  or  conjirm  heresy.         431 

the  right  faith,  then  if  he  shall  believe,  that  man  is  found,  contra 
whoso  was  lost.  But  when,  they  being  Priscillianists,  do,  in 
order  that  they  may  not  betray  their  venom,  lyingly  give 
themselves  out  to  be  of  us  ;  whoever  of  us  believes  them, 
even  while  they  escape  detection,  himself  perseveres  a 
catholic:  we  on  the  other  hand,  if,  in  order  to  attain  to  the 
discovery  of  them,  we  falsely  give  ourselves  out  for  Pris- 
cillianists, because  we  shall  praise  their  dogmas  as  though 
they  were  our  own,  whoso  shall  believe  the  same,  will  either 
be  confirmed  among  them,  or  will  be  transferred  to  them  in 
the  mean  time  straightway  :  but  what  the  coming  hour  may 
bring  forth,  whether  they  shall  be  afterwards  set  free  there- 
from by  us  when  speaking  true  things,  who  were  deceived 
by  us  when  speaking  false ;  and  whether  they  will  be  willing 
to  hear  one  teaching  whom  they  have  thus  experienced 
telling  a  lie,  who  can  know  for  certain  ?  who  can  be  ignorant 
that  this  is  uncertain  ?  Whence  it  is  gathered,  that  it  is 
more  pernicious,  or  to  speak  more  mildly,  that  it  is  more 
perilous  for  Catholics  to  lie  that  they  may  catch  heretics, 
than  for  heretics  to  lie  that  they  may  not  be  found  out 
by  Catholics.  Because,  whoso  believes  Catholics  when  they 
tell  a  lie  to  tempt  people,  is  either  made  or  confirmed  a 
heretic ;  but  whoso  believes  heretics  when  they  tell  a  lie  to 
conceal  themselves,  doth  not  cease  to  be  a  Catholic.  But 
that  this  may  become  more  plain,  let  us  propose  some  cases 
by  way  of  example,  and  from  those  writings  in  preference 
which  thou  hast  sent  me  to  read. 

5.  Well  then,  let  us  set  before  our  eyes  a  cunning  spy  as 
he  makes  up  to  the  person  whom  he  has  already  perceived 
to  be  a  Priscillianist;  he  begins  with  Dictinius  the  bishop, 
and  lyingly  bepraises  either  his  life,  if  he  knew  him,  or  his 
fame,  if  he  knew  him  not ;  this  is  more  tolerable  thus  far, 
because  Dictinius  is  accounted  to  have  been  a  Catholic,  and 
to  have  been  corrected  of  that  error.  Then,  passing  on  to 
Priscillian,  (for  this  comes  next  in  the  art  of  lying,)  he  shall 
make  reverend  mention  of  him,  of  an  impious  and  detestable 
person,  condemned  for  his  nefarious  wickedness  and  crimes  ! 
In  which  reverend  mention,  if  haply  the  person  for  whom 
this  sort  of  net  is  spread,  had  not  been  a  firm  Priscillianist, 
by  this  preaching  of  him,  he  will  be  confirmed.     But  when 


432    He  who  cheats  lojind  out  heresy,  will  not  he  believed. 

CONTRA  the  spy  shall  go  on  to  discourse  of  the  other  matters,  and 
ciuM*."  •'^^y'^S  that  he  pities  ihem  whom  the  author  of  darkness  hath 
involved  in  such  darkness  of  error,  that  they  acknowledge 
not  the  honour  of  their  own  soul,  and  the  brightness  of  their 
divine  ancestry  :  then  speaking  of  Dictinius's  Book,  which 
is  called  '  the  Pound,'  because  it  treats,  first  and  last,  of  a 
dozen  questions,  being  as  the  ounces  which  go  to  the  pound, 
shall  extol  it  with  such  praise,  as  to  protest  that  such  a  '  Pound' 
(in  which  awful  blasphemies  are  contained)  is  more  precious 
than  many  thousands  of  pounds  of  gold ;  truly,  this  astuteness 
of  him  who  tells  the  lie  slays  the  soul  of  him  who  believes  it, 
or,  that  being  slain  already,  doth  in  the  same  death  sink,  and 
hold  it  down.  But,  thou  wilt  say,  '  afterwards  it  shall  be  set 
at  liberty.'  What  if  it  come  not  to  pass,  either  upon  some- 
thing intervening  that  prevents  what  was  begun  from  being 
completed,  or  through  obstinacy  of  an  heretical  mind  denying 
the  same  things  over  again,  although  of  some  it  had  already 
begun  to  make  confession  .''  especially  because,  if  he  shall 
find  out  that  he  has  been  tampered  with  by  a  stranger,  he 
will  just  the  more  boldly  study  to  conceal  his  sentiments  by 
a  lie,  when  he  shall  have  learned  much  more  certainly  that 
this  is  done  without  blame,  even  by  the  example  of  the  very 
person  who  tampered  with  him.  This,  truly,  in  a  man  who 
thinks  it  right  to  hide  the  truth  by  telling  a  lie,  with  what  face 
can  we  blame,  and  dare  to  condemn  what  we  teach  ? 

6.  It  remains,  then,  that  what  the  Priscillianists  think, 
according  to  the  nefarious  falsity  of  their  heresy,  of  God,  of 
the  soul,  of  the  body,  and  the  rest,  we  hesitate  not  with 
truthful  piety  to  condemn  ;  but  what  they  think  of  the  right 
of  telling  a  lie  to  hide  the  truth  is  to  be  to  us  and  them 
(which  God  forbid  !)  a  common  dogma.  This  is  so  great  an 
evil,  that  even  though  this  attempt  of  ours,  whereby  we 
desire  by  means  of  a  lie  to  catch  them  and  change  them, 
should  so  prosper  that  we  do  catch  and  change  them,  there 
is  no  gain  that  can  compensate  the  damage  of  making  our- 
selves wrong  with  them  in  order  to  set  them  right.  For 
through  this  lie  shall  both  we  be  in  that  respect  perverse,  and 
they  but  half  corrected;  seeing  that  their  thinking  it  right  to 
tell  a  lie  on  behalf  of  the  truth  is  a  fault  which  we  do  not 
correct   in    them,  because  we  have    learned  and    do  teach 


MENDA- 
CIUM. 


Converts  made  by  lying  cannot  be  truftfed.  433 

the  same  thing,  and  lay  it  down  that  it  is  fit  to  be  done,  in  contra 
order  that  wc  may  be  able  to  attain  to  the  amending  of 
them.  Whom  yet  we  amend  not,  for  their  fault,  with  which 
they  think  right  to  hide  the  truth,  we  take  not  away,  rather 
we  make  ourselves  faulty  when  by  such  a  fault  we  seek 
them;  nor  do  we  find  how  we  can  believe  them,  when 
converted,  to  whom,  while  perverted,  we  have  lied ;  lest 
haply  what  was  done  to  them  that  they  might  be  caught, 
they  do  to  us  when  caught ;  not  only  because  to  do  it  hath 
been  their  wont,  but  because  in  us  also,  to  whom  they  come, 
they  find  the  same. 

7.  And,  what  is  more  miserable,  even  they,  already  made  iv 
as  it  were  our  own,  cannot  find  how  they  may  believe  us. 
For  if  they  suspect  that  even  in  the  catholic  doctrines  them- 
selves we  speak  lyingly,  that  we  may  conceal  I  know  not 
what  other  thing  which  we  think  true;  of  course  to  one 
suspecting  the  like  thou  shalt  say,  I  did  this  then  only  to 
catch  thee:  but  what  wilt  thou  answer  when  he  savs,  Whence 
then  do  I  know  whether  thou  art  not  doing  it  even  now,  lest 
thou  be  caught  by  me?  Or  indeed,  can  any  man  be  made  to 
believe  that  a  man  does  not  lie  not  to  be  caught,  who  lies  to 
catch?  Seest  thou  whither  this  evil  tends  ?  that  is,  that  not 
only  we  to  them,  and  they  to  us,  but  every  brother  to  every 
brother  shall  not  undeservedly  become  suspected  ?  And  so 
while  that  which  is  aimed  at  by  means  of  the  lie,  is  that 
faith  may  be  taught,  the  thing  which  is  brought  about  is, 
rather,  that  there  shall  be  no  having  faith  in  any  man.  For 
if  we  speak  even  against  God  when  we  tell  a  lie,  what  so 
great  evil  will  people  be  able  to  discover  in  any  lie,  that,  as 
though  it  were  a  most  wretched  thing,  we  should  be  bound 
in  every  way  to  eschew  it  ? 

8.  But  now  observe  how  more  tolerable  in  comparison  v 
with  us  is  the  lying  of  the  Priscillianists,  when  they  know 
that  they  speak  deceitfully  :  whom  by  our  own  lying  we 
think  right  to  deliver  from  those  false  things  in  which  they 
by  erring  are  deceived,  A  Priscillianist  saith,  that  the  soul 
is  a  part  of  God,  and  of  the  same  nature  and  substance  with 
Him.  This  is  a  great  and  detestable  blasphemy.  For  it 
follows  that  the  nature  of  God  may  be  taken  captive,  deceived, 
cheated,  disturbed,  and   defiled,  condemned   and  tortured. 

F  f 


434     Blasphemy  worst  in  one  who  knows  it  to  he  such. 

CONTRA  But  if  that  man  also  saith  this,  who  from  so  great  an  evil 
ciuM."  desires  to   deliver  a  man  by  a  lie,  let  us  see  what  is  the 
difference    between    the    one    blasphemer   and    the    other. 
'  Very  much,'  sayest  thou  :  '  for  this  the  Priscillianist  saith, 
also  believing  it  so:  but  the  catholic  not  so  believing,  though 
so  speaking.'     The  one,  then,  blasphemes  without  knowing, 
the    other  with   knowledge :    the    one  against  science,  the 
other  against  conscience :    the  one  hath    the  blindness    of 
thinking  false  things,  but  in  them  hath  at  least  the  will  of 
saying   true    things;    the   other   in   secret  seeth   truth,   and 
willingly    spcaketh    false.     '  But    the    one,'    thou    wilt    say, 
*  teacheth  this,  that  he  may  make  men  partakers  of  his  error 
and  madness :  the  latter  saith  it,  that   from  that  error  and 
madness    he    may    deliver    men.'       Now    I    have    already 
shewn  above  how  hurtful  is  this  very  thing  which  people 
believe  will  do  good :  but  meanwhile  if  we  weigh  in  these 
two  the  present  evils,  (for  the  future  good  which  a  catholic 
seeks  from  correcting  a  heretic  is  uncertain,)  wiio  sins  worse  } 
he  who  deceives  a  man  without  knowing  it,  or  he  who  blas- 
phemes God,  knowing  it?     Assuredly  which  is  the   worse, 
that  man  understands,  who  with  solicitous  piety  preferreth 
God  to  man.     Add  to  this,  that,  if  God  may  be  blasphemed 
in  order  that  we  may  bring  men  to  praise  Him,  without  doubt 
we  do  by  our  example  and  doctrine  invite  men  not  only  to 
praise,  but   also  to  blaspheme  God :    because    they   whom 
through  blasphemies  against  God  we  plot  to  bring   to   the 
praises  of  God,  verily,  if  we  do  bring  them,  will  learn  not 
only  to  praise,  but  also  to  blaspheme.    These  be  the  benefits 
we  confer  on  them  whom,  by  blaspheming  not  ignorautly  but 
with  knowledge,  we  deliver  from  heretics!  And  whereas  the 
1  Tim.   Apostle  delivered  men  to  Satan  himself  that  they  might  learn 
'     '     not  to  blaspheme,  we  endeavour  to  rescue  men  from  Satan, 
that  they  may  learn  to  blaspheme  not  with  ignorance,  but 
with   knowledge.      And  upon    ourselves,   their  masters,  we 
bring  this  so    great   bane,  that,  for   the    sake  of  catching 
heretics,  we  first  become,  which  is  certain,  blasphemers  of 
God,  in  order  that  we  may  for  the  sake  of  delivering  them, 
which  is  uncertain,  be  able  to  be  teachers  of  His  truth. 

9.  When  therefore  we  teach  ours  to  blaspheme  God  that 
the  Priscillianists  may  believe  them  theirs,  let  us  see  what 


Priscilllanists  sin  less  in  pretending  Catholicism.     435 

evil  themselves  say  when   they  therefore   lie   tliat  we   may  contra 
believe    them    ours.       They    anathematize    Priscillian,    and  f._^^^' 
detest  him  according  to  om'  mind  ;   they  say  that  the  soul  is 
a  creature  of  God,  not  a  part;    they  execrate  the  Priscil- 
lianists'  false   martyrdoms;    the   catholic  bishops   by  whom 
that  heresy  has  been    stripped,    attacked,  prostrated,   they 
extol  with  great  praises,  and  so  forth.     Behold,  themselves 
speak  truth  when  they  lie:  not  that  the  very  thing  which  is 
a  lie  can  be  true  at  the  same  time  ;  but  when  in  one  thing 
they  lie,  in  another  they  speak  truth  :  for  when,  in  saying 
they  are   of  us,   they  lie,  of  the  catholic  faith  they  speak 
truth.     And  therefore  they,  that  they  may  not  be  found  out 
for  Priscillianists,  speak  in  lying  manner  the  truth  :  but  we, 
that  we  may  find  them  out,  not  only  speak  lyingly,  that  we 
may  be  believed  to  belong  to  them ;  but  we  also  speak  false 
things  which  we  know  to  belong  to  their  error.     Therefore  as 
for  them,  when  they  wish  to  be  thought  of  us,  it  is  both  false 
in  part,  and  true  in  part,  what  they  say ;  for  it  is  false  that 
they  are  of  us,  but  true  that  the  soul  is  not  a  part  of  God : 
but  as  for  us,  when  we  wish  to  be  thought  to  belong  to  them, 
it  is  false,  both  the  one  and  the  other  that  we  sa}-,  both  that 
we  are  Priscillianists,  and  that  the  soul  is  a  part  of  God. 
They,  then,  praise  God,  not  blaspheme,  when  they  conceal 
themselves  ;    and  when  they  do  not  so,  but  utter  their  own 
sentiments,  they  know  not  that  they  blaspheme.     So  that  if 
they  be  converted  to  the  catholic  faith,  they  console  them- 
selves, because   they  can   say  what  the  Apostle   said:    who 
when  among  other  things  he  had  said,  /  was  before  a  bias- 1  Tim. 
phemer ;  but,  saith  he,  /  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it^'^^' 
ignoranthj.     We  on    the   contrary,  in  order  that  they  may 
open  themselves  to  us,  if  we  utter  this  as  if  it  were  a  just  lie 
for  deceiving  and  catching  them,  do  assuredly  both  say  that 
we  belong  to  the  blaspheming  Priscillianists,  and  that  they 
may  believe  us,  do  without  excuse  of  ignorance  blaspheme. 
For  a  catholic,  who  by  blaspheming  wishes  to  be  thought  a 
heretic,  cannot  say,  /  did  it  ignoranthj. 

10.  Ever,  my  brother,  in  such  cases,  it  behoves  with  fear     vi. 
to  recollect.  Whoso  shall  deny  Me  before  men,  I  will  deny  Mat.io, 
him  before  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven.     Or  truly  is  it  no^^' 
denying  of  Christ  before  men,  to  deny  Him  before  Priscil- 

i.'f2 


436       Ways  of  Providence  for  thtevtut//  secret  Iieresij. 

CONTRA  lianists,  that    when    they   hide   themselves,   one    may  by   a 

*ciuMt"  blasphemous    lie    strip   them    and    catcli   them  ?      But  who 

doubts,  I  pray  thee,  that  Christ  is  denied,  when  so   as  lie 

is  in  truth,  we  say  that  lie  is  not;  and  so  as  the  Priscillianist 

believes  Him,  we  say  that  fTe  is  ? 

11.  '  But,  hidden  wolves,'  thou  wilt  say,  '  clad  in  sheep's 
clothing,  and  privily  and  grievously  wasting  the  Lord's  flock, 
can  we  no  otherwise  find  out.'  Whence  then  have  tne 
Priscillianists  become  known,  ere  this  way  of  hunting  for 
them  with  lies  was  excogitated  ?  Whence  was  their  very 
author,  more  cunning  doubtless,  and  therefore  more  covert, 
got  at  in  his  bed  ?  Whence  so  many  and  so  great  persons 
made  manifest  and  condemned,  and  the  others  innumerable 
partly  corrected,  partly  as  if  corrected,  and  in  the  Church's 
compassion  gathered  into  her  fold.''  For  many  ways  giveth 
the  Lord,  when  He  hath  compassion,  whereby  we  may  come 
to  the  discovery  of  them  :  two  of  which  are  more  happy  than 
others;  nauiely,  that  eitlier  they  whom  they  have  wished  to 
seduce,  or  they  whom  they  had  already  seduced,  shall,  when 
they  repent  and  are  converted,  point  them  out.  Which  is 
more  easily  efi'ected,  if  their  nefarious  erior,  not  by  lying 
tricks,  but  by  truthful  reasonings  be  overthrown.  In  the 
writing  of  which  it  behoves  thee  to  bestow  thy  pains,  since 
God  hath  bestowed  the  gift  that  thou  canst  do  this :  which 
wholesome  writings  whereby  their  insane  perversity  is  de- 
stroyed, becoming  more  and  more  known,  and  being  by 
catholics,  whether  prelates  who  speak  in  the  congregations, 
or  any  studious  men  full  of  zeal  for  God,  every  where  diffused, 
these  will  be  holy  nets  in  which  they  may  be  caught  truth- 
fully, not  with  lies  hunted  after.  For  so  being  taken,  either, 
of  their  own  accord,  they  will  confess  what  they  have  been, 
and  others  whom  they  know  to  be  of  tlie  evil  fellowship  they 
will  eitlier  kindly"  correct,  or  mercifully  betray.  Or  else,  if 
they  shall  be  ashamed  to  confess  what  with  long-continued 
simulation  they  have  concealed,  by  the  hidden  hand  of 
God  healing  them  shall  they  be  made  whole. 

12.  '  But,'    thou    wilt    say,  '  we    move    easily  penetrate 
their  concealment  if  we  pretend  to  be  ourselves  what  they 
are.'     If  this  were  lawful  or  expedient,  Christ  might  have 
«  '  concorditer.' — '  misericorditer.' 


Jfolces'' skins  not  for  the '  slienp.''  Confession  of  fail  h  a  duty.  437 

iustructcd  IJis  sheep  that  they  should  come  clad  in  wolves' contra 
clothing  to  the  wolves,  and  by  the  cheat  of  this  artifice  dis-  ^^^ 


CIUM. 


cover  them  :  which  He  hath  not  said,  no,  not  when  He 
foretold  that  He  would  send  them  forth  in  the  midst  ofMat.io, 
wolves.  But  thou  wilt  say  :  '  They  needed  not  at  that  time 
to  have  inquisition  made  for  them,  being  most  manifest 
wolves;  but  their  bite  and  savageness  were  to  be  endured.' 
What,  when  foretelling  later  times,  He  said  that  ravening 
wolves  would  come  in  sheep's  clothinoj?  Was  there  not 
room  there  to  give  this  advice  and  say.  And  do  ye,  that  ye 
may  find  them  out,  assume  wolves'  clothing,  but  within  be  ye 
sheep  still?  Not  this  saith  He:  but  when  He  had  said, 
Many  will  come  to  you  in  sliee/fs  clolJiing,  but  within  are  Matt.  7, 
ravening  wolves;  He  went  on  to  say,  not,  By  your  lies,  but, 
By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.  By  truth  must  we 
beware  of,  by  truth  must  we  take,  by  truth  must  we  kill,  lies. 
B,e  it  far  from  us,  that  the  blasphemies  of  the  ignorant  we  by 
wittingly  blaspheming  should  overcome  :  far  from  us,  that 
the  evils  of  deceitful  men  we  by  imitating  should  guard 
against.  For  how  shall  we  guard  against  them  if  in  order  to 
guard  against  them  we  shall  have  them  ?  For  if  in  order 
that  he  may  be  caught  who  blasphemes  unwittingly,  I  shall 
blaspheme  wittingly,  worse  is  the  thing  I  do  than  that  which 
I  catch.  If  in  order  that  he  may  be  foi;nd  who  denies  Christ 
unwittingly,  I  shall  deny  Him  wittingly,  to  his  undoing  will 
he  follow  me  whom  I  shall  so  find,  since  in  order  that  1  may 
find  him  out,  I  first  am  undone. 

13.  Or  haply  is  it  so,  that  he  who  plots  in  this  way  to 
find  out  Priscillianisls,  denies  not  Christ,  forasmuch  as  with 
his  mouth  he  utters  what  with  his  heart  he  believes  not  ?    As 
if  truly  (which  I  also  said  a  little  above)  when  it  was  said, 
With    the  heart   man   believelh  unto  righteousness,  it  was  Rom. lO, 
added   to  no  purpose,  tcilh    the  mouth  confession  is  made     ' 
unto  salvation?    Is  it  not  so  that  almost  all  who  have  denied 
Christ  before  the  persecutors,  held  in  their  heart  what  they 
believed  of  Him?    And  yet,  by  not  confessing  with  the  mouth 
unto  salvation,  they  perished,  save  they  which  through  peni- 
tence have  lived  again?    Who  can  be  so  vain^  as  to  think 'eva- 
that  the  Apostle  Peter  had  that  in  his  heart  which  he  had  on"^"'"'"* 
his  lips  when  he  denied  Christ  ?     Surely  in  that  denial  he 


438  Truth  in  heart  goes  ivith,  not  against,  truth  in  mouth. 

coNTnA  held  the  truth  within   and   uttered   the  lie  without.     Why 

ciuM.  then  did  he  wash  away  with  tears  the  denial  which  he  uttered 
with  his  mouth,  if  that  sufficed  for  salvation  that  with  the 
heart  he  believed  ?  Why,  speaking  the  truth  in  his  heart, 
did  he  punish  with  so  bitter  weeping  the  lie  which  he 
brought  forth  with  his  mouth,  unless  because  he  saw  it  to 
be  a  great  and  deadly  evil,  tliat  while  with  his  heart  he 
believed  unto  righteousness,  with  his  mouth  he  made  not 
confession  unto  salvation? 

Ps.15,2.  14,  Wherefore,  that  which  is  written,  IVlio  speaketh  the 
truth  in  his  heart,  is  not  so  to  be  taken,  as  if,  truth  being 
retained  in  the  heart,  in  the  mouth  one  may  speak  a  lie. 
But  the  reason  why  it  is  said,  is,  because  it  is  possible  that 
a  man  may  speak  with  his  mouth  a  truth  which  profiteth  him 
nothing,  if  he  hold  it  not  in  his  heart,  that  is,  if  what  he 
speaketh,  himself  believe  not ;  as  the  heretics,  and,  above 
all,  these  same  Priscillianists  do,  when  they  do,  not  indeed 
believe  the  catholic  faith,  but  yet  speak  it,  that  they  may  be 
believed  to  be  of  us.  They  speak  therefore  the  truth  in  their 
mouth,  not  in  their  heart.  On  this  account  were  they  to  be 
distinguished  from  him  of  whom  it  is  written.  He  that  speak- 
eth truth  in  his  heart.  Now  this  truth  the  catholic  as  in 
his  heart  he  speaketh,  because  so  he  believeth,  so  also  in  his 
mouth  ought  he,  that  so  he  may  preach  it;  but  against  it, 
neither  in  heart  nor  in  mouth  have  falsehood,  that  both  with 
the  heart  he  may  believe  unto  righteousness,  and  with  the 
mouth  may  make  confession  unto  salvation.  For  also  in  that 
psalm,  after  it  had  been  said,  Who  speaketh  truth  in  his  heart, 

Ps.15,2. presently  this  is  added.  Who  hath  used  no  deceit  in  his 
tongue. 

Eph.  4,  15.  And  as  for  that  saying  of  the  Apostle,  Putting  away 
lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour,  for  we  are 
members  one  of  another,  far  be  it  that  we  should  so  under- 
stand it,  as  though  he  had  permitted  to  speak  a  lie  with  those 
who  are  not  yet  with  us  members  of  the  body  of  Christ. 
But  the  reason  why  it  is  said,  is,  because  each  one  of  us 
ought  to  account  every  man  to  be  that  which  he  wishes  him 
to  become,  although  he  be   not  yet  become  such ;  as  the 

Lutelo,  Lord  shewed  the  alien  Samaritan  to  be  neighbour  to  him 
'■  unto  whom  he  shewed  mercy.     A  neighbour  then,  and  not 


Lying  no  Jitter  to  use  against  heresy  than  other  sins.    439 


an  alien,  is  that  man  to  be  accounted,  with  whom  our  concern  contra 

f  1    • />  ii  r    -I   •      MENDA- 

is  that  he  remaui  not  an  alien  ;  and  if,  on  the  score  ot  his  ^ium. 
not  being  yet  made  partaker  of  our  Faith  and  Sacrament,  there 
be  some  truths  that  must  be  concealed  from  him,  yet  is  that 
no  reason  why  false  things  should  be  told  him. 

16.  For  there  were  even  in  the  Apostles'  times  some  who 
preached  the  truth  not  in  truth,  that  is,  not  with  truthful 
mind;  of  whom  the  Apostle  saith  that  they  preached 
Christ  not  chastely,  but  of  envy  and  strife.  And  on  this 
account  even  at  that  time  some  were  tolerated  while  preach- 
ing truth  not  with  a  chaste  mind  :  yet  not  any  have  been 
praised  as  preaching  falsehood  with  a  chaste  mind.     Lastly, 

he  saith  of  those,  Whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth  Christ  beVhil.  i, 
preached:  but  in  no  wise  would  he  say.  In  order  that  Christ  ~~  * 
may  after  be  preached,  let  Him  be  first  denied. 

17.  Wherefore,  though  there  be  indeed  many  ways  in 
which  latent  heretics  may  be  sought  out,  without  vituperating 

the  catholic  faith  or  praising  heretical  impiety,  yet  if  there  were  vii. 
no  other  way  at  all  of  drawing  out  heretical  impiety  from  its 
caverns,  but  that  the  catholic  tongue  should  deviate  from  the 
straight  path  of  truth;  more  tolerable  were  it  that  that  should 
be  hid,  than  that  this  should  be  precipitated;  more  tolerable 
that  the  foxes  should  lurk  in  their  pits  unseen,  than  for  the 
sake  of  catching  them  the  huntsmen  should  fall  into  the  pit 
of  blasphemy ;  more  tolerable  that  the  perfidy  of  Priscil- 
lianists  should  be  covered  with  the  veil  of  truth,  than  that  the 
faith  of  catholics,  lest  it  should  of  lying  Priscillianists  be 
praised,  should  of  believing  catholics  be  denied.  For  if  lies, 
not  of  whatsoever  kind,  but  blasphemous  lies,  are  therefore 
just  because  they  are  committed  with  intent  to  detect  hidden 
heretics;  it  will  be  possible  at  that  rate, if  they  be  committed 
with  the  same  intention,  that  there  should  be  chaste  adul- 
teries. For  put  the  case  that  of  a  number  of  lewd  Pris- 
cillianists, some  woman  shovdd  cast  her  eye  upon  a  catholic 
Joseph,  and  promise  him  that  she  will  betray  their  hidden 
retreats  if  she  obtain  from  him  that  he  lie  with  her,  and  it  be 
certain  that  if  he  consent  unto  her  she  will  make  good  her 
promise  :  shall  we  judge  that  it  ought  to  be  done  ?  Or  shall 
we  understand  that  by  no  means  must  such  a  price  be  paid 
in  purchase  of  that  kind  of  merchandize  ?    Why  then  do  we 


440     Indifferent  acts  judged  hy  their  end,  not  so  sins. 

CONTRA  not  rout  out  heretics,  in  order  to  their  being  caught,  by  the 
MENDA-  ggg]^   committing  lasciviousness  in  adultery,  and    yet  think 


ClUM. 


right  to  rout  them  out  by  a  mouth  committing  fornication  in 
blasphemy  ?  For  either  it  will  be  lawful  to  defend  both  the 
one  and  the  other  with  equal  reason,  that  these  things  be 
therefore  said  to  be  not  unjust,  because  they  were  done  with 
intention  of  finding  out  the  unjust:  or  if  sound  doctrine 
willeth  not  even  for  the  sake  of  finding  out  heretics  that  we 
should  have  to  do  with  unchaste  women,  albeit  only  in  body, 
not  in  mind,  assuredly  not  even  for  the  sake  of  finding  out 
heretics  willeth  it  that  by  us,  albeit  only  in  voice  not  in  mind, 
either  unclean  heresy  were  preached,  or  the  chaste  Catholic 
Church  blasphemed.  Because  even  the  very  sovereignty  of 
the  mind,  to  which  every  inferior  motion  of  the  man  ought 
to  be  obedient,  will  not  lack  deserved  opprobrium,  when  a 
thing  is  done  that  ought  not  to  be  done,  whether  by  member 
or  by  word.  Although  even  when  it  is  done  by  word,  it  is 
done  by  member :  because  the  tongue  is  a  member,  by 
which  the  word  is  made  ;  nor  is  any  deed  of  ours  by  any 
member  brought  to  the  birth  unless  it  is  first  conceived  in 
the  heart;  or  rather  being  by  our  inwardly  thinking  upon 
and  consenting  unto  it  already  brought  to  the  birth,  it  is 
brought  forth  abroad  in  our  doing  of  it,  by  a  member.  It  is 
therefore  no  excusing  the  mind  from  the  deed,  when  any 
'  ex  thing  is  said  to  be  done  not  after  the  purpose  of  the  mind", 
which  yet  were  not  done,  unless  the  mind  decreed  it  to  be 
done. 

18.  It  does  indeed  make  very  much  difference,  for  what 
cause,  with  what  end,  with  what  intention  a  thing  be  done : 
but  those  things  which  are  clearly  sins,  are  upon  no  plea  of 
a  good  cause,  with  no  seeming  good  end,  no  alleged  good 
intention,  to  be  done.  Those  works,  namely,  of  men,  which 
are  not  in  themselves  sins,  are  now  good,  now  evil,  according 
as  their  causes  are  good  or  evil;  as,  to  give  food  to  a  poor 
man  is  a  good  work,  if  it  be  done  because  of  pity,  with  right 
faith  ;  as  to  lie  with  a  wife,  when  it  is  done  for  the  sake  of 
generation,  if  it  be  done  with  faith  to  beget  subjects  for  rege- 
neration. These  and  the  like  works  according  to  their 
causes  are  good  or  evil,  because  the  self-same,  if  they  have 
evil  causes,  are  turned  into  sins :  as,  if  for  boasting  sake  a 


If  the  end  j  ulstijied  the  means,  an  if  Ihinij  might  be  right.  441 

poor  man  is  fed;  or  for  lasciviousness  a  man  lies  witli  his  contra 
wife;  or  children  are  begotten,  not  that  they  maybe  nurtnred  "^^j'^^'*' 
for  God,  but  for  the  devil.     When,  however,  the  works  in 
themselves  are  evil,  such  as  thefts,  fornications,  blasphemies, 
or  other  such  ;  who  is  there  that  will  say,  that  upon  good 
causes  they  may  be  done,  so  as  either  to  be  no  sins,  or,  what 
is  more  absurd,  just  sins?    Who  is  there  that  would  say.  That 
we  may  have  to  give  to  the  poor,  let  us  commit  thefts  upon 
the  rich :  or,  Let  us  sell  false  witness,  especially  if  innocent 
men  are  not  hurt  thereby,  but  rather  guilty  men  are  rescued 
from  the  judges  who  would  condemn  them?     For  two  good 
things  are  done  by  selling  of  this  lie,  that  money  may  be 
taken    wherewith    a   poor    man    may  be    fed,  and   a  judge 
deceived  that  a  man  be  not  punished.     Even  in  the  matter 
of  wills,  if  we  can,  why  not  suppress  the  true,  and  forge  false 
wills,  that  inheritances  or  legacies  may  not  come  to  unworthy 
persons,  who  do  no  good  -svith  them  ;  but  rather  to  those  by 
whom    the    hungry    are    fed,    the    naked    clothed,  strangers 
entertained,    captives   redeemed,    Churches    buildcd  ?      For 
why  should  not  those  evil  things   be  done  for  the  sake  of 
these  good  things,  if,  for  the  sake  of  these  good  things,  those 
are  not  evil  at  all  ?     Nay,  further,  if  lewd  and  rich  women 
are  likely  to  enrich   moreover  their  lovers  and  paramours, 
why  should  not  even  these  parts  and  arts  be  undertaken  by  a 
man  of  merciful  heart,  to  use  them  for  so  good  a  cause  as 
that  he  may  have  whence  to  bestow  upon  the  needy  ;  and 
not  hear  the  Apostle    saying.  Let  him  that  stole   steal  no  Eph.  4, 
more,  but  rather  let  him  labour,  icorking  with  his  hands  that"^^' 
which  is  good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth'^ 
If  indeed  not  only  theft  itself,  but  also   false  witness   and 
adultery  and  every  evil  work  will  be  not  evil  but  good,  if  it 
be  done  for  the  sake  of  being  the  means  of  doing   good. 
Who   can  say  these  things,  except  one  who  endeavours  to 
subvert  human  affairs  and  all  manners  and  laws  ?     For  of 
what  most  heinous  deed,  what  most  foul  crime,  what  most 
impious  sacrilege,  may  it  not  be  said  that  it  is  possible  for  it 
to  be  done  rightly  and  justly ;  and  not  only  with  impunity, 
but  even  gloriously,  that  in  perpetrating  thereof  not  only  no 
punishments    should  be  feared,  but   there    should  be  hope 
even  of  rewards :  if  once  we  shall  concede  in  all  evil  works 


442      A  sin  is  less  with  a  good  motive,  but  still  a  sin. 

CONTRA  of  men,  that  not  what  is  done,  but  wherefore  done,  must  be 
ciuM.  tlie  question  ;  and  this,  to  the  end  that  whatever  are  found 
to  have  been  done  for  good  causes,  not  even  they  should 
be  judged  to  be  evil  ?  But  if  justice  deservedly  punisheth  a 
thief,  albeit  he  shall  say  and  shew  that  he  therefore  withdrew 
superfluities  from  a  rich  that  he  might  afford  necessaries  to 
a  poor  man ;  if  deservedly  she  punisheth  a  forger,  albeit  he 
prove  that  he  therefore  corrupted  another's  will,  that  he 
might  be  heir,  who  should  thence  make  large  alms,  not 
he  who  should  make  none ;  if  deservedly  she  punisheth  an 
adulterer,  yea,  though  he  shall  demonstrate  that  of  mercy  he 
did  commit  adultery,  that  through  her  with  whom  he  did  it 
he  might  deliver  a  man  from  death  ;  lastly,  to  draw  nearer  to 
the  matter  in  question,  if  deservedly  she  punisheth  him  who 
hath  with  that  intent  mixed  in  adulterous  embrace  with  some 
woman,  privy  to  the  turpitude  of  the  Priscillianists,  that  he 
might  enter  into  their  concealments ;  I  pray  thee,  when  the 

Rom.  6,  Apostle  saith.  Neither  yield  ye  your  members  instruments  of 
unrighteousness  unto  sin;  and  therefore  neither  hands,  nor 
members  of  generation,  nor  other  members,  can  it  be  right 
to  yield  unto  flagitious  deeds  with  intent  that  we  may  be  able 
to  find  out  Priscillianists  ;  what  hath  our  tongue,  what  our 
whole  mouth,  what  the  orgau  of  the  voice,  offended  us,  that 
we  should  yield  these  as  instruments  to  sin,  and  to  so  great  a 
sin,  in  which,  that  we  may  apprehend  and  rescue  Priscil- 
lianists from  blaspheming  in  ignorance,  we,  without  excuse 
of  ignorance,  are  to  blaspheme  our  God  ? 
viii.  19.  Some  man  will  say,  '  So  then  any  thief  whatever  is  to 
be  accounted  equal  with  that  thief  who  steals  with  will 
of  mercy  ?'  Who  would  say  this  ?  But  of  these  two  it  does 
not  follow  that  any  is  good,  because  one  is  worse.  He  is 
worse  who  steals  through  coveting,  than  he  who  steals 
through  pity  :  but  if  all  theft  be  sin,  from  all  theft  we  must 
abstain.  For  who  can  say  that  peo])le  may  sin,  even  though 
one  sin  be  damnable,  another  venial  ?  but  now  we  are  asking, 
if  a  man  shall  do  this  or  that,  who  will  not  sin  or  will  sin  ? 
not,  who  will  sin  more  heavily  or  lightly.  For  even  thefts 
themselves  ai'e  more  lightly  punished  by  law  than  crimes  of 
lust :  they  ai'e,  however,  both  sins,  albeit  the  one  lighter,  the 
other  heavier;  so  that  a  theft  which  is  committed  of  concu- 


Kinds  of  sin  compared.     Question  of  LoCs  proposal.    443 

piscence  is  held  to  be  lighter  than  an  act  of  lust  which  Iscontiia 
committed  for  doing  a  good  turn.  Namely,  in  their  own '^'^.^j'^^'^" 
kind  these  become  lighter  than  other  sins  of  the  same  kind, 
which  appear  to  be  committed  with  a  good  intention ;  when 
yet  the  same  compared  with  sins  of  another  kind  lighter  in 
respect  of  the  kind  itself,  are  found  to  be  heavier.  It  is 
a  heavier  sin  to  commit  theft  of  avarice,  than  of  mercy ;  and 
likewise  it  is  a  heavier  sin  to  perpetrate  lewdness  of  luxury, 
than  of  mercy ;  and  yet  is  it  a  heavier  sin  to  commit  adultery 
of  mercy,  than  to  commit  theft  of  avarice.  Nor  is  it  our 
concern  now,  what  is  lighter  or  what  heavier,  but  what  are 
sins  or  are  not.  For  no  man  can  say  that  it  was  a  duty  for 
a  sin  to  be  done,  where  it  is  clearly  a  sin ;  but  we  say  that  it 
is  a  duty,  if  the  sin  were  done  so  or  so,  to  forgive  or  not  to 
forgive. 

20.  But,  what  must  be  confessed,  to  human  minds  certain     ix. 

compensative  sins  do  cause  such  embarrassment,  that  they 

are  even  thought  meet  to  be  praised,  and  rather  to  be  called 

right  deeds.     For  who  can  doubt  it  to  be  a  great  sin,  if  a 

father  prostitute  his  own  daughters  to  the  fornications  of  the 

impious  ?     And  yet  hath  there  arisen  a  case  in  wliich  a  just 

man  thought  it  his  duty  to  do  this,  when  the  Sodomites  with 

nefarious  onset  of  lust  were  iiishing  upon  his  guests.    For  he 

said,   /  have  two  daughters  ivhich  have  not  known  fnan ;  Gen.  19, 

I  will  bring  them  out  to  you.,  and  do  ye  to  them  as  is  good  in  ^' 

your  eyes;  only  unto  these  men  do  ye  no  wrong,  for  that  they 

have  come  under  covering  of  my  roof.     Wliat  shall  we  say 

here  ?     Do    we    not    so    abhor   the    wickedness    which   the 

Sodomites  were  attempting  to  do  to  the  guests  of  the  just 

man,  that,  whatever  were  done   so  this  were  not  done,  he 

should  deem  right  to  be  done  ?     Very  much  also  moveth  us 

the  person  of  the  doer,  which  by  merit  of  righteousness  was 

obtaining  deliverance  from  Sodom,  to  say  that,  since  it  is  a 

less  evil  for  women  to  suffer  lewdness  than  for  men,  it  even 

pertained  to  the  righteousness  of  that  just  man,  that  to  his 

daughters  he  chose  this  rather  to  be  done,  than  to  his  guests; 

not  only  willing  this  in  his  mind,  but  also  offering  it  in  word, 

and,  if  they  should  assent,  ready  to  fulfil  it  in  deed.     But 

then,  if  we  shall  open  this  way  to  sins,  that  we  are  to  commit 

less  sins,  in  order  that  others  may  not  commit  greater ;  by  a 


444      Oar  oivn  sin  not  aUuuedfor  preventing  another's. 

roNTUA  broad  boundary,  nay  rather,  with  no  boundary  at  all,  but 
ciiJM."  ^^itb  a  tearing  up  and  removing  of  all  bounds,  in  infinite 
space,  will  all  sins  enter  in  and  reign.  For,  when  it  shall  be 
defined,  that  a  man  is  to  sin  less,  that  another  may  not  sin 
more  ;  then,  of  course,  by  our  committing  thefts  shall  other 
men's  committing  of  lewdness  be  guarded  against,  and  incest 
by  lewdness  ;  and  if  any  impiety  shall  seem  even  worse  than 
incest,  even  incest  shall  be  pronounced  meet  to  be  done  by 
us,  if  in  such  wise  it  can  be  wrought  that  that  impiety  be  not 
committed  by  others  :  and  in  each  several  kind  of  sins,  both 
thefts  for  thefts,  and  lewdness  for  lewdness,  and  incest  for 
incest,  shall  be  accounted  meet  to  be  done :  our  own  sins  for 
other  men's,  not  only  less  for  greater,  but  even  if  it  come  to 
the  very  highest  and  worst,  fewer  for  more ;  if  the  stress  of 
affairs  so  turns,  that  otherwise  other  men  would  not  abstain 
from  sin  unless  by  our  sinning,  somewhat  less  indeed,  but  still 
sinning ;  so  that  in  every  case  where  an  enemy  who  shall 
have  power  of  this  sort  shall  say,  '  Unless  thou  be  wicked, 
I  will  be  more  wicked,  or  unless  thou  do  this  wickedness, 
I  will  do  more  such,'  we  must  seem  to  admit  wickedness  in 
oiuselves,  if  we  wish  to  refrain  (others)  from  wickedness. 
To  be  wise  in  this  sort,  what  is  it  but  to  lose  one's  wits,  or 
rather,  to  be  downright  mad  ?  Mine  own  iniquity,  not 
another's,  whether  perpetrated  upon  w.e  or  upon  others,  is 
Ezek.  that  from  which  1  must  beware  of  damnation.  For  the  soul 
'    ■     that  sinneth,  it  shall  die. 

21.  If  then  to  sin,  that  others  may  not  commit  a  worse  sin, 
either  against  us  or  against  any,  without  doubt  we  ought 
not ;  it  is  to  be  considered  in  that  which  Lot  did,  whether  it 
be  an  example  which  we  ought  to  imitate,  or  rather  one 
which  we  ought  to  avoid.  For  it  seems  meet  to  be  more 
looked  into  and  noted,  that,  when  so  horrible  an  evil  from 
the  most  flagitious  impiety  of  the  Sodomites  was  impending 
over  his  guests,  which  he  wished  to  ward  off  and  was  not 
able,  to  such  a  degree  may  even  that  just  man's  mind  have 
been  disturbed,  that  he  was  willing  to  do  that  wdiich,  not 
man's  fear  with  its  misty  tempest,  but  God's  Law  in  its 
tranquil  serenity,  if  it  be  consulted  by  us,  will  cry  aloud, 
must  not  be  done,  and  will  command  rather  that  we  be  so 
cautious  not  to  sin  ourselves,  that  we  sin  not  through  fear  of 


Some  doings  of  liohj  men  not  to  be  followed.         445 

any   sins  whatever  of  other  men.      For   that  just  man,  byroNTRA 
fearing  other  men's  sins,  which  cannot  defile  except  such  as  "'Jj'J'j^''' 
consent  thereto,  was  so   perturbed  that  he   did   not  attend 
to  his  own  sin,  in  tlial  he  was  willing  to  subject  his  daughters 
to  the  lusts  of  impious  men.     These  things,  when  we  read  in 
holy  Scriptures,  we  must  not,  for  that  we  believe  them  done, 
therefore    believe    them   meet  to    be  done ;    lest  we  violate 
precepts  while  we  indiscriminately  follow  precedents.     Or, 
truly,  because  David  swore  to  put  Nabal  to  death,  and,  upon  i  Sam. 
more  considerate  cleniencv,  did  it  not,  shall  we  therefore  saVo-'^^"~ 

•  '  '  '    So. 

that  he  is  to  be  imitated,  so  that  we  may  swear  to  do  a  thing 
which  afterwards  we  may  see  to  be  not  meet  to  be  done  ? 
But  as  fear  perturbed  the  one,  so  that  he  was  willing  to 
prostitute  his  daughters,  so  did  anger  the  other,  that  he  swore 
rashly.  In  short,  if  it  were  allowed  us  to  inquire  of  them 
both,  by  asking  them  to  tell  us  why  they  did  these  things, 
the  one  might  answer,  Fearfidness  and  tremhling  came  npoti  Ps.55,5. 
me^  and  darkness  covered  me;  the  other  too  might  say, 
Mhie  eye  was  tronhled  through  wrath'^:  so  that  we  should Ps. 6,  7. 
not  marvel  either  that  the  one  in  the  darkness  of  fear,  or 
the  other  with  troubled  e3'e,  saw  not  what  was  meet  to  have 
been  seen,  that  they  might  not  do  what  was  not  meet  to  have 
been  done. 

2-2.  And  to  holy  David  indeed  it  might  more  justly  be 
said,  that  he  ought  not  to  have  been  angry;  no,  not  with  one 
however  ungrateful  and  rendering  evil  for  good  ;  yet  if,  as 
man,  anger  did  steal  over  him,  he  ought  not  to  have  let  it  so 
prevail,  that  he  should  swear  to  do  a  thing  which  either 
by  giving  way  to  his  rage  he  should  do,  or  b}'  breaking 
his  oath  leave  undone.  But  to  the  other,  set  as  he  was  amid 
the  libidinous  frenzy  of  the  Sodomites,  who  would  dare  to 
say,  '  Although  thy  guests  in  thine  own  house,  whither  to 
enter  in  thou  by  most  violent  humanity  hast  compelled  them, 
be  laid  hold  upon  by  lewd  men,  and  being  deforced  be 
carnally  known  as  women,  fear  thou  not  a  whit,  care  for 
it  not  a  whit,  have  no  dread,  no  horror,  no  trembling  ?' 
What  man,  even  a  companion  of  those  wretches,  would  dare 
to  say  this  to  the  pious  host?     But  assuredly  it  would  be 

•■  Ps.  6,  7.  turbatus  est  prce  ira,  as  in  LXX.  Mine  eye  is  consumed  lecause 
of  grief .    E.V. 


MENDA 
CIUM 


446  Lot  erred  from  fear ,  David  from  anger. 

CONTRA  most  rightly  said,  '  Do  what  thou  canst,  that  the  thing  be 
■  not  done  which  thou  deservedly  fearest :  but  let  not  this  fear 
"of  thine  drive  thee  to  do  a  thing  which  if  thy  daughters  be 
willing  that  it  be  done  unto  them,  they  will  through  thee  do 
wickedness  with  the   Sodomites,  if  unwilling,  will    through 
thee  from  the  Sodomites  suffer  violence.     Commit  not  thou 
a  great  crime  of  thine  own,  while  thou  dreadest  a  greater 
crime  of  other  men ;  for  be  the  difference  as  great  as  thou 
wilt  between  thine  own  and  that  of  others,  this  will  be  thine 
own,  that  other  men's/     Unless  perchance  in  defending  this 
man  one  should  so  crowd  himself  into  a  corner,  as  to  say, 
'  Since  to  receive  a  wrong  is  better  than  to  do  one,  and  those 
guests  were  not  about  to  do  but  to  suffer  a  wrong,  that  just 
man  chose  that  his  daughters  should  suffer  wrong  rather  than 
his  guests,  acting  upon  his  rights  as  his  daughters'  lord;  and 
he  knew  that  it  would  be  no  sin  in  them,  if  the  thing  were 
done,  because  they  would  but  bear  them  which  did  the  sin, 
not  consenting  unto  them,  and  so  without  sin  of  their  own. 
In  fine,  they  did  not  offer  themselves  (albeit  better  females 
than  males)  to  be  carnally  known  instead  of  those  guests, 
lest  they  should   be   rendered   guilty,  not  by  the  suffering 
of  others'  lust,  but  by  consenting  of  their  own  will :  nor  yet 
did  their  father  permit  it  to  be  done  unto  himself,  when  they 
essayed  to  do  it,  because  he  would  not  betray  his  guests  to 
them,  (albeit  there  had  been  less  of  evil,  if  it  were  done  to 
one  man  than  to  two;)  but  as  much  as  he  could  he  resisted, 
lest  himself  also  should  be  defiled  by  any  assent  of  his  own, 
though  even  if  the  frenzy  of  others'  lust  had  prevailed  by 
strength  of  body,  it  would  not  have  defiled  him  so  long  as  he 
consented  not.     Now  as  the  daughters  siianed  not,  neither 
did  he  sin  in  their  persons,  because,  he  was  not  making  them 
to  sin,  if  they  should  be  deforced  against  their  will,  but  only 
to  bear  them  that  did  the  sin.     Just  as  if  he  should  offer  his 
slaves  to  be  beaten  by  ruffians,  that  his  guests  might  not 
suffer  the  wrong  of  beating.'     Of  which  matter  I  shall  not 
dispute,  because  it  would  take  long  to  argue,  whether  even  a 
master  may  justly  use  his  right  of  power  over  his  slave,  so  as 
to  cause  an  unoffending  slave  to    be  smitten,  that  his  un- 
offending friend  may  not  be  beaten  iu  his  house  by  violent 
bad  men.     But  certainly,  as  concerning  David,  it  is  no  wise 


Our  Lord's  precedent  for  withholding  truth,  not  lying.  447 

right  to  say  that  he  ought  to  have  swoni  to  do  a  thing  which  contha 
afterwards    he    would    perceive    that    he    ought   not    to    do.    cium." 
Whence  it  is  clear  that  we  ought  not  to  take  all  that  we  read 
to  have  been  done  by  holy  or  just  men,  and   transfer  the 
same   to  morals,  but  hence  too  we  must  learn  how  widely 
that  saying  of  the  Apostle  extends,  and  even  to  what  persons 
it  reaches  :     Brethren,  if  a  man  he  overtaken  in  a  fault,  yeGal.6,1. 
tchich    are  spiritual   restore   such  an    one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness,   considering    thyself  also,  lest   tJiou    he    tempted. 
The  being  overtaken  in  a  fault  happens,  either  while  one 
does  not  see  at  the  time  what  is  right  to  be  done,  or  while, 
seeing  it,  one  is  overcome  ;   that  is,  that  a  sin  is  done,  either 
for  that  the  truth  is  hidden,  or  for  that  infirmity  compelleth. 

23.  But  in  all  our  doings,  even  good  men  are  very  greatly      x. 
embaiTassed  in  the  matter  of  compensative  sins  ;    so  that 
these  are  not  esteemed  to  be  sins,  if  they  have  such  causes 
for  the  which  they  be  done,  and  in  the  which  it  may  seem 
to  be  rather  sin,  if  they  be    left   undone.     And  chiefly  as 
concerning  lies  hath  it  come  to  this  pass  in  the  opinion  of 
men,  that  those  lies  are  not  accounted  sins,  nay  rather  are 
believed    to  be  rightly  clone,  when    one    tells  a  lie  for  the 
benefit  of  him  for  whom  it  is  expedient  to  be  deceived,  or 
lest  a  person  should  hurt  others,  who  seems  likely  to  hurt 
imless  he  be  got  rid  of  by  lies.     In  defence  of  these  kinds  of 
lies,  very  niany  examples  from  holy  Scripture  are  accounted 
to  lend  their  support.     It  is  not,  however,  the  same  thing  to 
hide  the  truth  as  it  is  to  utter  a  lie.     For  although  every  one 
who  lies  wishes  to  hide  what  is  true,  yet  not  every  one  who 
wishes  to  hide  what  is  true,  tells  a  lie.     For  in  general  we 
hide  truths  not  by  telling  a  lie,  but  by  holding  our  peace. 
For  the  Lord  lied  not  when  He  said,  /  have  many  things  to  Johnie, 
sag  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  hear  them  now.     He  held  His 
peace    from    true    things,  not    spake    false  things ;    for  the 
hearing  of  which  truths  He  judged  them  to  be  less  fit.     But 
if  He  had  not  indicated  this  same  to  them,  that  is,  that  they 
were  not  able  to  bear  the  things  which  He  was  unwilling  to 
speak,    He    would    indeed    hide    nevertheless    somewhat   of 
truth,  but  that    this   may  be    rightly  done  we    should  per- 
adventure  not  know,  or  not   have  so  great  an  example  to 


448     Ahrahnm  fold  no  lie.     Jacob'' s  falsehood  a  figure. 

CONTRA  confirm  us.     Whence,  they  who  assert  that  it  is  sometimes 

ciuM."  ii^fet  to  lie,  do  not  conveniently  mention  that  Abraham  did 

Gen. 20,  this  Concerning  Sarah,  whom  he  said  to  be  his  sister.     For 

he  did  not  say,  She  is  not  my  wife,  but  he  said,  She  is  tmi 

sister ;  because  she  was  in  truth  so  near  akin,  that  she  might 

without  a  lie  be  called  a  sister.     Which  also  afterwards  he 

confirmed,  after  she  had  been  given  back  by  him  who  had 

taken  her,  answering  him  and  saying,  And  indeed  she  is  my 

sister,  hy  father,  not    hy  mother;    that  is,  by  the  father's 

kindred,  not  the  mother's.     Sotifiewhat  therefore  of  truth  he 

left  untold,  not  told  ought  of  falsehood,  when  he  left  wife 

Gen. 26,  untold,  and  told  of  sister.     This  also  did  his  son  Isaac  :    for 

ch.^24.    him  too  we  know  to  have  gotten  a  wife  near  of  kin.     It  is 

not  then  a  lie,  when  by  silence  a  true  thing  is  kept  back,  but 

when  by  speech  a  false  thing  is  put  forward. 

24.  Touching  Jacob,  however,  that  which  he  did  at  his 

mother's  bidding,  so  as  to  seem  to  deceive  his  father,  if  with 

diligence  and   in  faith   it  be  attended  to,  is   no   lie,  but  a 

myster3\     The  which  if  we  shall  call  lies,  all  parables  also, 

and  figures  designed  for  the  signifying  of  any  things  soever, 

which  are  not  to  be  taken  according  to  their  proper  meaning, 

but  in  them  is  one  thing  to  be  understood  from  another,  shall 

be  said  to  be  lies  :  which  be  far  from  us  altogether.     For  he 

who  thinks  this,  may  also  in  regard  of  tropical  expressions 

of  which  there  are  so  many,  bring  in  upon  all  of  them  this 

calumny  ;    so  that  even  metaphor,  as  it  is  called,  that  is,  the 

usurped  transferring  of  any  word  from  its  proper  object  to  an 

object    not  proper,  may  at  this  rate   be  called  a  lie.     For 

when  he  speaks  of  waving  corn-fields,  of  vines  putting  forth 

I 'gem- gems',   of  the  bloom    of  youth,   of   snowy    hairs;    without 

^^'^^'     doubt  the  waves,  the  gems,  the  bloom,  the  snow,  for  that  we 

find  them  not  in  those  objects  to  which  we  have  from  other 

transferred  these  words,  shall  by  these  persons  be  accounted 

1  Cor.    lies.     And  Christ  a  Rock,  and  the  stony  heart  of  the  Jews  ; 

i?'j^*     also,  Christ  a  Lion,  and  the  devil  a  lion,  and  innumerable 

36,  26.   such  like,  shall  be  said  to  be  lies.     Nay,  this  tropical  ex- 

5^^'   '  pression  reaches  even  to  what  is  called  anliphrasis,  as  when 

1  Pet.5,  a  thing  is  said  to  abound  which  does  not  exist,  a  thing  said 

to  be  sweet  which   is  sour  ;    Incus  quod  noji  luceat,  Parcat 


MENDA- 
CIUM. 


In  Allegory^  the  thing  really  said  is  what  is  signijied.  449 

quod  noil  parcaut.     Of  which  kind  is  that  in  holy  Scripture,  contra 
If  he  ivill  ?)ot  bless'  Thee  to  Thy  face  ;  which  the  devil  saith 
to  the  Lord  concerning  holy  Job,  and  the  meaning  is,  curse. 
By  which  word  also  the  feigned  crime  of  Naboth  is  named 
by  his  calumniators;  for  it  is  said  that  he  blessed^  the  king, 
that  is,  cursed.     All  these  modes  of  speaking  shall  be  ac- 
counted lies,  if  figurative  speech  or  action  shall  be  set  down 
as  lying.     But  if  it  be  no  lie,  when  things  which  signify  one 
thing   by    another   are    referred   to  the  understanding  of  a 
truth,  assm'edly  not  only  that  which  Jacob  did  or  said  to  his 
father  that  he  might  be  blessed,  but  that  too  which  Joseph 
spoke  as  if  in  mockery  of  his  brothers,  and  David's  ieigningGen.42. 
of  madness,  must  be  judged  to  be  no  lies,  but  prophetical  21  '\™_' 
speeches  and  actions,  to  be  referred  to  the  understanding  of 
those  things  which  are  true ;    which  are  covered  as  it  were 
with  a  garb  of  figure  on  purpose  to  exercise  the  sense  of  the 
pious    enquirer,  and  that  they  may  not   become    cheap  by 
lying  bare    and  on    the  surface.     Though  even  the   things 
which  we  have  learned  from  other  places,  where  they  are 
spoken  openly  and  manifestly,  these,  when  they  are  brought 
out   from    their  hidden  retreats,  do,  by  our  (in  some  sort) 
discovering  of  them,  become  renewed,  and  by  renewal  sweet. 
Nor  is  it  that  they  are  begrudged  to  the  learners,  in  that 
they  are  in  these  ways  obscured ;    but  are  presented  in  a 
more  winning  manner,  that  being  as  it  were  withdrawn,  they 
may  be  desired  more  ardently,  and  being  desired  may  Avith 
more    pleasure    be    found.     Yet    true   things,  not  false,  are 
spoken  ;  because  true  things,  not  false,  are  signified,  whether 
by  word  or  by  deed ;  the  things  that  are  signified,  namely,  those 
are  the  things  spoken.    They  are  accounted  lies  only  because 
people  do  not  understand   that  the  true   things  which  are 
signified  are  the  things  said,  but  believe  that  false  things  are 
the  things  said.     To  make  this  plainer  by  examples,  attend 
to  this  very  thing  that  Jacob  did.     With  skins  of  the  kids, 
no  doubt,  he  did  cover  his  limbs  ;    if  we  seek  the  immediate 
cause,  we  shall  account  him  to  have  lied ;    for  he  did  this, 
that  he  might  be  thought  to  be  the  man  he  was  not :    but  if 
this  deed  be  referred  to  that  for  the  signifying  of  which  it 

«  Job   2,5.  benedixerit:  as  LXX.         ^  1  Kings  21,  10.  13.  LXX.  tixi. 
tbktynfu  :    E.  V.  '  curse.'  ynnen :   E.  V.  '  didst  blaspheme.' 


450      What  Truths  were  signified  in  Jacob's  deception. 

CONTRA  was  really  clone,  by  skins  of  the  kids  are  signified  sins  ;    by 
*c*iu>i!'  ^^^^^^  ^^^o  covered  himself  therewith,  He  who  bare  not  His 
own,  but  others'  sins.     The  truthful  signification,  therefore, 
can  in  no  wise  be  rightly  called  a  lie.     And  as  in  deed,  so 
Gen.27,  also  in  word.     Namely,  when  his  father  said  to  him.  Who 
'  art  thott^  my  son  ?    he  answered,  /  atn  Esau,  thy  Jirst-born. 
This,  if  it  be  referred  to  those  two  twins,  will  seem  a  lie  ; 
but  if  to  that  for  the  signifying  of  which  those  deeds  and 
w^ords  are  written.  He  is  here  to  be  understood,  in  His  body, 
which  is  His  Church,  Who,  speaking  of   this  thing,  saith, 
Lukeis,  jj//i(,,(  ye  ahall  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all 
'  the  ■prophets  in  the  kingdom  oj  God,  and  yourselves  cast  out. 
And  they  shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west  and 
from  the  north  and  from  the  south,  and  shall  sit  doivn  in 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and,  behold,  there  are  last  uJiich  shall 
be  first,  and  titer e  are  first  which  shall  be  last.     For  so  in  a 
certain  sort  the  younger  brother  did  bear  off  the  primacy  of 
the   elder    brother,  and  transfer  it  to  himself.     Since    then 
things  so  true,  and  so  truthfully,  be  signified,  what  is  there 
here  that  ought  to  be  accounted  to  have  been  done  or  said 
lyingl}'  ?   For  when  the  things  which  are  signified  are  not  in 
truth  things  which  are  not,  but  which  are,  whether  past  or 
present  or  future,  without  doubt  it  is  a  true  signification,  and 
no  lie.     But  it  takes  too  long  in  the  matter  of  this  prophetical 
•  enu-     signification   by  stripping  off  the    shell  to  search  out  all', 
euncta    ^^'^i^i^in  truth  hath  the  palm,  because  as  by  being  signified 
rimari    they  were  fore-announced,  so  by  ensuing  have  they  become 
clear, 
xi.         25.  Nor  have  1  undertaken  that  in  the  present  discourse, 
as  it  more  pertains  to  thee,  who  hast  laid  open  the  hiding- 
places  of  the  Priscillianists,  so  far  as  relates  to  their  false 
and  perverse  dogmas  ;  that  they  may  not  seem  to  have  been 
in  such  sort  investigated  as  if  they  were  meet  to  be  taught, 
not  to  be  argued  against.     Make  it  therefore  more  thy  work 
that  they  be  beaten  down  and  laid  low,  as  thou  hast  made  it, 
that  they  should  be  betrayed  and  laid  open  ;    lest  while  we 
wish  to  get  at  the  discovery  of  men  practising  falsehood,  we 
allow  the  falsehoods  themselves,  as  if  insuperable,  to  stand 
their  ground  ;    when  we  ought  rather  even  in  the  hearts  of 
latent  heretics  to  destroy  falsehoods,  than  by  sparing  false- 


Falsehood  affords  a  handle.     Points  of  the  Argument.   451 

hoods    to    find   out   the    deceivers    who   practise  falsehood,  contra 
Moreover,  among  tliose  dogmas  of   theirs  which  are  to   be"c'n,j,.* 
subverted,  is    this    which    they  dogmatize,  namely,  that    in 
order  to  hide  religion  religious  people  ought  to  lie,  to  that 
degree  that  not  only  concerning  other  matters,  not  pertaining 
to  doctrine  of  religion,  but  concerning  religion  itself,  it  is 
meet  to  lie,  that  it  may  not  become  exposed  to  aliens;    to 
wit,  that  one  may  deny  Christ,  in  order  that  one  may  in  the 
midst  of  His  enemies  be  in  secret  a  Christian.    This  impious 
and   nefarious    dogma    do    thou   likewise,    I    beseech    thee, 
overthrow ;  to  bolster  up  which  they  in  their  argumentations 
do  gather  from  the  Scriptures  testimonies  to  make  it  appear 
that  lies  are  not  only  to  be  pardoned  and  tolerated,  but  even 
honoured.     To    thee    therefore  it  pertains,  in  refuting  that 
detestable  sect,  to  shew  that  those  testimonies  of  Scripture 
are  so  to  be  received,  that  either  thou  shalt  teach  those  to 
be  no  lies  which  are  accounted  to  be  such,  if  they  be  under- 
stood in  that  manner  in  which  they  ought  to  be  understood  ; 
or,  that  those  are    not  to  be  imitated  which  be  manifestly 
lies  ;  or  in  any  wise  at  last,  that  concerning  those  matters  at 
least  which  pertain  to  doctrine  of  religion,  it  is  in  no  wise 
meet  to  tell  a  lie.     For  thus  are  they  truly  from  the  very 
foundation    overthrown,    while    that    i>;   overthrown    wherein 
they  lurk  :    that  in  that  very  matter  they  be  judged  least  fit 
for  us  to  follow,  most  fit  to  be  shunned,  in  that  they,  for  the 
hiding  of  their  heresy,  do  profess  tliemselves  liars.     This  it 
is  in  them  that  must  from  the  very  first  be  assaulted,  this 
which  is,  as  it  were,  their  fitting  bulwark  must  with  blows  of 
Truth  be  battered  and  cast  down.     Nor  must  we  afford  them 
another   lurking-place,  which    they  had   not,  wherein   they 
may  take  refuge,  to  wit,  that  being  perhaps  betrayed  of  them 
whom    they    have    essayed  to    seduce  but    could    not,  they 
should  say,  '  We  only  wanted  to  try  them,  because  prudent 
Catholics  have  taught  that  to  find  out  heretics  it  is  right  to 
do  this.'     But  it  is  necessary  with  somewhat  more  earnest 
bespeaking  of   thy  favour  to  say  why  this  seems  to  me  a 
tripartite  method  of  disputing  against   those  who  want  to 
apply  the  divine  Scriptures  as  advocates  of   their  lies  ;    to 
Avit,  by  shewing  that  some  which  arc  there  accounted  to  be 
lies,  are  not  what  they  are  accounted,  if  rightly  understood ; 

Gg2 


452  No  example  of  falsehood  in  Saints  of  the  New  Testament. 


coNTHA  next,  that  if  there  be  there  any  manifest  lies,  they  are  not 
ciuBi.  meet  to  be  imitated  ;  thirdly,  contrary  to  all  opinions  of  all 
persons  who  think  it  pertains  to  the  duty  of  a  good  man 
sometimes  to  lie,  that  it  must  in  every  way  be  held  that  in 
doctrine  of  religion  there  must  in  no  wise  a  lie  be  told.  For 
these  are  the  three  things  to  follow  up  which  I  shortly  before 
recommended,  and  in  some  sort  enjoined  thee. 
xii.  26.  To  shew  then  that  some  things  in  the  Scriptures  which 
are  thought  to  be  lies  are  not  what  they  are  thought,  if  they 
be  rightly  understood,  let  it  not  seem  to  thee  to  tell  little 
against  them,  that  it  is  not  from  Apostolic  but  from  Pro- 
phetical books  that  they  find  as  it  were  precedents  of  lying. 
For  all  those  which  they  mention  by  name,  in  which  each 
lied,  are  read  in  those  books  in  which  not  only  words  but 
many  deeds  of  a  figurative  meaning  are  recorded,  because  it 
was  also  in  a  figurative  sense  that  they  were  done.  But  in 
figures  that  which  is  spoken  as  a  seeming  lie,  being  well 
understood,  is  found  to  be  a  truth.  The  Apostles,  however, 
in  their  Epistles  spoke  in  another  sort,  and  in  another  sort 
are  written  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  to  wit,  because  now 
the  New  Testament  was  revealed,  which  was  veiled  in  those 
prophetic  figures.  In  short,  in  all  those  Apostolic  Epistles, 
and  in  that  large  book  in  which  their  acts  are  narrated  with 
canonical  truth,  we  do  not  find  any  person  lying,  such  that 
from  him  a  precedent  can  be  set  forth  by  these  men  for 
license  of  lying.  For  that  simulation  of  Peter  and  Barnabas 
with  which  tliey  were  compelling  the  Gentiles  to  Judaize,  was 
deservedly  reprehended  and  set  right,  both  that  it  might  not 
do  harm  at  the  time,  and  that  it  might  not  weigh  with 
posterity  as  a  thing  to  be  imitated.  For  when  the  Apostle 
Paul  saw  tliat  they  walked  not  uprightly  according  to  the 
truth  of  the  Gospel,  he  said  to  Peter  in  the  presence  of  them 

Gal.  2,  all,  //'  thou,  heinfi  a  Jeir^  livest  as  the  Gentiles;  and  not  as 
do  the  Jens,  Iiow  compellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  Judaize  ? 
But  in  that  which  himself  did,  to  the  intent  that  by  retaining 
and  acting  upon  certain  observances  of  the  law  after  the 
Jewish  custom  he  might  shew  that  he  was  no  enemy  to  the  Law 
and  to  the  Prophets,  far  be  it  from  us  to  believe  that  he  did 
so  as  a  liar.  As  indeed  concerning  this  matter  his  sentence 
is  sufficiently  well  known,  whereby  it  was  settled  that  neither 


St.  Peter  and  St.  Barnabas  corrected  by  St.  Paul.     453 

Je\vs  who  then  believed  in  Christ  were  to  be  prohibited  from  contra 
the  traditions  of  their  fathers,  nor  Gentiles  when  they  became  "^^°*' 


CIUM. 


Christians  to  be  compelled  thereunto  :    in  order  that  those 
sacred  rites*  which  were  well  known  to  have  been  of  God^'sacra- 

menta' 

enjoined,  should    not   be    shunned    as  sacrileges ;    nor    yet 
accounted  so  necessary,  now  that  the  New  Testament  was 
revealed,  as  though  without  them  whoso  should  be  converted 
unto  God,  could  not  be  saved.     For  there  were  some  who 
thought   so    and  preached,  albeit   after  Christ's  Gospel  re- 
ceived ;    and  to  these  had  feignedly  consented  both  Peter 
and    Barnabas,    and    so    were    compelling   the    Gentiles   to 
Judaize.     For  it  was  a  compelling,  to  preach  them  to  be  so 
necessary  as  if,  even  after  the  Gospel  received,  without  them 
were  no  salvation  in  Christ.     This  the  error  of  certain  did 
suppose,  this  Peter's  fear  did  feign,  this  Paul's  liberty  did 
beat  down.     What  therefore  he  saith,  /  am  made  all  things  ^  Cor.  9, 
to  all,  that  I  might  gain  all,  that  did  he,  by  suffermg  with 
others,  not  by  lying.     For  each  becomes  as  though  he  were 
that  person  whom  he  would  fain  succour,  when  he  succoureth 
with  the  same  pity  wherewith  he  would  wish  himself  to  be 
succoured,  if  himself  were  set  in  the  same  misery.    Therefore 
he  becomes  as  though  he  were  that  person,  not  for  that  he 
deceives  him,  but  for  that  he  thinks  himself  as  him.    Whence 
is  that  of  the  Apostle,  which  1  have  before  rehearsed.  Brethren,  Gal.6,i. 
if  a  tnan  be  overtaken  in  afaxdi,  ye  which  are  spiritual  re- 
store such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  thyself 
lest  thou  also  be  tempted.     For  if,  because  he  said.  To  the  \Cov. 9, 
Jews  became  I  as  a  Jeir,  and  to  them  which  were  under  the     ' 
law  as  under  the  law,  he  is  therefore   to  be  accounted  to 
have  in  a  lying  manner  taken  up  the  sacraments  of  the  old 
law,  he  ought  in  the  same  manner  to  have  taken  up,  in  a 
lying  way,  the  idolatry  of  the  Gentiles,  because  he  hath  said 
that  to  them  which  were  without  law  he  became  as  without 
law  ;    which  thing  in  any  wise  he  did  not.     For  he  did  not 
any  where  sacrifice  to  idols  or  adore  those  figments  and  not 
rather  freely  as  a  martyr  of  Christ  shew  that  they  were  to  be 
detested  and  eschewed.    From  no  apostolic  acts  or  speeches, 
thei'efore,  do  these  men  allege  things  meet  for  imitation  as 
examples    of    lying.      From    prophetical    deeds   or   words^ 
then,  the  reason  why  they  seem  to  themselves  to  have  what 


454  Meaning  of  our  Lord's  seeming  sometimes  not  to  know. 

CONTRA  they  may  allege,  is  only  for  that  they  take  figures  prenun- 
"'Jl"!,^.**  ciative  to  be  lies,  because  they  are  sometimes  like  unto  lies. 

C I U  M  •  '  •f 

But  when  they  are  refen-ed  to  those  things  for  the  signifying 
of  which  they  were  so  done  or  said,  they  are  found  to  be 
significations  full  of  truth,  and  therefore  in  no  wise  to  be  lies. 
A  lie,  namely,  is  a  false  signification  with  will  of  deceiving. 
But  that  is  no  false  signification,  where,  although  one  thing  is 
signified  by  another,  yet  the  thing  signified  is  a  true  thing,  if 
it  be  rightly  understood, 
xiii.        27.  There  are  some  things  of  this  sort  even  of  our  Saviour 
in  the  Gospel,  because  the  Lord  of  the  Prophets  deigned  to 
be  Himself  also  a  Prophet.    Such  are  those  where,  concerning 
Luke  8,  the  woman  which    had    an    issue   of  blood.  He  said.    Who 
Johuii  touched  3Ie?    and   of  Lazarus,    Where  have  ye  laid  him? 
34.         He  asked,  namely,  as  if  not  knowing  that  which  in  any  wise 
He  knew.     And  He  did  on  this  account  feign  that  He  knew 
not,  that  He  might  signify  somewhat  else  by  that  His  seeming 
ignorance :  and  since  this  signification  was  truthful,  it  was 
assuredly  not  a  lie.     For  those  were  signified,  whether  by 
her  which  had  the  issue,  or  by  him  which  had  been  four 
days  dead,  whom  even  He  Who  knew  all  things  did  in  a 
certain  sort  know  not.     For  both  she  bore  the  type  of  the 
people    of  the    Gentiles,  whereof  the    prophecy    had   gone 
Pp.  18,  before,  A  people  whom  I  have  not  known  hath  served  Me: 
(  4^>w-  ^"^  Lazarus,  removed  from  the  living,  did  as  it  were  in  that 
'''^•'       place  lie  in  significative  similitude   where   He  lay.  Whose 
Ps.  31,  voice  that  is,  /  am  cast  out  of  the  sight  of  thine  eyes.     And 
with  that  intent,  as  though  it  were  not  known  by  Christ,  both 
who  she  was,  and  where  he  was  laid,  by  His  words  of  inter- 
rogating a  figure  was  enacted,  and  by  truthfid  signification 
all  lying  left  apart. 

28.  Hence  is  also  that  which  thou  hast  mentioned  that 
they  speak  of,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  after  He  was  risen, 
walked  in  the  way  with  two  disciples  ;  and  upon  their 
drawing  near  to  the  village  whither  they  were  going.  He 
made  as  though  He  would  have  gone  further :  where  the 
Luke24,  Evangelist,  saying.  But  He  Himself  feigned  that  He  would 

go 

i^^^,-f,  go  further,  hath  put  that  very  word  in  which  liars  too  greatly 
delight,  that  they  may  with  impunity  lie  :  as  if  every  thing 
that  is  feigned  is  a  lie,  whereas  in  a  truthful  way,  for  the 


Parables.     Our  Lord's  feiynhtg  He  would  go  farther.    455 

sake  of  signifying  one  thing  by  another,  so  many  things  use  to  contra 
be    feigned.      If  tlien  there  had    been  no  other  thing  that^^Jj^^j"^' 
Jesus  signified,  in  that  He  feigned  to  be  going  further,  with 
reason  might  it  be  judged  to  be  a  lie:    but  then  if  it  be 
rightly  understood    and    referred    to    that  which    He   willed 
to  signify,  it  is  a  mystery.     Else  will  all  things  be  lies  which, 
on  account  of  a  certain  similitude  of  things  to  be  signified, 
although  they  never  were  done,  are  related  to  have  been  done. 
Of  which  sort  is  that  concerning  the  two  sons  of  one  man,  LukelS, 
the  elder  who  tarried  with  his  father,  and  the  younger  who  ' 

went  into  a  far  countiy,  which  is  narrated  so  much  at  length. 
In  which  sort  of  fiction,  men  have  put  even  human  deeds  or 
words  to  irrational  animals  and  things  without  sense,  that  by 
this  sort  of  feigned  narrations   but  true  significations,  they 
might  in  more  winning   manner   intimate  the  things  which 
they  wished.     Nor  is  it  only  in  authors  of  secular  letters,  as 
in  Horace,  that  mouse  speaks  to  mouse,  and  weasel  to  fox,  Serm.  ii. 
that  through  a  fictitious  narration  a  true  signification  may  be^'  -P'^*' 
referred  to  the  matter  in  hand  ;    whence  the  like  fables  of 
iEsop  being  referred  to  the  same  end,  there  is  no  man  so 
untaught  as  to  think  they  ought  to  be  called  lies  :  but  in 
Holy  Writ  also,  as  in  the  book  of  Judges,  the  trees  seek  them  Judg.  9, 
a  king,  and  speak  to  the  olive,  to  the  fig  and  to  the  vine  and  ~ 
to  the  bramble.     Which,  in  any  wise,  is  all  feigned,  with 
intent  that  one  may  get  to  the  thing  which  is  intended,  by  a 
feigned    narration  indeed,  yet  not  a  lying  one,  but  with  a 
truthful  signification.     This  I  have  said  on  account  of  that 
which  is  written  concerning  Jesus,  And  Himself  feigned  to 
be  going  further:  lest  any  from  this  word,  like  the  Priscil- 
lianists,  wishing  to  have  license  of  lying,  should  contend  that 
beside  others  even  Christ  did  lie.     But  whoso  would  under- 
stand what  He  by  feigning  that  did  prefigure,  let  him  attend 
to  that  which  He  by  acting  did  effect.     For  when  afterwards 
He  did  go  further,  above  all  heavens,  yet  deserted  He  not 
His  disciples.     In  order  to  signify  this  which  in  the  future 
He  did  as  God,  at  the  present  He  feigned  to  do  that  as  Man. 
And  therefore  was  a  veritable   signification   caused  in  that 
feigning  to  go  before,  because  in  this  departure  the  verity  of 
that  signification  did  follow  after.    Let  him  therefore  contend 


456         Some  had  examples  left  to  our  own  judgment. 

CONTRA  that  Christ  did  lie  by  feigning,  who  denieth  that  He  fulfilled 

""c^iuM*.'  ^y  <ioi"o  t^iat  which  He  signified. 
xiv.  29.  Because,  therefore,  lying  heretics  find  not  in  the 
books  of  the  New  Testament  any  precedents  of  lying  which 
are  meet  to  be  imitated,  they  esteem  themselves  to  be  most 
copious  in  their  disputation  wherein  they  opine  that  it  is 
right  to  lie,  when  from  the  old  proplietical  books,  because  it 
doth  not  appear  therein,  save  to  the  few  who  understand,  to 
what  must  be  referred  the  significative  sayings  and  doings 
which  as  such  be  true,  they  seem  to  themselves  to  find  out 
and  allege  many  that  be  lies.  But  desiring  to  have,  where- 
with they  may  defend  themselves,  precedents  of  deceit 
seemingly  meet  to  be  imitated,  they  deceive  themselves,  and 

Ps.  27,  their  iniquity  lieth  unto  itself^.  Those  persons,  however,  of 
whom  it  is  not  there  to  be  believed  that  they  wished  to 
prophesy,  if  in  doing  or  saying  they  feigned  aught  with  will 
of  deceiving,  however  it  may  be.  that  from  the  very  things 
also  which  they  did  or  said  somewhat  prophetical  may 
be  shapen  out,  being  by  His  omnipotence  afore  deposited 
therein  as  a  seed  and  pre-disposed,  Who  knoweth  how  to 
turn  to  good  account  even  the  ill-deeds  of  men,  yet  as  far  as 
regards  the  persons  themselves,  without  doubt  they  lied. 
But  they  ought  not  to  be  esteemed  meet  for  imitation  simply 
for  that  they  are  found  in  those  books  which  are  deservedly 
called  holy  and  divine:  for  those  books  contain  the  record  of 
both  the  ill  deeds  and  the  good  deeds  of  men  ;  the  one  to  be 
eschewed,  the  other  to  be  followed  after:  and  some  are 
so  put,  that  upon  them  is  also  sentence  passed ;  some,  with 
no  judgment  there  expressed,  are  left  permitted  for  us  to 
judge  of:  because  it  was  meet  that  we  should  not  only 
be  nourished  by  that  vvhich  is  plain,  but  exercised  by  that 
which  is  obscure. 

30.  But  why  do    these   persons   think   they  may  imitate 

Gen. 38,  Tamar  telling  a  lie,  and  not  think  they  may  imitate  Judah 

14—18.  committing  fornication  ?  For  there  they  have  read  both, 
and  nought  of  these  hath  that  Scripture  either  blamed  or 
praised,  but  has  merely  naiTated  both,  and  to  our  judgment 

(f  Ps.  26,  (Heb.  27,)  12.  '  mentitiir     ^liKia,  lawrj;.    Heb.  and    E.  V.  'And 
eorum  iniquitas  sibi.'  LXX.  \^iiga,ro  n     sucli  as  breathe  out  cruelty.' 


A  just  lie  the  same  as  a  just  injustice.  457 

dismissed  both :   but  it  is  marvellous  if  it  bath  permitted  contra 
ought    of  these    to    be    imitated  with   impunity.     For,  that 


CIUM. 


Tamar  not  through  lust  of  playing  the  harlot,  but  through 
wish  of  conceiving  seed,  did  tell  the  lie,  we  know.  But 
fornication  also,  howbeit  Judah's  was  not  such,  yet  some 
man's  may  be  such  whereby  to  procure  that  a  man  may  be 
delivered,  just  as  her  lie  was  in  order  that  a  man  might 
be  conceived  ;  is  it  right  then  to  commit  fornication  on  this 
account,  if  on  that  account  it  is  thought  that  it  was  right  to 
lie  ?  Not  therefore  concerning  lying  only,  but  concerning  all 
worlis  of  men  in  which  there  arise  as  it  wei'e  compensative 
sins,  must  we  consider  what  sentence  we  ought  to  pass ;  lest 
we  open  a  way  not  only  to  small  sins  whatsoever,  but  even  to 
all  wickednesses,  and  there  remain  no  outrageous,  flagitious, 
sacrilegious  deed,  in  which  there  may  not  arise  a  cause  upon 
which  it  may  rightly  seem  a  thing  meet  to  be  done,  and  so 
universal  probity  of  life  be  by  that  opinion  subverted. 

31.  But  he   who   says   that  some  lies  are  just,  must  be    xv. 
judged  to  say  no  other  than   that   some  sins  are  just,  and 
therefore  some  things  are  just  which  are  unjust:  than  which 
what  can  be  more  absurd  ?     I  or  whence  is  a  thing  a  sin,  but 
for  that  it  is  contrary  to  justice  ?     Be  it  said  then  that  some 
sins  are  great,  some  small,  because  it  is  true ;  and  let  us  not 
listen  to  the  Stoics  who  maintain  all  to  be  equal :  but  to  say 
that  some  sins  are  unjust,  some  just,  what  else  is  it  than  to 
say  that  there  be  some  unjust,  some  just  iniquities  ?     When 
the  Apostle  John  saith.  Even/  man  uho  doeth.  sin,  doeth  alsoi  John 
iniquit'/,  and  sin  is  iniquity.     It  is  impossible  therefore  that  ' 
a  sin  should  be  just,  unless  when  we  put  the  name  of  sin 
upon   another  thing  in  which  one  doth  not  sin,  but  either 
doeth  or  suifereth  ought  for  sin.     Namely,  both  sacrifices  for 
sins    are    named    '  sins,'   and    the    punishments   of  sins  are 
sometimes  called  sins.     These  doubtless  can  be  understood 
to  be  just  sins,  when  just  sacrifices  are  spoken  of,  or  just 
punishments.      But    those    things  which    are    done   against 
God's  law  cannot  be  just.     It  is  said  unto  God,  Thy  law  is Vs.\i9, 
truth :    and  consequently,  what  is  against  truth  cannot  be  ^^^' 
just.     Now  who  can  doubt  that  every  lie  is  against  truth  ? 
Therefore  there  can  be  no  just  lie.     Again,  what  man  doth 
not  see  clearly  that  every  thing  which  is  just  is  of  the  truth  ?  ■ 


CONTHA 

MENDA- 

CIUM. 

1  John 
2,  21. 


Exod.  1, 
17—20. 
Josh.  2, 
and  6, 
25. 


mentis, 

menti- 

entis. 


458      How  far  sbi  is  excused  through  a  good  intent. 

And  John  crietli  out,  No  lie  is  of  the  truth.  No  lie  therefore 
is  just.  Wherefore,  when  from  holy  Scriptures  are  proposed 
to  us  examples  of  lying,  either  they  are  not  lies,  but  are 
thought  to  be  so  while  they  are  not  understood ;  or,  if  lies 
they  be,  thoy  are  not  meet  to  be  imitated,  because  they 
cannot  be  just. 

32.  But,  as  for  that  which  is  written,  that  God  did  good  to 
the  Hebrew  niidwives,  and  to  Rahab  the  harlot  of  Jericho ; 
this  was  not  because  they  lied,  but  because  they  were 
merciful  to  God's  people.  That  therefore  which  was  re- 
warded in  them  was,  not  their  deceit,  but  their  benevolence  ; 
•  benignity  of  mind,  not  iniquity  of  lying.  For,  as  it  would 
not  be  marvellous  and  absurd  if  God  on  account  of  good 
works  after  done  by  them  should  be  willing  to  forgive  some 
evil  works  at  another  time  before  committed,  so  it  is  not  to 
be  marvelled  at  that  God  beholding  at  one  time,  in  one 
cause,  both  these,  that  is,  the  thing  done  of  mercy  and  the 
thing  done  of  deceit,  did  both  reward  the  good,  and  for  the 
sake  of  this  good  forgive  that  evil.  For  if  sins  which  are 
done  of  carnal  concupiscence,  not  of  mercy,  are  for  the  sake 
of  after  works  of  mercy  remitted',  why  are  not  those  through 
merit  of  mercy  remitted  which  of  mercy  itself  are  committed.'' 
For  more  grievous  is  a  sin  which  with  purpose  of  hurting, 
than  that  which  with  jiurpose  of  helping,  is  wrought.  And 
consequently  if  that  is  blotted  out  by  a  work  of  mercy 
thereafter  following,  why  is  this,  which  is  less  heinous, 
not  blotted  out  by  the  mercy  itself  of  the  man,  both  going 
before  that  he  may  sin,  and  going  along  with  him  while  he 
sins  ?  So  indeed  it  may  seem  :  but  in  truth  it  is  one  thing 
to  say,  '  I  ought  not  to  have  simied,  but  I  will  do  works  of 
mercy  whereby  I  may  blot  out  the  sin  which  I  did  before  ;' 
and  another  to  say,  '  I  ought  to  sin,  because  1  cannot  else 
shew  mercy.'  It  is,  I  say,  one  thing  to  say,  '  Because  we 
have  already  sinned,  let  us  do  good,'  and  another  to  say, 
'  Let  us  sin,  that  we  may  do  good.'  There  it  is  said,  '  Let 
Kom.  3,  us  do  good,  because  we  have  done  evil ;'  but  here.  Let  us  do 
evil  that  good  may  come.  And,  consequently,  there  we  have 
to  drain  off"  the  sink  of  sin,  here  to  beware  of  a  doctrine 
which  teacheth  to  sin. 

3:3.    It  remains  then   that   we   understand   as   concerning 


'  dimit 
tuntur. 


8 


Examples  of  Rahab  and  the  Hebrew  Midtvives.      459 

those  women,  whether  in  Egypt  or  in  Jericho,  that  for  their  contra 
hnmanity  and  mercy  they  received   a  reward,  m  any  wise  ^^^^^ 
temporal,  which  indeed  itself,  while  they  wist  not  of  it,  should 
by    prophetical    signification    prefigure    somewhat    eternal. 
But  whether  it  be  ever  right,  even  for  the  saving  of  a  man's 
life,  to  tell  a  lie,  as  it  is  a  question  in  resolving  which  even 
the  most  learned  do  weary  themselves,  it  did  vastly  suq^ass 
the  capacity  of  those  poor  women,  set  in  the  midst  of  those 
nations,  and  accustomed  to  those  manners.     Therefore  their 
ignorance  in  this  as  well  as  in  those  other  things  of  which 
they  were  alike  unknowing,  but  which  are  to  be  known  by 
the  children  not  of  this  world  but  of  that  which  is  to  come, 
the  patience  of  God   did  bear  withal:  Who  yet,  for  their 
human    kindness   which    they   had   shewn  to   His  servants, 
rendered  unto  them  rewards  of  an  earthly  sort,  albeit  signi- 
fying somewhat  of  an  heavenly.    And  Rahab,  indeed,  delivered 
out    of  Jericho,    made    transition   into   the  people  of  God, 
where,    being   proficient,  she    might    attain   to    eternal  and 
immortal  prizes  which  are  not  to  be  sought  by  any  lie.    Yet  at    xvi. 
that  time  when  she   did  for  the    Israelite  spies   that   good, 
and,  for  her  condition  of  life,  laudable  work,  she  was  not  as 
yet  such  that  it  should  he  required  of  her.  In  your  moulh  let  Matt.  5, 
Yea   be  yea,   Nay  nay.     But  as  for  those  midwives,  albeit 
Hebrewesses,  if  they  savoured  only  after  the  flesh,  what  or 
how  great  is  the  good  they  got  of  their  temporal  reward  in 
that  they  made  them  houses,  unless  by  making  proficiency 
they  attained  unto  that  house  of  which  is  sung  unto  God, 
Blessed  are  they  that  duell  in  thine  house;  for  ever  andVs.Si, 
ever  they  uill  praise  thee  ?     It  must  be  confessed,  however, 
that  it  approacheth  much  unto    righteousness,  and  though 
not  yet  in  reality,  yet  even  now  in  respect  of  hopefulness  and 
disposition    that  mind  is    to  be  praised,   which    never  lies 
except  with  intention  and  will  to  do  good  to  some  man,  but 
to  hurt  no  man.     But  as  for  us,  when  we  ask  whether  it  be 
the  part  of  a  good  man  sometimes  to  lie,  we  ask  not  con- 
cerning a  person  pertaining  to  Egypt,  or  to  Jericho,  or  to 
Babylon,  or  still  to  Jerusalem  itself,  the  earthly,  which  is  in  Gal.  4, 
bondage  with  her  children  ;  but  concerning  a  citizen  of  that     '  "  ' 
city  which  is   above    and  free,  our  mother,   eternal  in  the 
heavens.     And  to  our  asking  it  is  answered,  No  lie  is  of  the  iJohn2, 

21. 


460     How  the  Midivives  and  Rahah  might  have  acted. 

coNTBA  truth.     The  sons  of  that  city,  are  sons  of  the  Truth.     That 
c^ium!"  city's  sons  are  they  of  whom  il  is  written,  In  their  mouth  was 
Rev.  \A,found  no  lie:   son  of  that  city  is  he  of  whom  is  also  written, 
Prov      ^  '^^'*  receiving  the  uord  shall  he  far  from  destruction  :    hut 
29,  27.   receiving,  he  hath   received  that  for  himself,  and  nothing 
(not  in  false  proceedeth  out  of  his  mouth.     These  sons  of  Jerusalem 
Hebrew)  on  high,  and  of  the  holy   city  eternal,  if  ever,  as  they  be 
men,  a  lie  of  what  kind  soever  doth  worm  itself  into  them, 
they  ask  humbly  for  pardon,  not  therefrom  seek  moreover 
glory, 
xvii.        34,  But  some  man  will  say,  Would  then  those  midwives 
and  Rahab  have  done  better  if  they  had  shewn  no  mercy, 
by  refusing  to  lie?    Nay  verily,  those  Hebrew  women,  if  they 
were  such  as  that  sort  of  persons  of  whom  we  ask  whether 
they  ought  ever  to  tell  a  lie,  would  both  eschew  to  say  ought 
false,  and  would  most  frankly  refuse   that  foul   service  of 
killing  the  babes.     But,  thou  wilt  say,  themselves  would  die. 
Yea,  but  see  what  follows.     They  would  die  with  an  heavenly 
habitation  for  their  incomparably  more  ample  reward  than 
those  houses  which  they  made  them  on  earth  could  be:  they 
would  die,  to  be  in  eternal  felicity,  after  enduring  of  death 
for  most  innocent  truth.     What  of  her  in  Jericho  ?    Could 
she  do  this  ?    Would  she  not,  if  she  did  not  by  telling  a  lie 
deceive  the  enquiring  citizens,  by  speaking  truth  betray  the 
lurking  guests .?    Or  could   she  say  ^  to  their  questionings, 
1  know  where  they  are ;  but  I  fear  God,  I  will  not  betray 
them.?    She  could  indeed  say  this,  were  she  already  a  true 
John  1,  Israelitess  in  whom  was  no  guile:  which  thing  she  was  about 
to  be,  when  through  the  mercy  of  God  passing  over  into  the 
city  of  God.     But  they,  hearing  this  (thou  wilt  say),  would 
slay  her,  would  search  the  house.      But  did  it  follow  that 
they  would  also  find  them,  whom  she  had  diligently  con- 
cealed?    For  in   the  foresight  of  this,  that  most  cautious 
woman  had  placed  them  where  they  would  have  been  able  to 
remain   undiscovered    if  she,  telling    a   lie,    should  not  be 
believed.     So  both  she,  if  after  all  she  had  been  slain  by 
her  countrymen  for  the  work  of  mercy,  would  have  ended 
Ps.  1 16,  this  life,  which  must  needs  come  to  an  end,  by  a  death  precious 
^^*         in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  towards  them  her  benefit  had 
h  MSS.  and  edd.  '  An  posset;'  but  Ben.  propose  '  an  non  posset,' '  Could  she  not?' 


Providence  must  in  any  case  he  trusted  at  last.       461 

not  been  in  vain.     But,  thou  wilt  say,  '  What  if  the  men  contra 
who  sought  tliem,  in  their  thorough-going  search,  had  come  "*^'"'*' 


CIUM. 


to  the  place  where  she  had  concealed  them?'  In  this  fashion 
it  may  be  said:  What  if  a  most  vile  and  base  woman,  not  only 
telhng,  but  swearing  a  lie,  had  not  got  them  to  believe  her  ? 
Of  course  even  so  would  the  things  have  been  like  to  come 
to  pass,  through  fear  of  which  she  lied.  And  where  do  we 
put  the  will  and  power  of  God  ?  or  haply  was  He  not  able  to 
keep  both  her,  neither  telling  a  lie  to  her  own  townsmen,  nor 
betraying  men  of  God,  and  them,  being  His,  safe  from  all 
harm?  For  by  Whom  also  after  the  woman's  lie  they  were 
guarded,  by  Him  could  they,  even  if  she  had  not  lied,  have 
in  any  wise  been  guarded.  Unless  perchance  we  have 
forgotten  that  this  did  come  to  pass  in  Sodom,  where  males 
burning  towards  males  with  hideous  lust  could  not  so  much 
as  find  the  door  of  the  house  in  which  were  the  men  they 
sought;  when  that  just  man,  in  a  case  altogether  most  simi- 
lar, would  not  tell  a  lie  for  his  guests,  whom  he  knew  not  to 
be  Angels,  and  feared  lest  they  should  suffer  a  violence  worse 
than  death.  And  doubtless,  he  might  have  given  the  seekers 
the  like  answer  as  that  woman  gave  in  Jericho.  For  it  was 
in  precisely  the  like  manner  that  they  sought  by  interro- 
gating. But  that  just  person  was  not  willing  that  for  the 
bodies  of  his  guests  his  soul  should  be  spotted  by  bis  own 
telling  of  a  lie,  for  which  bodies  he  was  willing  that  the 
bodies  of  his  daughters  by  iniquity  of  others'  lust  should  be 
deforced.  Let  then  a  man  do  even  for  the  temporal  safety  Gen.  19, 
of  men  what  he  can  ;  but  when  it  comes  to  that  point  that  to  ~  ' 
consult  for  such  saving  of  them  except  by  sinning  is  not  in 
his  power,  thenceforth  let  him  esteem  himself  not  to  have 
what  he  may  do,  when  he  shall  perceive  that  only  to  be  left 
him  which  he  may  not  rightly  do.  Therefore,  touching 
Rahab  in  Jericho,  because  she  entertained  strangers,  men  of 
God,  because  in  entertaining  of  them  she  put  herself  in  peril, 
because  she  believed  on  their  God,  because  she  diligently 
hid  them  where  she  could,  because  she  gave  them  most 
faithful  counsel  of  returning  by  another  way,  let  her  be 
praised  as  meet  to  be  imitated  even  by  the  citizens  of  Jeru- 
salem on  high.  But  in  that  she  lied,  although  somewhat 
therein  as  prophetical  be  intelligently  expounded,  yet  not  as 


462         Dictinius's  precedents.    Embarrassing  cases. 

coNTKA  meet  to  be  imitated  is  it  wisely  propounded :  albeit  that  God 
^c\v-m'  liath  those  good  things  memorably  honoured,  this  evil  thing 
mercifully  overlooked. 

35,   Since  these  things  are  so,  because  it  were  too  long  to 
'  or 'Ba- treat  thoroughly  of  all  that  in  that  '  Pound' '  of  Dictinius  are 

Itincc'  ' 

set  down  as  precedents  of  lying,  meet  to  be  imitated,  it 
seemeth  to  me  that  this  is  the  rule  to  which  not  only  these, 
but  whatever  such  there  be,  must  be  reduced.  Namely, 
either  what  is  believed  to  be  a  lie  must  be  shewn  not  to  be 
such  ;  whether  it  be  where  a  truth  is  left  untold,  and  yet  no 
falsehood  told;  or  where  a  true  signification  wiileth  one 
thing  to  be  understood  of  another,  which  kind  of  figurative 
either  sayings  or  doings  abounds  in  the  prophetical  writings. 
Or,  those  which  are  convicted  to  be  lies,  must  be  proved  to 
be  not  meet  to  be  imitated:  and  if  any  (as  other  sins)  should 
stealthily  creep  in  upon  us,  we  are  not  to  attribute  righte- 
ousness to  them,  but  to  ask  pardon  for  them.  So  indeed  it 
seems  to  me,  and  to  this  sentence  the  things  above  disputed 
do  compel  me. 
xviii.  36.  But  for  that  we  are  men  and  among  men  do  live,  and 
I  confess  that  I  am  not  yet  in  the  number  of  them  whom 
compensative  sins  embarrass  not,  it  oft  befalleth  me  in  human 
affairs  to  be  overcome  by  human  feeling,  nor  am  I  able  to 
resist  when  it  is  said  to  me,  *  Lo,  here  is  a  sick  man  in  peril 
of  his  life  with  a  grievous  disease,  whose  strength  will  no 
more  be  able  to  bear  it,  if  the  death  of  his  only  and  most 
dear  son  be  announced  to  him ;  he  asks  of  thee  whether  his 
son  liveth,  and  thou  knowest  that  he  is  departed  this  life ; 
what  wilt  thou  reply,  when,  whatever  thou  shalt  say  beside 
one  of  these  three;  either.  He  is  dead;  or.  He  liveth;  or, 
I  know  not ;  he  believes  no  other  than  that  he  is  dead ; 
which  thing  he  perceives  thee  to  be  afraid  to  tell,  and  un- 
willing to  tell  a  lie  ?  It  comes  to  the  same  thing,  if  thou 
altogether  hold  thy  peace.  But  of  those  three,  two  are  false, 
He  liveth,  and,  I  know  not;  and  they  cannot  be  said  by 
thee  but  by  telling  a  lie.  Whereas  if  thou  shalt  say  that  one 
thing  which  is  true,  that  is,  that  he  is  dead,  and  the  man  be 
so  perturbed  that  death  follow,  people  will  cry  out  that  thou 
hast  killed  him.  And  who  can  bear  men  casting  up  to  him 
what  a  mischief  it  is  to  shun  a  lie  that  might  save  life,  and 


Truth  no  more  chargeable  icilh  results  than  any  virtue.  463 

to   choose   truth  which   murders  a  man?    I  am  moved  by  com  n  a 
these  objections  exceedingly,  but  it  were  marvellous  whether  "^^j,," 
also  wisely.     For,  when  I   shall  set  before  the  eyes  of  my 
heart  (such  as  they  be)  the  intellectual  beauty  of  Him  outintel- 
of  Whose  mouth  nothing  false  proceedeth,  albeit  where  truth  ^^^^ '" 
in  her  radiance  doth  more  and  more  brighten  upon  me,  there 
my  weak  and  throbbing  sense  is  beaten  back  :  yet  I  am  with 
love  of  that  surpassing    comeliness   so    set  on  fire,   that  I 
despise  all   human    regards  which  would  thence   recal  me. 
But  it  is  much  that  this  affection  persevere  to  that  degree, 
that  in  temptation  it  lack  not  its  effect.     Nor  doth  it  move 
me,  while  contemjilating  that  luminous  Good  in  which  is  no 
darkness  of  a  lie,  that,  when  we  refuse  to  lie,  and  men  through 
hearing  of  a  truth  do  die,  truth  is  called  a  murderer.     For,  if 
a  lewd  woman  crave  of  thee  the  gratification  of  her  lust,  and, 
when  thou  consentest  not,  she  perturbed  with  the  fierceness 
of  her  love  should  die,  will  chastity  also  be  a  murderer?    Or, 
tnily,  because  we  read,  l^'e  are  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  in^Cor.i, 
every  place,  both  in   them  ichlcli   are  saved  and  in   them  '^'  ^^' 
which  perish;  to  the  one,  indeed,  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  to 
others  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  ;    shall  we  pronounce 
even  the  savour  of  Christ  to  be  a  murderer  ?     But,  for  that 
\ve,  being  men,  are  in  questions  and  contradictions  of  this 
sort  for  the  most  part  overcome  or  wearied  out  by  our  feeling 
as  men,  for  that  very  reason  hath  the  Apostle  also  presently 
subjoined.  And  tcho  is  sufficient  for  these  things? 

37.  Add  to  this,  (and  here  is  cause  to  cry  out  more  pite- 
ously,)  that,  if  once  we  grant  it  to  have  been  right  for  the 
sa\'ing  of  that  sick  man's  life  to  tell  him  the  lie,  that  his  son 
was  alive,  then,  by  little  and  little  and  by  minute  degrees, 
the  evil  so  grows  upon  us,  and  by  slight  accesses  to  such  a 
heap  of  wicked  lies  does  it,  in  its  almost  imperceptible  en- 
croachments, at  last  come,  that  no  place  can  ever  be  any 
where  found  on  which  this  huge  mischief,  by  smallest  additions 
rising  into  boundless  strength,  might  be  resisted.  Where- 
fore, most  providently  is  it  written,  He  that  despiseth  small Ecclas. 
things  shall  fall  by  little  and  little.  Nay  more :  for  these  '  ^' 
persons  who  are  so  enamoured  of  this  life,  that  they  hesitate 
not  to  prefer  it  to  truth,  that  a  man  may  not  die,  say  rather, 
that  a  man  who  must  some  time  die  may  die  somewhat  later. 


464  Joying  about  Relifjion  a  kind  of  perjury. 

CONTRA  would  have  us  not  only  to  lie,  but  even  to  swear  falsely  ;  to 
MFNDA-  vvit,  that,  lest  the  vain  health  of  man  should  somewhat  more 

CIUM.  '  ' 

quickly  pass  away,  we  should  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  our 

God  in  vain!  And  there  are  among  ihem  learned  men  who 
even  fix  rules,  and  set  bounds  when  it  is  a  duty,  when  not  a 
duty,  to  commit  perjury !  O,  where  are  ye,  fountains  of  tears  ? 
And  what  shall  we  do  ?  whither  go  ?  where  hide  us  from  the 
ire  of  truth,  if  we  not  only  neglect  to  shun  lies,  but  dare 
moreover  to  teach  perjuries?  For  look  they  well  to  it,  who 
uphold  and  defend  lying,  what  kind,  or  what  kinds,  of  lying 
they  shall  delight  to  justify  :  at  least  in  the  worship  of  God 
let  them  grant  that  there  must  be  no  lying ;  at  least  let  them 
keep  themselves  from  perjuries  and  blasphemies;  at  least 
there,  where  God's  name,  where  God  as  witness,  where  God's 
'  sacra-  oath  is  interposed,  Avhere  God's  religion  is  the  matter  of  dis- 
""^"r  com-se  or  colloquy,  let  none  lie,  none  praise,  none  teach 
and  enjoin,  none  justify  a  lie  :  of  the  other  kinds  of  lies  let 
him  choose  him  out  that  which  he  accounteth  to  be  the  mildest 
and  most  innocent  kind  of  lying,  he  who  will  have  it  to  be 
right  to  lie.  This  I  know,  that  even  he  who  teaches  that  it 
is  meet  to  tell  lies,  wishes  to  be  thought  to  teach  a  truth. 
For  if  it  be  false  which  he  teaches,  who  would  care  to  give 
heed  to  false  doctrine,  in  which  both  he  deceives  that  teaches 
and  he  is  deceived  that  learns?  But  if,  in  order  that  he  may 
be  able  to  find  some  disciple,  he  upholds  that  he  teaches  a 
truth  when  he  teaches  that  it  is  meet  to  lie,  how  will  that  lie 
1  John  be  of  the  truth,  when  the  Apostle  John  reclaimeth,  No  lie  is 
^'^^"  of  the  truth?  It  is  therefore  not  true,  that  it  is  sometimes 
right  to  lie  ;  and  that  which  is  not  true  to  no  man  is  at  all  to 
be  persuaded. 
xix.  ^^-  ^^^^  infirmity  pleadeth  its  part,  and  with  favour  of  the 
crowds  proclaims  itself  to  have  a  cause  invincible.  Where 
it  contradicts,  and  says,  '  What  way  is  there  among  men, 
who  without  doubt  by  being  deceived  are  turned  aside 
from  a  deadly  harm  to  others  or  themselves,  to  succour  men 
in  peril,  if  our  affection  as  men  may  not  incline  us  to  lie  V 
If  it  will  hear  me  patiently,  this  crowd  of  mortality,  crowd  of 
infirmity,  I  will  say  somewhat  in  answer  on  the  behalf  of  truth. 
Surely  at  the  least  pious,  true,  holy  chastity  is  not  otherwise 
than  of  the  truth  :  and  whoso  acts  against  it,  acts  against 


MliNDA- 
CIUM. 


Truth  cannot  persuade  to  lying.     On  no  plea  blaspheme.  465 

truth.  Why  then,  if  otherwise  it  be  not  possible  to  succour  contua 
men  in  peril,  do  I  not  also  commit  whoredom,  which  is 
therefore  contrary  to  truth,  for  that  it  is  contrary  to  chastity, 
and  yet,  to  succour  men  in  peril,  do  speak  a  lie  which  most 
openly  is  contrary  to  truth  itself?  Wherein  hath  chastity  so 
highly  deserved  at  our  hands,  and  truth  offended  us  ? 
When  all  chastity  is  of  the  truth,  and  not  the  body's  but  the 
mind's  chastity  is  truth,  yea,  in  the  mind  dwelleth  even  the 
body's  chastity.  Lastly,  as  I  shortly  before  said,  and  say 
again,  whoever  for  the  recommending  and  defending  of  any 
lie  speaks  against  me,  what  speaks  he,  if  he  speaks  not  truth  ? 
Now  if  he  is  therefore  to  be  heard  because  he  speaks  truth, 
how  wishes  he  to  make  me,  by  speaking  truth,  a  liar?  How 
does  lying  take  unto  itself  truth  as  its  patroness  ?  Or,  is  it 
for  her  own  adversary  that  she  conquers,  that  by  herself  she 
may  be  conquered  ?  Who  can  bear  this  absurdity  ?  In  no 
wise  therefore  may  we  say,  that  they  who  assert  that  it  is 
sometimes  right  to  lie,  in  asserting  that  are  truthful ;  lest, 
what  is  most  absurd  and  foolish  to  believe,  truth  should 
teach  us  to  be  liars.  For  what  sort  of  thing  is  it,  that  no 
man  learns  of  chastity  that  we  may  commit  adultery;  that  we 
may  offend  God  none  learns  of  piety  ;  that  we  may  do  any 
man  harm,  none  learns  of  kindness  ;  and  that  we  may  tell 
lies,  we  are  to  learn  of  truth  !  But  then  if  this  thing  truth 
teaches  not,  it  is  not  true  ;  if  not  true,  it  is  not  meet  to  be 
learned  ;  if  not  meet  to  be  learned,  never  therefore  is  it  meet 
to  tell  a  lie. 

39.  But,  some  man  will  say.  Strong  meat  is  for  them  that  Heb. 
are  perfect.  For  in  many  things  a  relaxation  by  way  of^^' 
indulgence  is  allowed  to  infirmity,  although  in  her  utmost 
sincerity  the  things  be  no-wise  pleasing  to  truth.  Let  him 
say  this,  whoever  dreads  not  the  consequences  which  are 
to  be  dreaded,  if  once  there  shall  be  in  any  way  any  lies 
permitted.  In  no  wise,  however,  must  they  be  permitted  to 
climb  up  to  such  a  height  as  to  reach  to  perjuries  and  blas- 
phemies :  nor  must  any  plea  whatever  be  held  out,  for  which 
it  should  be  right  that  peijury  should  be  committed,  or,  what 
is  more  execrable,  that  God  should  be  blasphemed.  For  it 
does  not  follow  that  because  the  blaspheming  is  only  in 
pretence  and  a  lie,  therefore  He  is  not  blasphemed.     For  at 

Hh 


'iGGIytioranceandpretence  compared.  Lying/or  another'' s  soul. 

CONTRA  this  rate  it  might  be  said  that  perjury  is  not  committed, 
ciuM.  because  it  is  by  a  He  that  it  is  committed :  for  who  can  be 
by  truth  a  perjurer?  So  also  by  truth  can  no  man  be  a 
blasphemer.  Doubtless  it  is  a  milder  kind  of  false  swearing, 
when  a  person  does  not  know  that  thing  to  be  false  and 
believes  it  to  be  true,  which  he  swears  :   like  as  also  Saul 

1  Tim, 1,  blasphemed  more  excusably,  because  he  did  it  ignorantly. 
But  the  reason  why  it  is  worse  to  blaspheme  than  to  perjure 
one's  self,  is,  that  in  folse  swearing  God  is  taken  to  witness  a 
false  thing,  but  in  blaspheming  false  things  are  spoken  of 
God  Himself.  Now  by  so  much  is  a  man  more  inexcusable, 
whether  perjurer  or  blasphemer,  by  how  much  the  more, 
while  asserting  the  things  wherein  they  perjure  or  blaspheme, 
they  know  or  believe  them  to  be  false.  Whoever  therefore 
says  that  for  an  imperilled  man's  temporal  safety  or  life  a  lie 
may  be  told,  doth  too  much  himself  swerve  from  the  path  of 
eternal  safety  and  life,  if  he  says  that  on  that  behalf  one  may 
even  swear  by  God,  or  even  blaspheme  God. 
XX.        40.  But  sometimes  a  peril  to  eternal  salvation  itself  is  put 

1  o/jpo-  forth  against  us ' ;  which  peril,  they  cry  out,  we  by  telling  a 
lie,  if  otherwise  it  cannot  be,  must  ward  off.  As,  for  instance, 
if  a  person  who  is  to  be  baptized  be  in  the  power  of  impious- 
and  infidel  men,  and  cannot  be  got  at  that  he  may  be  washed 
with  the  laver  of  regeneration,  but  by  deceiving  his  keepers 
with  a  lie.  From  this  most  invidious  cry,  by  which  we  are 
compelled,  not  for  a  man's  wealth  or  honours  in  this  world 
which  are  fleeting  by,  not  for  the  life  itself  of  this  present 
time,  but  for  the  eternal  salvation  of  a  human  being,  to  tell  a 
lie,  whither  shall   I   betake    me    for   refuge    but   unto   thee, 

2joj-opo-  O  truth?  And  by  thee  is  init  forth  before  me^.  Chastity. 
For  why,  if  those  keepers  may  be  enticed  to  admit  us  to 
baptize  the  man,  by  our  committing  lewdness,  do  we  refuse 
to  do  things  contrary  to  chastity,  and  yet,  if  by  a  lie  they  may 
be  deceived,  consent  to  do  things  contrary  to  truth?  when 
without  doubt  no  man  would  faithfully  think  chastity  amiable, 
but  because  it  is  enjoined  of  truth  ?  So  then,  to  get  at  a  man  to 
baptize  him,  let  the  keepers  be  deceived  by  lying,  if  truth 
bid  it.  But  how  can  truth  bid  in  order  that  a  man  may  be 
baptized,  that  we  should  tell  a  lie,  if  chastity  biddeth  not,  in 
order  that  a  man  be  baptized,  that  we  should  commit  whore- 


Truth  to  he  kept  as  chastity.     All  sin  called  lying.     467 

dom?    Now  why  doth  chastity  not  bid  this,  but  because  this  contra 
truth  teacheth  not  ?    If  then,  save  what  truth  teacheth,  we  "c^juMt" 
ought  not  to  do,  when  truth  teacheth  not  even  for  the  sake 
of  baptizing  a  man  to  do  what  is  contrary  to  chastity,  how 
shall  she  teach  us  to  do  for  the  sake  of  baptizing  a  man 
what  is  contrary  to  herself,  the  truth  ?    But  like  as  eyes  not 
strong  enough  to  look  upon  the  sun  yet  do  gladly  look  upon 
the  objects  which  are  by  the  sun  enlightened,  so,  souls  which 
have  already  strength  to  delight  in  the  beauty  of  chastity  are 
yet  not  straightway  able  to   consider  in  her  very  self  that 
truth  whence  chastity  hath  her  light,  insomuch  that  when  it 
Cometh  to  the  doing  of  somewhat  that  is  adverse  to  truth, 
they  should  so  start  back  in  horror  as  they  do   start  back 
in  horror  if  ought  be  proposed  to  be  done  that  is  adverse 
to  chastity.     But  that  sun,   who,   receiving  the  word  shall 
be    far  from    perdition,   and  nothing  false  cometh   forth   ofProv.29, 
his  mouth,  accounts  it   as  much  debarred  from  him   if,  to"'*    "' 
the    succouring    of  his    fellow    man    he    be    urged   to   pass 
through  a  lie,  as  if  it  were  through  the  deed  of  lewdness. 
And  the  Father   heareth   and  granteth  his   prayer  that  he 
may  avail  without  a  lie  to  succour  whom  the  Father  Him- 
self, Whose  judgments  are  unsearchable,  willeth  to  be  suc- 
coured.    Such  a  son  therefore  so  keeps  watch  against  a  lie, 
as  he  doth  against  sin.     For  indeed  sometimes  the  name  of 
lie  is  put  for  the  name  of  sin:  whence  is  that  saying,  AllPs.iie, 
men  are  liars.     For  it  is  so  said,  as  if  it  were  said.  All  men     ' 
are  sinners.     And  that :  But  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  abounded  Rom.  3, 
through  my  lie.     And  therefore,  when  he  lies  as  a  man  he" 
sins  as  a  man,  and  will  be  held  by  that  sentence  in  which  it 
is  said.  All  men  are  liars;  and,  If  we  say  that  we  have  noi  John 
siti,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.     But^'^' 
when  nothing  false  cometh  forth  of  his  mouth,  according  to 
that  grace  will  it  so  be,  of  which  is  said :  He  that  is  born  of\  John 
God,  sinneth  not.     Foi  were  this  nativity  by  itself  alone  in   ' 
us,  no  man  would  sin :  and  when  it  shall  be  alone,  no  man 
will  sin.     But  now,  we  as  yet  drag  on  that  which  we  were 
born  corruptible :  although,  according  to  that  which  we  are 
new-born,  if  we  walk  aright,  from  day  to  day  we  are  renewed  2  Cor. 
inwardly.     But  when  this  coiTuptible  shall  have  put  on  in-  fcor'is 

H  h  2  53—56.' 


468  Even  adulterers  sometimes  fear  perjury. 

CONTRA  corruption,  life  will  swallow  it  up  wholly,  and  not  a  sting  of 


MENDA- 


ciuM.   fleath  will  remain.     Now  this  sting  of  death  is  sin. 

xxi.  41.  Either  then  we  are  to  eschew  lies  by  right  doing,  or 
to  confess  them  by  repenting  :  but  not,  while  they  unhappily 
abound  in  our  living,  to  make  them  more  by  teaching  also. 
But  let  him  who  thinks  this,  choose  out  whereby  he  may 
help  his  fellow  man  being  in  peril,  to  what  safety  he  will, 
what  kinds  soever  of  lies ;  provided  yet  even  of  such  men  we 
obtain  our  demand,  that  upon  no  cause  must  we  be  carried 
on  to  false-swearing  and  to  blaspheming.  These  wicked- 
nesses at  least  let  us  judge  either  greater  than  deeds  of 
lewdness,  or  certainly  not  smaller.  For  indeed  it  is  vs^orth 
thinking  of,  that  very  often  men,  where  they  suspect  them  of 
adidtery,  challenge  their  wives  to  an  oath  :  which  surely 
they  would  not  do,  unless  they  believed  that  even  they  who 
were  not  afraid  to  perpetrate  adidtery,  might  be  afraid  of 
perjury.  Because  in  fact  also  some  lewd  women  who  were 
not  afraid  by  unlawful  embraces  to  deceive  their  husbands, 
have  been  afraid  to  call  God  deceitfully  to  witness  unto  those 
same  husbands  whom  they  had  deceived.  What  cause  then 
can  there  be,  that  a  chaste  and  religious  person  should  be 
unwilling  by  adultery  to  help  a  man  to  baptism,  yet  be 
willing  to  help  him  by  peijury,  which  even  adulterers  are 
wont  to  dread.?  And  then,  if  it  be  shocking  to  do  this  by 
perjuring  one's  self,  how  much  rather  by  blaspheming  ?  Far 
be  it  then  from  a  Cluistian  to  deny  and  blaspheme  Christ,  that 
he  may  make  another  man  a  Christian ;  and  by  losing  him- 
self seek  to  find  one,  whom,  if  he  teach  him  such  things,  he 
may  cause  to  be  lost  when  found.  The  book  then  which  is 
called  '  the  Pound,'  thou  must  in  this  method  refute  and 
destroy  ;  namely,  that  head  of  it  in  which  they  dogmatize 
that  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  religion  a  lie  may  be 
told,  this  thou  shalt  understand  must  be  the  Hrst  to  be 
amputated;  in  such  manner,  that  their  testimonies  by  which 
they  labour  to  advance  the  Holy  Books  as  patrons  of  their 
lies,  thou  must  demonstrate  partly  not  to  be  lies,  partly, 
even  those  which  are  such,  to  be  not  meet  to  be  imitated : 
and  if  infirmity  usurps  to  herself  thus  much,  that  somewhat 
shall  be  venially  permitted  unto  her  which  truth  approve  not. 


Sin  not  to  be  committed  to  detect  sin.  469 

yet  that  thou   uushakeiily  hold  and  defend,  that  in  divine  contra 
rehgion  it  is  at  no  time  whatever  right  to  tell  a  lie.     And,  as  ^civu.' 
for  concealed  heretics,  that,  as  we  are  not  to  find  out  con- 
cealed  adulterers  by  committing  of  adulteries,  nor  murderers 
by  committing  of  mmxlers,  nor  practisers  of  black   arts  by  male- 
practising  of  black  arts,  so  neither  must  we  seek  to  find  out 
liars  by  telling  lies  or  blasphemers  by  blaspheming :  accord- 
ing to  the  reasonings  which  we    have    in  this  volume    so 
copiously  set  forth,  that  imto  the  goal  of  the  same,  which  we 
fixed  to  be  in  this  place,  we  have  with  difiiculty  come  at 
last. 


S.    AUGUSTINE 

OF 

THE    WORK     OF     MONKS. 


From  the  Retractations,  ii.  21. 

To  write  the  Book  on  the  Work  of  Monks,  the  need  which  compelled 
me  was  this.  When  at  Carthage  there  had  begun  to  be  monasteries, 
some  maintained  themselves  by  their  own  hands,  obeying  the  Apostle; 
but  others  wished  so  to  live  on  the  oblations  of  the  faithful,  that 
doing  no  work  whence  they  might  either  have  or  supply  the  neces- 
saries of  life,  they  thought  and  boasted  that  they  did  rather  fulfil  the 
precept  of  the  Gospel,  where  the  Lord  saith.  Behold  the  fowls  of  heaven 
and  the  lilies  of  the  field.  Matt.  vi.  26.  Whence  also  among  laics 
of  inferior  purpose,  but  yet  fervent  in  zeal,  there  had  begun  to  arise 
tumultuous  contests,  whereby  the  Church  was  troubled,  some  defending 
the  one,  others  the  other  part.  Add  to  this,  that  some  of  them  who 
were  for  not  working,  wore  their  hair  long.  Whence  contentions  between 
those  who  reprehended  and  those  who  justified  the  practice,  were,  ac- 
cording to  their  party  affections,  increased.  On  these  accounts  the 
venerable  old  Aurelius,  Bishop  of  the  Church  of  the  same  city,  desired 
me  to  write  somewhat  of  this  matter ;  and  I  did  so.  This  book  begins, 
"  Jussioni  tuse,  sancte  frater  Aureli." 


This  work  is   placed  in   the  Retractations  nest  after  that  '  On  the  Good  of 
Marriage,'  which  belongs  to  the  year  401. 


1.  Thy  bidding,  holy  brother  Aurelius,  it  was  meet  that 
I  should  comply  withal,  with  so  much  the  more  devotion,  by 
how  much  the  more  it  became  clear  unto  me  Who,  out  of 
thee,  did  speak  that  bidding.  For  om-  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
dwelling  in  thine  inner  part,  and  inspiring  into  thee  a 
solicitude   of  fatherly   and    brotherly   charity,  whether  our 


Argument  of  Monks  against  manual  labour.         471 

sous  and  brothers  the  monks,  who  neglect  to  obey  blessed     de 
Paul    the   Apostle,  when   he    saith,   //"  any  wiU   not   work,  °jo^a^ 
neither  let  him  eat,  are  to  have  that  licence  permitted  unto    cho- 
them;  He,  assuming  unto  His  work  thy  will  and  tongue,  hath; 


2  Thess. 

connnanded  me  out  of  thee,  that  I  should  hereof  write  some-  'S,  lo. 
what  unto  thee.     May  He  therefore  Himself  be  present  with 
me  also,  that  I  may  Obey  in  such  sort  that  from  His  gift, 
in  the  very  usefulness  of  frmlful  labour,  I  may  understand 
that  I  am  indeed  obeying  Him. 

2.  First  then,  it  is  to  be  seen,  what  is  said  by  persons  of 
that  profession,  who  will  not  work :  then,  if  we  shall  find 
that  they  think  not  aright,  what  is  meet  to  be  said  for  their 
correction  ?  '  It  is  not,'  say  they,  '  of  this  corporal  work  in 
which  either  husbandmen  or  handicraftsmen  labour,  that  the 
Apostle  gave  preceipt,  when  he  said,  If  any  will  not  work, 
neither  let  him  eat.  For  he  could  not  be  contrary  to  the 
Gospel,  where  the  Lord  Himself  saith.  Therefore  I  say  unto  llatt.  6, 
you,  be  not  solicitous  for  your  life,  what  ye  shall  eat,  neither  " 
for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on.  Is  not  the  life  more 
than  meat,  and  the  body  than  raiment  ?  Consider  the  fouls 
of  heaven,  that  they  sow  not,  nor  reap,  nor  gatJier  into  barns ; 
and  your  heavenly  Father  feedsth  them.  Are  not  ye  rather 
of  more  worth  than  they?  But  who  of  you  by  taking  thought 
can  add  to  his  stature  one  cubit?  And  concerning  raiment, 
why  are  ye  solicitous  ?  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how 
they  grow;  they  labour  not,  neither  spin;  but  I  say  unto 
you,  that  not  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  arrayed  like 
one  of  these.  But  if  the  grass  of  tlie  field,  wliich  to-day  is, 
and  io-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  God  so  clothelh ;  how 
much  more  you,  {O  ye)  of  little  faith  I  Be  not  therefore 
solicitous,  saying.  What  shall  tve  eat,  or  what  shall  we 
drink,  or  wherewithal  shall  we  be  clad  ?  for  all  these  things 
do  the  Gentiles  seek.  And  your  heavenly  Father  knouelh 
that  ye  need  all  these.  But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  shall  be  added 
vnto  you.  Be  not  therefore  solicitous  for  the  morrow:  for 
the  morroiv  will  be  solicitous  for  itself.  Sufficient  unto  the 
day  is  the  evil  thereof.  Lo,  say  they,  where  the  Lord 
biddeth  "us  be  without  care  concerning  our  food  and 
clothing :    liow  then  could   the   Apostle  think   contrary  to 


472  Spiritual  work  alleged  as  sufficient. 

DE     the  Lord,  that  he  should  instruct  us  that  we  ought  to  be  in 
MONA-  such  sort  solicitous,  what  we   shall   eat,  or  what  we  shall 
c")-    drink,  or  wherewithal  we  shall  be  clothed,  that  he  should 
—even    burden    us    with    the    arts,    cares,    labours    of  handi- 
craftsmen ?     Wherefore   in  that   he   saith.   If  any  will  not 
work,  neither  let   him  eat ;    works  spiritual,  say  they,  are 
what  we  must  understand :    of  whicii   he   saith  in  another 
1  Cor. 3, place.  To  each   one  according  as  the  Lord  hath  given:   I 
^—^^-    have  planted,   Apollos    hath    watered;    hut   God  gave    the 
increase.      And   a  little   after.  Each    one  shall    receive  his 
reward  according  to  his  own  labour.      We  are  God\s  fellow- 
ivorkers ;    God's  husbandrg,  God's  building  are  ye :   accord- 
ing to  the  grace  which  is  given  unto  me,  as  a  ivise  master- 
builder  I  have  laid  the  foundation.    As  therefore  the  Apostle 
worketh    in   planting,  watering,   building,   and    foundation- 
laying,  in  that  way  whoso  will  not  work,  let  him  not  eat. 
For  what  profiteth  in  eating  spiritually  to  be  fed  with  the 
word  of  God,  if  he  do  not  thence  work  others'  edification  ? 
As  that  slothful  servant,  what  did  it  profit  to  receive  a  talent 
and  to  hide  it,  and  not  work  for  the  Lord's  gain  ?     Was  it 
that  it  should  be  taken  from  him  at  last,  and  himself  cast 
into  outer  darkness  ?    So,  say  they,  do  we  also.     We  read 
with  the  brethren,  who  come  to  us  fatigued  from  the  turmoil 
of  the   world,  that  with   us,   in   the   word  of  God,  and  in 
prayers,  psalms,  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs,  they  may  find 
rest.     We  speak  to  them,  console,  exhort,  building  up  in 
them  whatever  unto  their  life,  according  to  their  degree,  we 
perceive   to  be  lacking.      Such  works  if  we   wrought  not, 
with   peril    sliould   we    receive    of  the    Lord    our   spiritual 
sustenance  itself      For  this  is  it  the  Apostle  said.  If  any 
one  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat.     Thus  do  these  men 
deem  themselves  to  comply  with  the  apostolic  and  evangelic 
sentence,  when  both  the  Gospel  ihey  believe  to  have  given 
precept  concerning  the    not    caring   for   the    corporal    and 
temporal  indigence  of  this  life,  and  the  Apostle  concerning 
spiritual  work  and  food  to  have  said.  If  any  will  not  ivork, 
neither  let  him  eat. 
ii.         3.  Nor  do  they  attend  to  this,  that  if  another  should  say, 
that  *  the  Lord  indeed,  speaking  in  parables  and  "in  simili- 
tudes concerning  spiritual  food  and  clothing,  did  warn  that 


Our  Lord  forbade  care  for  earthly  goods.  473 

not  on  these  accounts  should  His  servants  be  solicitous;  (as  de 
He  saith,  JVkeii  they  shall  dray  you  to  judgment-seats,  take  ^ona- 
vo  thought  tvhat  ye  shall  speak.  For  it  ivill  be  given  you  in  cho- 
that  hour  what  ye  shall  speak  :  but  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  ^^^  ^q 
but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father  that  speaketh  in  you.  For  19.20. 
the  discourse  of  spiritual  wisdom  is  that  for  which  He 
would  not  that  they  should  take  thought,  promising  that 
it  should  be  given  unto  them,  nothing  solicitous  thereof;) 
but  the  Apostle  now,  in  manner  Apostolical,  more  openly 
discoursing  and  more  properly,  than  figm-atively  speaking, 
as  is  the  case  with  much,  indeed  well-nigh  all,  in  his 
Apostolic  Epistles,  said  it  properly  of  corporal  work  and 
food,  If  any  tcill  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat:  by  those 
would  their  sentence  be  rendered  doubtful,  unless,  con- 
sidering the  other  words  of  the  Lord,  they  should  find 
somewhat  whereby  they  might  prove  it  to  have  been  of 
not  caring  for  corporal  food  and  raiment  that  He  spake 
when  He  said,  Be  not  solicitous  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what 
ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye  shall  be  clothed.  As,  if 
they  should  observe  what  He  saith,  For  all  these  things  do 
the  Gentiles  seek;  for  there  He  shews  that  it  was  of  very 
corporal  and  temporal  things  that  He  spake.  So  then,  were 
this  the  only  thing  that  the  Apostle  has  said  on  this  subject, 
//'  any  will  not  work,  neitlier  let  him  eat;  these  words 
might  be  drawn  over  to  another  meaning:  but  since  in  many 
other  places  of  his  Epistles,  what  is  his  mind  on  this  point, 
he  most  openly  teaches,  they  superfluously  essay  to  raise 
a  mist  before  themselves  and  others,  that  what  that  charity 
adviseth  they  may  not  only  refuse  to  do,  but  even  to  under- 
stand it  themselves,  or  let  it  be  undertood  by  others ;  not 
fearing  that  which  is  written,  He  ivould  not  understand  that  Ps.36,3. 
he  might  do  good  ^. 

4.  First  then  we  ought  to  demonstrate  that  the  blessed  iii. 
Apostle  Paul  willed  the  servants  of  God  to  work  corpora] 
works  which  should  have  as  their  end  a  great  spiritual 
reward,  for  this  purpose  that  they  should  need  food  and 
clothing  of  no  man,  but  with  their  own  hands  should  procure 
these  for  themselves :  then,  to  shew  that  those  evangelical 
pi'ecepts  from  which  some  cherish  not  only  their  sloth  but 
*  Ps.  35,  4.  (36,  3.)  '  noluit  intelligere  ut  bene  ageret.' 


474  St.  PauVs  meaning  -proved  by  his  example. 

DE     even  arrogance,  are  not  contrary  to  the  Apostolical  precept 

MONA-  ^^^  example.     Let  us  see  then  whence  the  Apostle  came  to 

cHo-  this,  that  he  should  say,  If  any  will  not  work,  tieitlier  let  him 

aThes's. ^^^'  ^"*^^  what  he  thereupon  joineth  on,  that  from  the  very 

3,  G-12.  context^  of  this  lesson  may  appear  his  declared  sentence. 

1  t  cir- 

cum-  W^  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
stantia'  Christ,  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every  brother  that 
walketh  unquietly,  and  not  according  to  the  tradition  which 
2 '  ance-  they  have  received^  of  us.  For  yourselves  know  hoiu  ye 
^"^^"^  ought  to  imitate  us  ;  for  we  were  not  unquiet  among  you, 
neither  ate  we  bread  of  any  man  for  nought,  but  in  labour 
and  travail  night  and  day  working  that  we  might  not 
burden  any  of  you  :  not  for  that  we  have  not  power,  but 
that  we  might  give  ourselves  as  a  pattern  to  you  in  which  ye 
should  hnitate  us.  For  also  when  we  rvere  with  you,  we 
gave  you  this  charge,  that  if  any  ivill  not  ivork,  let  him  not 
eat.  For  we  have  heard  that  certain  among  you  walk 
unquietly,  ivorking  not  at  all,  but  being  busy-bodies.  Now 
them  that  are  such  we  charge  and  beseech  in  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  tvith  silence  they  work,  and  eat  their  own 
bread.  What  can  be  said  to  these  things,  since,  that  none 
might  thereafter  have  license  to  interpret  this  according  to 
his  wish,  not  according  to  charity,  he  by  his  own  example 
hath  taught  what  by  precept  he  hath  enjoined  ?  To  him, 
namely,  as  to  an  Apostle,  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel,  a  soldier 
of  Christ,  a  planter  of  the  viueyard,  a  shepherd  of  the  flock, 
had  the  Lord  appointed  that  he  should  live  by  the  Gospel ; 
and  yet  himself  exacted  not  the  pay  which  was  his  due,  that 
he  might  make  himself  a  pattern  to  them  which  desired  what 
was  not  their  due ;  as  he  saith  to  the  Corinthians,  Who 
goeth  a  warfare  at  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?  Who  plan  teth 
a  vineyard,  and  of  its  fruit  eateth  not  ?  Who  feedeth  a  f lock, 
and  of  the  milk  of  the  flock  parlakelh  not  ?  Therefore,  what 
was  due  to  him,  he  would  not  receive,  that  by  his  example 
they  might  be  checked,  who,  although  not  so  ordained  in 
the  Church,  did  deem  the  like  to  be  due  to  themselves.  For 
what  is  it  that  he  saith,  Neither  ate  we  bread  of  any  man 
for  nought,  hut  in  labour  and  travail  night  and  day  working 
that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you  ;  not  for  that  we  have 
not  power,  but  that  ?ce  might  yive  ourselves  as  a  pattern  to 


His  liheriy  not  to  icork  ivas  of  his  office.  475 

you  icltercin  ye  should  follow  us  ?    Let  them,  therefore,  hear     de 
to  whom  he  hath  given  this  precept,  that  i«,  they  which  have  mona- 
not  this  power  which  he  had,  to  wit,  that  while  only  spiritually   cho- 

RUM 

working  they  should  eat  bread  by  corporal  labour  not  earned ' :  j 

and  as  he  says,  We  charge  and  beseech  in  Christ  that  withinm 

silence    they  work  and  eat  their  own  bread,  let  them  not 

dispute    against   the    most  manifest  words    of  the  Apostle, 

because  this   also    pertaineth   to  that  '  silence'  with  which 

they  ought  to  work  and  eat  their  own  bread. 

5.  I  would,  however,  proceed  to  a  more  searching^  and     iv, 

diligent  consideration  and  handling  of  these  words,  had  I  ^^?"°  ^' 

not   other   places    of  his  Epistles  much  more  manifest,  by 

comparing  which,  both  these  are  made  more  clearly  manifest, 

and  if  these  were  not  in  existence,  those  others  would  suffice. 

To  the  Corinthians,  namel}-,  writing  of  this  same  thing,  he 

saith  thus,  Am  I  not  free  ?  am  I  not  an  Apostle^  ?    Have  /i  Cor. 

''  '  .9  1 7. 

not  seen  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord?  Are  not  ye  my  work  in  the  ' 

Lord  i    If  to  others  L  am  not  an  Apostle,  to  you  assuredly  I 

am.     For  the  seal  of  mine  Apostleship  are  ye  in  the  Lord. 

My  defence  to  them  which  interrogate  me  is  this.     Have  ive 

not  power  to  eat  and  to  drink  ?  Have  we  not  power  to  lead 

about  a  woman  who  is  a  sister^,  as  also  the  other  Apostles,^ '  sm-o- 

and  tlie  brethren  of  the  Lord,  and  Cephas?    See  how  first  J^-^j.^),^! ' 

he  shews  what  is  law^ful  to  him,  and  therefore  lawful  for  that 

he  is  an  Apostle.     For  with  that  he  began.  Am  I  not  free  ? 

am  J  not  an  Apostle  ?    and  j^roves  himself  to  be  an  Apostle, 

saying,  Have  I  not  seen  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord?  Are  not  ye 

my  work  in  the  Lord  ?     Which  being  proved,  he  shews  that 

to  be  lawful  to  him  which  was  so  to  the  other  Apostles ; 

that  is,  that  he  should  not  work  with  his  hands,  but  live  by 

the  Gospel,  as  the  Lord  appointed,  which  in  what  follows  he 

has  most  openly  demonstrated ;    for   to   this   end  did    also 

faithful  women  which  had  earthly  substance  go  with  them, 

and  minister  unto  them  of  their  substance,  that  they  might 

lack  none  of  those  things  which  pertain  to  the  necessaries  of 

this  life.     Which  thing   blessed   Paul    demonstrates   to  be 

lawful  indeed  unto  himself,  as  also  the  other  Apostles  did  it, 

but  that  he  had  not  chosen  to  use  this  power  he  afterwards 

i"  So  Griesbach  and  Lachmann.   But  text  recept.  Am  I  not  an  Apostle  ?  am 
I  not  free  ? 


476        Holy  ivomen  used  to  provide  for  the  Apostles. 

DE     mentions.     This    thing    some   not   understanding,  have  in- 
terpreted not  a  uonian  ivhich  is  a  sister,  when  he  said,  Have 
cHo-    ^,g  not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister  a  woman  ?    but,  a  sister 


OPERK 
MONA- 


RUM. 


a  wife.  They  were  misled  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  Greek 
word,  because  both  '  wife'  and  '  woman'  is  expressed  in 
Greek  by  the  same  word.  Though  indeed  the  Apostle  has 
so  put  this  that  they  ought  not  to  have  made  this  mistake ; 
for  that  he  neither  says  a  woman  merely,  but  a  sister 
woman;  nor  to  take  (as  in  marriage),  but  to  take  about  (as 
on  a  journey).  Howbeit  other  interpreters  have  not  been 
misled  by  this  ambiguity,  and  they  have  interpreted  icoman 
not  wife. 
V,  6.  Which  thing  whoso  thinks  cannot  have  been  done  by 

the  Apostles,  that  with  them  women  of  holy  conversation 
should  go  about  wheresoever  they  preached  the  Gospel,  that 
of  their  substance  they  might  minister  to  their  necessities,  let 
him  hear  the  Gos]3el,  and  learn  how  in  this  they  did  after 
the    example    of  the    Lord    Himself.      Our   Lord,   namely, 
according  to  the  wont  of  His  pity,  sympathising  with  the 
weak,  albeit   Angels   might   minister    unto  Him,  had    both 
a  bag  in  which  should  be  put  the  money  which  was  bestowed 
doubtless  by  good  and  believing  persons,  as  necessary  for 
their  living,  (which  bag  He  gave  in  charge  to  Judas,  that 
even  thieves,  if  we  could  not  keep  clear  of  such,  we  might 
learn  to  tolerate  in  the  Church.     He,  namely,  as  is  written 
»'«?//(?- of  him,  stole^  ivhat  was  put  therein:)  and  He  willed  that 
women  should  follow  Him  for  the  preparing  and  ministering 
what  was  necessary,  shewing  what  was  due  to  evangelists  and 
ministers  of  God  as  soldiers,  from  the  people  of  God  as  the 
provincials  ;    so  that  if  any  should  not  choose  to  use  that 
which  is  due  unto  him,  as  Paul  the  Apostle  did  not  choose, 
he  might  bestow  the  more  upon  the  Church,  by  not  exacting 
the  pay  which  was   due  to    him,  but  by  earning  his  daily 
living  of  his  own  labours.     For  it  had  been  said  to  the  inn- 
Lukeio,  keeper  to  whom  that  wounded  man  was  brought.  Whatever 
thou  layest  out  more,  at  my  coming  again  1  will  repay  thee. 
1  Cor.  9,  The  Apostle  Paul,  then,  did   lay  out  more,  in    that  he,  as 
and  2     himself  witnesseth,  did  at  his  own  charges  go  a  warfare.     In 
Cor.  iijjjjg  Gospel,  namely,  it  is  written.  Thereafter  also  Himself 
Luke  8,  was  making  a  journey  through  cities  and  villages  preaching 

1—3. 


The  Seventy  had  like  poiver  to  live  by  the  Gospel.    All 

and  evangelizing  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;    atid  lite  tivelve     de 
with  Him,  and  certain  loomen  ivhich  had  been  healed   of'^J^^f 
evil  spirits  and  infirmities :  Mary  who  is  called  Magdalene,    cho- 

R.TT  RT 

out  of  whom  seven  devils  had  gone  forth,  and  Joanna  wife  of - 

Chuza  Herod'' s  steward,  and  Susanna,  and  many  oilier s, 
who  ministered  unto  Him  of  their  substance.  This  example 
of  the  Lord  the  Apostles  did  imitate,  to  receive  the  meat 
which  was  due  unto  them  ;  of  which  the  same  Lord  most 
openly  speaketh :  As  ye  go,  saith  He,  preach,  saying,  77/e  Mat.io, 
kingdom,  of  heaven  is  at  hand.  Heal  the  sick,  raise  the 
dead,  cleanse  lepers,  cast  out  devils.  Freely  have  ye  received, 
freely  give.  Possess  not  gold  nor  silver  nor  money  in  your 
purses,  neither  scrip  oti  your  journey,  neither  two  coats, 
neither  shoes,  neither  staff :  for  the  ivorkman  is  worthy  of 
his  meat.  Lo,  where  the  Lord  appointeth  the  very  thing 
which  the  Apostle  doth  mention.  For  to  this  end  He  told 
them  not  to  carry  all  those  things,  namely,  that  where  need 
should  be,  they  might  receive  them  of  them  unto  whom  they 
preached  the  kingdom  of  God. 

7.  But  lest  any  should  fancy  that  tins  was  granted  only  to  vi. 
the  twelve,  see  also  what  Luke  relateth  :  After  these  things,  Lukeio 
saith  he,  the  Lord  chose  also  other  seventy  and  two,  and  sent  ^~"^* 
them  by  two  and  two  before  His  face  into  every  city  and 
place  tvhither  He  was  about  to  come.  And  He  said  unto 
them,  The  harvest  indeed  is  plentiful, but  the  labourers  few: 
ask  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  He  would  send 
forth  labourers  into  His  harvest.  Go  your  ways:  behold,  I 
send  you  as  lambs  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  Carry  neither 
purse  nor  scrip  nor  shoes,  and  salute  no  man  by  the  way. 
Lnto  whatsoever  house  ye  shall  enter,  first  say,  Peace  be  to 
this  house.  And  if  the  son  of  peace  be  there,  your  peace 
shall  rest  upon  him:  if  not,  it  shall  return  to  you.  And  in 
the  same  house  remain,  eating  and  drinking  such  tilings  as 
are  with  litem  :  for  the  ivorkman  is  worthy  of  his  hire. 
Here  it  appears  that  these  things  were  not  commanded,  but 
permitted,  that  whoso  should  choose  to  use,  might  use  that 
which  was  lawful  unto  him  by  the  Lord's  appointment ;  but 
if  any  should  not  choose  to  use  it,  lie  would  not  do  contrary 
to  a  thing  commanded,  but  would  be  yielding  up  his  own 
right,  by  demeaning  himself  more  mercifully  and  laboriously 
in  the  Gospel  in  the  which  he  would  not  accept  even  the 


478     W/ial  '  workincf  Paul  and  Barnabas  might  forbear. 

DE     hire  wliich  was  liis  due.     Otherwise  the  Apostle  did  contrary 

MONA-  to  a  command  of  the  Lord  :    for,  after  he  had  shewn  it  to  be 
cHo-  lawful  unto  him,  he  hath  straightway  subjoined.  Bat  yet  have 

/  not  used  this  power. 

vii.        8.  But  let  us  return  to  the  order  of  our  discourse,  and  the 
whole  of  the  passage  itself  of  the  Epistle  let  us  diligently 

1  licen-  consider.    Have  ue  «o/jSaith  he,  leave^  to  eat  and  to  drink'? 

'^'"  have  we  not  leave  to  lead  about  a  woman,  a  sister?  What 
leave  meant  he,  but  what  the  Lord  gave  imto  them  whom  He 
sent  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  saying,  Those  things 
which  are  {given)  of  them,  eat  ye" ;  for  the  workman  is 
worthy  of  his  hire  ;  and  proposing  Himself  as  an  example  of 
the  same  power,  to  Whom  most  faithful  women  did  of  their 
means  minister  such  necessaries  ?  But  the  Apostle  Paul  hath 
done  more,  from  his  fellow-Apostles  alleging  a  proof  of  this 
license  permitted  of  the  Lord.  For  not  as  finding  fault  hath 
he  subjoined,  As  do  also  the  other  Apostles,  and  the  brethren, 
of  the  Lord,  and  Cephas;  but  that  hence  he  might  shew 
that  this  which  he  would  not  accept  was  a  thing  which,"  that 
it  was  lawful  for  him  to  accept  w'as  proved  by  the  wont  of 
the  rest  also  his  fellow-soldiers.  Or  I  only  and  Barnabas, 
have  we  not  power  to  forbear  working  ?  Lo,  he  hath  taken 
away  all  doubt  even  from  the  slowest  heai'ts,  that  they  may 
understand  of  what  working  he  speaks.  For  to  what  end 
saith  he.  Or  I  only  and  Barnabas,  have  we  not  power  to 
forbear  IV orking  ?  but  for  that  all  evangelists  and  ministers 
of  God's  word  had  power  received  of  the  Lord,  not  to  work 
with  their  hands,  but  to  live  by  the  Gospel,  working  only 
spiritual  works  in  preaching  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and 
edifying  of  the  peace  of  the  Church  t  For  no  man  can  say 
that  it  is  of  that  very  spiritual  working  that  the  Apostle  said, 
Or  I  only  and  Barnabas,  have  ice  not  power  to  forbear 
working  ?  For  this  power  to  forbear  working  all  those  had  : 
let  him  say  then,  who  essays  to  deprave  and  pervert  precepts 
Apostolical;  lethim  say,  if  he  dares,thatall  evangelists  received 
of  the  Lord  power  to  forbear  preaching  the  Gospel.  But  if  this 
is  most  absurd  and  mad  to  say,  why  will  they  not  understand 
what  is  plain  to  all,  that  they  did  indeed  receive  power  not 
to  work,  but  works  bodily,  whereby  to  get  a  living,  because 

<^  Luke  10,  7.  '  Ea  qjiee  ah  ipsis  sunt.' 


They  worked  with  their  hands  for  the  Church''s  good.    479 

the  uorkman  is  norlliy  of  his  hire,  as  the  Gospel  speaks,      de 
It   is  not   therefore    that  Paul  and  Barnabas ,  only  had  not  mona- 
power  to  forbear  working;  but  that  all  alike  had  this  power,   ^h°' 

•        T  ^  •        /■  •  RUM* 

of  which  these  availed  not  themselves  in     lavmcr  out  more' 


^o 


upon  the  Church  ;  so  as  in  those  places  where  they  preached 
the  Gospel  they  judged  to  be  meet  for  the  weak.  And  for 
this  reason,  that  he  might  not  seem  to  have  found  fault  with 
his  fellow-Apostles,  he  goes  on  to  say  :  Who  yoeth  a  icarfare  i  Cor.9, 
at  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?  Who  feedeth  ajlock,  and  '~~  ' 
of  the  milk  of  the  flock  partnketJi  not  ?  Speak  I  these 
things  as  a  man  ?  Saith  not  the  Law  the  same  ?  For 
in  the  law  of  3Ioses  it  is  written,  Thou  shall  not  muzzle  the 
ox  that  treadelli  ont  the  corn.  Dotli  God  care  for  oxen  f 
Or  saith  he  it  for  our  sake  altogether?  For  our  sakes  truly 
is  it  written,  because  he  that  plougheth  ought  to  plough  in 
hope,  and  he  that  thresheth  in  hope  of  partaking  of  the 
fruits.  By  these  words  the  Apostle  Paul  sufficiently  indi- 
cates, that  it  was  no  usurping  unto  themselves  of  ought 
beyond  their  due  on  the  part  of  his  fellow-Apostles,  that  they 
wrought  not  bodily,  whence  they  might  have  the  things 
which  to  this  life  aie  necessary,  but  as  the  Lord  ordained, 
should,  living  by  the  Gospel,  eat  bread  gratuitously  given  of 
them  unto  whom  they  were  preaching  a  gratuitous  grace. 
Their  charges,  namely,  they  did  like  soldiers  receive,  and  of 
the  fruit  of  the  vineyard  by  them  planted,  they  did,  as  need 
was,  freely  gather  ;  and  of  the  milk  of  the  flock  which  they 
fed,  they  drank  ;  and  of  the  threshing-floor  on  which  they 
threshed,  they  took  their  meat. 

9.  But  he  speaks  more  openly  in  the  rest  which  he  subjoins,  viii. 
and  altogether  removes  all  causes  of  doubting.  If  tee  ^into 
you,  saith  he,  have  sown  spiritual  things,  is  it  a  great  matter 
if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal  things  ?  What  are  the  spiritual 
things  which  he  sowed,  but  the  word  and  mystery  of  the 
sacrament  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  And  what  the  carnal 
things  whicli  he  saith  he  had  a  right  to  reap,  but  these 
temporal  things  which  are  indulged  to  the  life  and  indigency 
of  the  flesh  .''  These  however  being  due  to  him  he  declares 
that  he  had  not  sought  nor  accepted,  lest  he  should  cause 
any  impediment  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  What  work 
remaineth  for  us  to  understand  him  to  have  wrought,  whereby 


480      Proof  that  St.  Paul  means  real  manual  labour. 

DE     he    should    get   his  living,  but  bodily  work,  with    his   own 
MONA-  bodily  and    visible  hands  ?     For  if  from   spiritual  work  he 
cHo-   sought  food  and  clothing,  that  is,  to  receive  these  of  them 


RUM 


whom  he  was  edifying  in  the  Gospel,  he  could  not,  as  he 
iCor.9,  does,  go  on  to  say,  If  others  be  partakers  of  this  power  over 
you,  are  not  ive  rather  ?  Nevertlieless,  we  have  not  used  this 
power,  but  tolerate  all  tilings  that  uw  may  not  cause  any 
hindrance  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  What  power  doth  he 
say  he  had  not  used,  but  that  which  he  had  over  them, 
received  of  the  Lord,  the  power  to  reap  their  carnal  things, 
in  order  to  the  sustenance  of  this  life  which  is  lived  in  the 
flesh  ?  Of  which  power  were  others  also  partakers,  who  did 
not  at  the  first  announce  the  Gospel  to  them,  but  came 
thereafter  to  their  Church  preaching  the  self-same.  There- 
fore, when  he  had  said,  If  we  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual 
things,  is  it  a  great  matter  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal 
things?  he  subjoined,  If  others  be  partakers  of  this  power 
over  you,  are  not  we  rather?  And  when  he  had  demonstrated 
what  power  they  had :  Nevertheless  we  have  not  used^  saith 
he,  this  power ;  but  ive  put  up  with  all  things,  lest  we  should 
cause  any  impediment  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Let  there- 
fore these  persons  say  in  what  way  from  spiritual  work  the 
Apostle  had  carnal  food,  when  himself  openly  says  that  he 
had  not  used  this  power.  But  if  from  spiritual  work  he  had 
not  carnal  food,  it  remains  that  from  bodily  work  he  had  it, 
2Tliess.  and  thereof  saith.  Neither  did  we  eat  a?iy  man's  bread  for 
'  '  nought;  but  wrought  tvith  labour  and  travail  night  and 
day,  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you  :  not 
because  we  have  not  poiver,  but  to  make  ourselves  an  example 
tmto  you  to  follow  us.  All  things,  saith  h.e,we  suffer,  lest  we 
cause  any  hindrance  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ. 
ix.  10.  And  he  comes  back  again,  and  in  all  ways,  over  and 

over  again,  enforcetli  what  he  hath  the  right  to  do,  yet  doeth 
iCor.9,  not.  Do  ye  not  know,  saith  he,  that  they  ivhicJt  work  in  the 
^^~^^'  temple,  eat  of  the  tilings  which  are  in  the  temple'?  they 
which  serve  the  altar,  have  their  share  with  the  altar  ?  So 
hath  the  Lord  ordained  for  them  which  preach  the  Gospel, 
to  live  of  the  Gospel.  But  I  have  used  none  of  these  things. 
What  more  open  than  this .?  what  more  clear  ?  I  fear  lest 
haply,  while  I  discourse  wishing  to  expound  this,  that  become 


Vain  a i tempts  to  wrest  his  meaning  refuted.         481 

obscure  which  in  itself  is  bright  and  clear.     For  they  who     de 
understand  not  these  words,  or  feign  not  to  understand,  do 
much  less  understand  mine,  or  proiess  to  understand  :  unless    cho- 


OPERE 

MONA- 


RUM. 


perchance  they  do  therefore  quickly  understand  ours,  be- 
cause it  is  allowed  them  to  deride  them  being  understood ; 
but  concerning  the  Apostle's  words  this  same  is  not  allowed. 
For  this  reason,  where  they  cannot  mterpret  them  otherv*'ise 
according  to  their  own  sentence,  be  it  ever  so  clear  and 
manifest,  they  answer  that  it  is  obscure  and  uncertain, 
because  wrong  and  perverse  they  dare  not  call  it.  Cries 
the  man  of  God,  The  Lord  hath  ordainad  fur  them  ivhich 
preach  the  Gospel,  of  this  Gospel  to  live ;  but  I  have  used 
none  of  these  things ;  and  flesh  and  blood  essayeth  to  make 
crooked  what  is  straight;  what  open,  to  shut;  what  serene, 
to  cloud  over.  '  It  was,'  saith  it,  '  spiritual  work  that  he  was 
doing,  and  thereof  did  he  live.'  If  it  be  so,  of  the  Gospel 
did  he  live  :  why  then  doth  he  say,  The  Lord  hath  ordained 
for  them  which  preach  the  Gospel,  of  the  Gospel  to  live;  hut 
I  have  used  none  of  these  things?  Or  if  this  very  word,  to 
live,  which  is  here  used,  they  will  needs  also  interpret  in 
respect  of  spiritual  life,  then  had  the  Apostle  no  hope 
towards  God,  in  that  he  did  not  live  by  the  Gospel, 
because  he  hath  said,  I  have  used  none  of  these  things. 
Wherefore,  that  he  should  have  certain  hope  of  life  eternal, 
the  Apostle  did  of  the  Gospel  in  any  wise  spiritually  live. 
What  therefore  he  saith.  But  I  have  used  none  of  these 
things,  doth  without  doubt  make  to  be  understood  of  this 
life  which  is  in  the  flesh,  that  which  he  hath  said  of  the 
Lord's  ordaining  to  them  which  preach  the  Gospel,  that  of 
the  Gospel  they  should  live ;  that  is,  this  life  which  hath 
need  of  food  and  clothing,  they  by  the  Gospel  shall  sustain  ; 
as  above  he  said  of  his  fellow-apostles ;  of  whom  the  Lord 
Himself  saith,  The  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat;  and.  The 
tvorkman  is  worthy  of  his  Itire.  This  meat,  then,  and  this  hire 
of  the  sustenance  of  this  life,  due  to  evangelists,  this  of  ihem 
to  whom  he  evangelized  the  Apostle  accepted  not,  saying  a 
true  thing,  1  have  used  none  of  these  things. 

11.  And  he  goes  on,  and  adjoins,  lest  perchance  any 
should  imagine  that  he  only  therefore  received  not,  because 
ihev  had  not  given:    But  I  have  not  written  these  things i Cor. 9, 

I  i  ^^- 


482  »S7.  Paul  had  no  right  to  maintenance  ivithout preaching. 

nE     tliat  they  may  he  so  done  unto  me:  good  is  it  for  me  rather 

MONA-  '^  ^^^^  than   that  any  make  void  my  glory.     What   glory, 

cHo-   unless  that  which  he  wished  to  have   with  God,  while  in 

—Christ  suffering  with  the  weak?    As  he  is  presently  about  to 

1  Cor.  9,  say  most  openly;  For  if  I  slut  II  have  preached  the  Gospel, 
there  is  not  to  ..te  any  glory:  for  necessity  is  laid  upon  me ; 
that  is,  of  sustaining  this  life.  For  woe  will  be  to  me,  he  saith, 
if  I  preach  not  the  Gospel :  that  is,  to  my  own  ill  shall  I 
forbear  to  preach  the  Gospel,  because  I  shall  be  tormented 
with  hunger,  and  shall  not  have  whereof  to  live.  For  he 
goes  on,  and  says;  For  if  ivillingly  I  do  this,  I  have  a 
reuard.  By  his  doing  it  willingly,  he  means,  if  he  do  it 
uncompelled  by  any  necessity  of  supporting  this  present  life; 
and  for  this  ho  hath  reward,  to  wit,  with  God,  of  glory  ever- 
V.  17.  lasting.  But  if  unwilling,  saith  he,  a  dispensation  is  en- 
trusted utito  me:  that  is,  if,  being  unwilling,  I  am  by 
necessity  of  passing  through  this  present  life,  compelled  to 
preach  ihe  Gospel,  a  dispensation  is  entrusted  unto  me;  to 
wit,  that  by  ray  dispensation  as  a  steward,  because  Christ, 
because  the  truth,  is  that  which  I  preach,  howsoever  because 
of  occasion,  howsoever  seeking  mine  own,  howsoever  by 
necessity  of  earthly  emolument  compelled  so  to  do,  other 
men  do  profit,  but  I  have  not  that  glorious  and  everlasting 
reward  with  God.  What  then,  saith  he,  shall  be  my  reward? 
He  saith  it  as  asking  a  question:  therefore  the  pronunciation 
must  be  sus])ended,  until  he  give  the  answer.  Which  the 
more  easily  to  understand,  let,  as  it  were,  us  put  the  question 
to  him,  '  What,  then,  will  be  thy  reward,  O  Apostle,  when 
that  earthly  reward  due  to  good  evangelists,  not  for  its  sake 
evangelizing,  but  yet  taking  it  as  the  consequence  and 
offered  to  them  by  the  Lord's  appointment,  thou  acceptest 
not  ?  What  shall  be  thy  reward  then  ?'  See  what  he  replies : 
That,  preaching  the  Gospel,  I  may  make  the  Gospel  of  Christ 
nithout  charge;  that  is,  that  the  Gospel  may  not  be  to 
believers  expensive,  lest  they  account  that  for  this  end  is 
the  Gospel  to  be  preached  to  them,  that  its  preachers  should 
seem  as  it  were  to  sell  it.  And  yet  he  comes  back  again  and 
again,  that  he  may  shew  what,  by  warrant  of  the  Lord,  he 
V- 18.  hath  a  right  unto,  yet  doeth  not :  that  I  abuse  not,  saith  he, 
w/y  power  in  the  Gospel. 


St. Paul co}i descended  to  the  weak  in  these  S^  other  things.  483 
12.  But  now,  that  as  bearing  with  the  infirmity  of  men  he     de 

O  PF  R.  E 

did  this,  let  us  hear  what  follows :  For  though  I  be  free  from  mona- 
all  men,  yet  have  I  made  myself  servant  unto  all,  that  I  might    ^^O" 
gain  the  more.    To  them  that  are  under  the  hno,  I  became  as  ~- 
under  the  law,  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  under  the  iCot.9, 
law;    to   them    that   are   without    law,    as    without    law,  ' 

{being  not  ivithout  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to 
Christ,)  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  without  law. 
Which  thing  he  did,  not  with  craftiness  of  simulation,  but 
with  mercy  of  compassion  with  others ;  that  is,  not  as  if  to 
feign  himself  a  Jew,  as  some  have  thought,  in  that  he 
obseiTed  at  Jerusalem  the  things  prescribed  by  the  old 
law*^.  For  he  did  this  in  accordance  with  his  free  and 
openly  declared  sentence,  in  which  he  says,  Is  any  called 
being  circumcised  ?  let  him  not  become  uncircumcised. 
That  is,  let  him  not  so  live,  as  though  he  had  become 
uncircumcised,  and  covered  that  which  he  had  laid  bare : 
as  in  another  place  he  saith.  Thy  circumcision  is  become  Rom.  2, 
iincircumcision.  It  was  in  accordance  then  with  this  his"''* 
sentence,  in  which  he  saith,  Is  any  called  being  circumcised?  1  Cor.  7, 

•  1  ft 

let  him  not  become  uncircumcised.  Is  any  called  in  uncir- 
cumcision?  let  him  not  be  circumcised;  that  he  did  those 
things,  in  which,  by  persons  not  understanding  and  not 
enough  attending,  he  has  been  accounted  to  have  feigned. 
For  he  was  a  Jew,  and  was  called  being  circumcised  ;  there- 
fore he  would  not  become  uncircumcised ;  that  is,  would  not 
so  live  as  if  he  had  not  been  circumcised.  For  this  he  now 
had  in  his  power  to  do.  And  under  the  law,  indeed,  he  was 
not  as  they  who  servilely  wrought  it;  but  yet  in  the  law  of 
God  and  of  Clmst.  For  that  law  was  not  one,  and  the  law 
of  God  another,  as  accursed  Manicheans  are  wont  to  say. 
Othenvise,  if  when  he  did  those  things  he  is  to  be  accounted 
to  have  feigned,  then  he  feigned  himself  also  a  pagan,  and 
sacrificed  to  idols,  because  he  says  that  he  became  to  those 
without  law,  as  without  law.  By  whom,  doubtless,  he 
would  have  us  to  understand  no  other  than  Gentiles  whom 
we  call  Pagans.  It  is  one  thing  therefore  to  be  under  the 
law,  another  in  the  law,  another  without  law.      Under  the 

">  S.  Jerome  in  Ep.  inter  Augustinianas,  75,  n.  9 — 11. 
I  i  2 


OPERE 
MONA 


4  84  How  those  not  under  theLaw  mlyhtuse  theLaw  in  kindnes. 

DE      law,  the  carnal  Jews ;  in  the  law,  spiritual  raen,  both  Jews 
and  Christians;  (whence  the  former  kept  that  custom  of  their 
cHo-   fathers,  but  did  not  impose   unwonted  burthens   upon  the 

RUM.  .  ^ 

believing  Gentiles ;  and  therefore  they  also  were  circum- 
cised;) but  witliout  lair,  are  the  Gentiles  which  have  not 
yet  believed,  to  whom  yet  the  Apostle  teslifieth  himself  to 
have  become  like,  through  sympathy  of  a  merciful  heart,  not 
simulation  of  a  changeable  exterior ;  that  is,  that  he  might 
in  that  way  succour  carnal  3e\\  or  Pagan,  in  which  way 
himself,  if  he  were  that,  would  have  wished  to  be  succoured: 
bearing,  to  wit,  their  infirmity,  in  likeness  of  compassion,  not 
deceiving  in  fiction  of  lying ;  as  he  straightway  goes  on,  and 

iCor.  9,  says,  /  became  to  the  weak  as  weak,  that  I  vtiaht  gain  the 

22  •  •  • 

•weak.  For  it  was  from  this  point  that  he  was  speakmg,  in 
saying  all  those  other  things.  As  then,  that  he  became  to 
the  weak  as  weak,  was  no  lie  ;  so  all  those  other  things 
above  rehearsed.  For  what  doth  he  mean  his  weakness 
towards  the  weak  to  have  been,  but  that  of  suffering  with 
them,  insomuch  that,  lest  he  should  appear  to  be  a  seller  of 
the  Gospel,  and  by  falling  into  an  ill  suspicion  with  ignorant 
men,  should  hinder  the  course  of  God's  word,  he  would  not 
accept  what  by  warrant  of  the  Lord  was  his  due  ?  Which  if 
he  were  willing  to  accept,  he  would  not  in  any  wise  lie, 
because  it  was  truly  due  to  him  ;  and  for  that  he  would  not, 
he  did  not  in  any  wise  lie.  For  he  did  not  say,  it  was  not 
due ;  but  he  shewed  it  to  be  due,  and  that  being  due  he  had 
not  used  itj  and  professed  that  he  would  not  at  all  use  it,  in 
that  very  thing  becoming  weak  ;  namely,  in  that  he  would 
not  use  his  power;  being,  to  wit,  Avith  so  merciful  affection 
endued,  that  he  thought  in  what  way  he  should  wish  to  be 
dealt  withal,  if  himself  also  vAcre  made  so  weak,  that  pos- 
sibly, if  he  shoidd  see  them  by  whom  the  Gospel  was 
preached  to  him,  accepting  their  charges,  he  might  think 
it  a  bringing  of  wares  to  market,  and  hold  them  in  suspicion 
accordingly, 
xii.  13.  Of  this  weakness  of  his,  he  saith  in  another  place.  We 
'  far-  made  ourselves  small  among  you,  even  as  a  nurse  cherisheth 
1  Thess.  ^^^^  children.  For  in  that  passage  the  context  indicates  this: 
2,  5—7.  Pqj.  neither  at  any  time,  saith  he,  used  we  flattering  words, 
as  ye  know,  nor  an  occasion  of  covetousness ;  God  is  witness: 


Sf.  Paul  u'ould  avoid  occasions  for  slander  or  abuse.     485 

nor  of  men  sought  toe  glory  ^  neither  of  you.,  nor  yet  of  others    de 
when  we  miaht  have  been  burdensome  to  you  as  the  Apostles  °^^^^ 

•/  -y  MONA- 

of  Christ:  but  we  made  ourselves  small  among  you,  even  as   cho- 
cs nurse  cherisheth  her  children.     What  therefore  he  sailh  to  —  ^'^' 
the  Corinthians,  that  he  had  power  of  his  apostleshij),  as  also 
the  other  Apostles,  which  power  he  testifieth  that  he  had  not 
used  ;  this  also  he  saith  in  that  place  to  the  Thessalonians, 
When  we  might  have  been  burdensome  to  you  as  Christ's 
Apostles:  according  to  that  the  Lord  saith,  The  workman  is 
icorthy  of  his  hire.     For  that  of  this  he  speaks,  is  indicated 
by  that  which  he  above  set  down.  Neither  for  occasion  of 
covetousness,   God  is  witness.      By  reason,  namely,  of  this 
which  by  right  of  the  Lord's  appointment  was  due  to  good 
evangelists,  who  not  for  its  sake  do  evangelize  but  seek  the 
kingdom  of  God,  so  that  all  these  things  shoidd  be  added 
unto  them,  others  were  taking  advantage  thereof,  of  whom 
he  also  saith,  For  they  that  are  such  serve  not  God,  but  their  Rom.16, 
oivn  belly.    From  whom  the  Apostle  washed  so  to  cut  off  this  ^^" 
occasion,  that  even  what  was  justly  due  to  him,  he  would 
forego.     For  this  himself  doth  openl}'  shew  in  the  second  to 
the  Corinthians,  speaking  of  other  Churches  supplying  bis 
necessities.     For  he  had  come,  as  it  appears,  to  so  great 
indigence,  that  from  distant  Churches  were  sent  supplies  for 
his  necessities,  while  yet  fi-om  them  among  whom  he  was,  he 
accepted  nothing  of  that  kind.     Have  I  committed  a  sin,  2C0r.11, 
saith   he,  in   humbling  myself  that  ye   might   be  excdted,'^~^'^' 
because  I  have  preached  to  you  the  Gospel  of  God  freely? 
Other  Churches  I  despoiled,  taking  wages  of  them  to  minister 
unto  you :  and  when  I  was  present  with  you  and  wanted,  to 
no  man  was  I  burdensome.     For  that  which  was  lacking  to 
me  the  brethren  which  came  from  Macedonia  supplied,  and 
in  all  things  I  have  kept  myself  from  being  burdensome  to 
you,  and  will  keep  myself.     It  is  the  truth  of  Christ  in  me, 
that  this  glory  shall  not  be  infringed  in  me  in  the  regions  of 
Achaia.     Wherefore?  because  I  love  you  not?    God knoweth. 
But  what  I  do,  I  also  mean  to  do,  that  I  may  cut  off  occasion 
from  them  which  seek  occasion,  that  wherein  they  glory  they 
may  be  found  as  also  we.     Of  this  occasion,  therefore,  which 
he  here  saith  that  he  cuts  off,  he  would  have  that  understood 
which  he  saith  in  the  former  place,  Neither  for  occasion  of 


486  Suspicion  avoided.     Repeated  Testimonies. 

DE     covetousness,  God  is  witness.     And  what  he  here  saith,  In 
MONA^  humbling  myself  that  ye  might  he  exalted:  this  in  the  first  to 
cHo-  the  same  Corinthianss  /  became  to  the  iceak  as  weak;  this  to 
rp,       the  Thessalonians,  /  became  small  among  you,  as  a  nurse 
2^'i—d.cherisheth  her  children.     Now  then  observe  what  follows: 
So,  saith   he,  being  affectionately  desirous  of  you,  we  are 
minded  to  impart  unto  you  not  alone  the  Gospel  of  God,  but 
our  own  souls  also ;  because  ye  are  become  most  dear  to  us. 
For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  toil,  night  and 
day  working,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you.    For  this 
he  said  above,    When  we  might  be  burdensome  to  you,  as 
Christ's  Apostles.      Because,  then,  the  weak  were  in  peril, 
lest,  agitated  by  false  suspicions,  they  should  hate  an,  as  it 
were,  venal  Gospel,  for  this  cause,  trembling  for  them  as  with 
a  father's  and  a  mother's  bowels  of  compassion,  did  he  this 
thing.     So  too  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  he  speaks  the 
same  thing,  when,  sending  froni  Miletus  to  Ephesus,  he  had 
called  thence  the  presbyters  of  the  Church,  to  whom,  among 
Acts  20,  much  else.  Silver,  saith  he,  and  gold,  or  apparel  of  no  man 
~    '  have  I  coveted;  yourselves  knoiv,  that  to  my  necessities  and 
theirs  who  were  with  me  these  hands  have  ministered.     In 
all  things  have  I  shewn  you  that  so  labouring  it  behoveth  to 
help  the  weak,  mindful  also  of  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
for  that  He  said.  More  blessed  is  it  rather  to  give  than  to 
receive. 
xiii.        14.    Here  peradventure  some   man  may  say,  '  If  it  was 
bodily  work  that  the  Apostle  wrought,  whereby  to  sustain 
this  life,  what  was  that  same  worl<,  and  when  did  he  find 
time  for  it,  both  to  work  and  to  preach  the  Gospel  .f"     To 
whom  I  answer  :  Suppose  1  do  not  know  ;  nevertheless  that 
he  did  bodily  work,  and  thereby  lived  in  the  flesh,  and  did 
not  use  the  power  which  the  Lord  had  given  to  the  Apostles, 
that  pi'eaching  the  Gospel  he  should  live  by  the  Gospel, 
those  things  abovesaid  do  without  all  doubt  bear  witness. 
For  it  is  not  either  in  one  place  or  briefly  said,  that  it  should 
be  possible  for  any  most  astute  arguer  with  all  his  tergiver- 
sation to  traduce  and  pervert  it  to  another  meaning.     Since 
then  so  great  an  authority,  with  so  mighty  and  so  frequent 
blows  mauling  the  gainsayers,  doth   break  in  i:)ieces  their 
contrariness,  why  ask  they  of  me  either  what  sort  of  work  he 


Honest  trades.  VVhocan  ivant  leisure  whenPaiilcouldivork?AQ7 

did,  or  when  he  did  it  ?     One  thing  I  know,  that  he  neither     de 
did    steal,    nor    was    a   housebreaker   or   highwayman,    nor  mona- 
chariot- driver  or  hunter  or  phiyer,  nor  given  to  filthy  lucre  :    ^h^" 

but  innocently  and  honestly  wrought  things  which  are  fitted 

for  the  uses  of  men ;  such  as  are  the  works  of  carpenters, 
builders,  shoemakers,  peasants,  and  such  like.     For  honesty 
itself  reprehends  not  what  their  pride  doth  reprehend,  who 
love  to  be  called,  but  love  not  to  be,  honest.     The  Apostle 
then  would  not  disdain  either  to  take  in  hand  any  work  of 
peasants,  or  to  be  employed  in  the  labour  of  craftsmen.     For 
he  who  saith.  Be  ye  ivithout  offence  to  Jens  and  to  Greeksi  Cor. 
and  to  the  Church  of  God,  before  what  men  he  could  possibly     ' 
stand  abashed,  I  know  not.     If  they  shall  say,  the  Jews;  the 
Patriarchs  fed  cattle :    if  the   Greeks,   whom  we    call    also 
Pagans  ;  they  have  had  philosophers,  held  in  high  honour, 
who  were  shoemakers:  if  the  Church  of  God;  that  just  man, 
elect  to  the  testimony  of  a  conjugal  and  ever-during  virginity, 
to  whom  was  betrothed  the  Virgin  Mary  who  bore  Christ, 
was  a  carpenter.      "Wliatever  therefore  of  these  with  inno-Mat.i3, 
cence  and  without  fraud  men  do  work,  is  good.     For  the  ''' 
Apostle  himself  takes  precaution  of  this,  that  no  man  through 
necessity  of  sustaining  life  should  turn  aside  to  evil  works. 
Let  him.  that  stole,  saith  he,  steal  no  more;  but  rather  /e^Eph.  4, 

28 

him  labour  good  with  his  hands,  that  he  may  have  to  imijart  to 
him  that  needeth.  This  then  is  enough  to  know,  that  also  in 
the  very  work  of  the  body  the  Apostle  did  work  that  which 
is  good. 

15.    But  when  he  might   use   to   work,  that  is,  in  what 
spaces  of  time,  that  he  might  not  be  hindered  fi'om  preaching 
the   Gospel,  who   can  make   out }     Though,  truly,  that  he  i  Thess. 
wrought  at  hours  of  both  day  and  night  himself  hath  not  left2'Thess. 
untold.     Yet  these  men  truly,  who  as  though  very  full  of.3>  8- 
business  and  occupation  inquire  about  the  time  of  working,    ^^  ' 
what  do  they?     Have  they  from  Jerusalem  round  about  evenEom.lo, 
to  Illyricum  filled  the  lands  with  the  Gospel  ?   or  whatever  of    ' 
barbarian  nations  hath  remained  yet  to  be  gone  unto,  and  to 
be  filled  of  the  peace  of  the  Church,  have  they  undertaken  ? 
We  know  them  into  a  certain  holy  society  most  leisurely 
gathered  together.     A  marvellous  thing  did  the  Apostle,  that 
in  very  deed  amid  his  so  great  care  of  all  the  Churches,  both 


488  St.  Paul  caused  some  to  receive  sustenance/or  preach  ing. 

DE  planted  and  to  be  planted,  to  his  care  and  labour  apper- 
MONA-  taiuing,   he  did    also   with    his    hands   work :    yet    on    that 

cHo-  account,  when  he  was  with  the  Corinthians,  and  wanted,  was 

'-  burdensome  to  no  man  of  those  among  whom  he  was,  but 

2  Cor.    altogether  that  which  was  lacking  to  him  the  brethren  which 

11    9  .  . 

'    *     came  from  Macedonia  supplied. 

XV'.  16.  For  he  himself  also,  with  an  eye  to  the  like  necessities 
of  saints,  who,  although  they  obey  his  precepts,  that  with 
silence  they  work  and  eat  their  own  breads  may  yet  from 
many  causes  stand  in  need  of  somewhat  by  way  of  supple- 
ment to  the  like  sustenance,  therefore,  after  he  had  thus  said, 

2  Thess.  teaching  and  premonishino;,  Now  them  which  are  such  we 

3  12  13 

'    '    'command  and  beseech  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with 
silence  they  work  and  eat  their  own  bread;  yet,  lest  they 
which    had  whereof  they  might    supply  the    needs    of  the 
servants  of  God,  should  hence  take  occasion  to  wax  lazy, 
providing  against  this  he  hath   straightway  added,  But  ye, 
'^infir-   brethren,  become  not  weak  in  shelving  beneficence'^.     And 
«e/aej-"when  he  was  writing  to  Titus,  saying,  Zenas  the  lawyer  and 
entes.     Apollos  do  thou  diligently  send  forward,  that  nothing  may 
13. 14.   be  ivanting  to  them;  that  he  might  shew  from  what  quarter 
nothing  ought  to  be  wanting  to  them,  he  straightway  sub- 
joined. But  let  ours  also  learn  to  maintain  good  works^  for 
necessary  use,  that  they  be  not  unfruitfid.     In  the  case  of 
JTim.i,  Timothy  also,  whom  he  calls  his  own  most  true"  son,  because 
2'"germa-he  knew  him  weak  of  body,  (as  he  shews,  in  advising  him  not 

nissi-     ^Q  drink  water,  but  to  use  a  little  wine  for  his  stomach's  sake 

mum.  ,  ,  .        »         .    ^       .  . 

iTim.5,  and  his  often  infirmities,)  lest  then  haply,  because  in  bodily 

work  he  could  not  labom*,  he  being  unwilling  to  stand  in 

need  of  daily  food  at  their  hands,  unto  whom  he  ministered 

the  Gospel,  should  seek  some  business  in  which  the  stress  of 

his  mind  would  become  entangled ;  (for  it  is  one  thing  to 

labour  in  body,  with  the  mind  fiee,  as  does  a  handicraftsman, 

if  he  be  not  fraudulent  and  avaricious  and  greedy  of  his  own 

private  gain  ;  but  another  thing,  to  occupy  the  mind  itself 

with  cares  of  collecting  money  without  the  body's  labour,  as 

do  either  dealers,  or  bailiffs,  or  undertakers,  for  these  with 

care  of  the  mind  conduct  their  business,  not  with  their  hands 

do  work,  and  in  that  regard  occupy  their  mind  itself  with 

b  bonis  operihus  prtecssc.  xtt.Xu^'i^yiut  •x^o'tc'Ta.afa.i.   E.  V.  in  margin,  ^profess 
honest  frafk's,' 


mum 

IT 

23, 


Better  to  do  so  than  engage  in  ivoi-lcllij  cares.        489 

solicitude  of  getting;)  lest  then  Timothy  should  fall  upon  such     de 
like  ways,  because  from  weakness  of  body  he  could  not  work  mona- 
with  his  hands,  he  thus  exhorts,  admonishes,  and  comforts   ^^'^- 

RUM 

him:  Labour,  saith  he,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ. ^^^ 
No  man,  going  a  warfare  for  God,  entangleth  himself  icith^,3—&. 
secular  business  ;  that  he  may  please  Him  to  whom  he  hath 
froved  himselj  '.     For  he  that  strivethfor  masteries,  is  not^  c?d  se 
crowned  except  he  strive  laufully.     Hereupon,  lest  the  other{!/^^  "" 
should  be  put  to  straits,  saying,  Dig  I  cannot,  to  beg  I  a?n'i-n^ei6, 
ashamed,  he  adjoined.  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  must 
be  first  partaker  of  the  fruits :  according  to  that  which  he 
had  said  to  the  Corinthians,  Who  goeth  a  warfare  any  ti)ne\  Cor. 9, 
at  his  own  charges^      Who  planteth  a  vineyard,  and  eateth" 
not  of  the  fruit  thereof?    Who  feedeth  a  flock,  and  partaketh 
not  of  the  milk  of  the  flock  ?     Thus  did  he  make  to  be  with- 
out care  a  chaste  evangelist,  not  to  that  end  working  as  an 
evangelist  that  he  might  sell  the  Gospel,  but  yet  not  having 
strength    to    supply  unto    himself  with  his  own  hands   the 
necessities  of  this  life ;  for  that  he  should  understand  what- 
ever being  necessary  for  himself  he  was  taking  of  them  whom 
as  provincials  lie  as  a  soldier  was  serving,  and  whom  as  a 
vineyard  he  was  culturing,  or  as  a  flock  was  feeding,  to  be 
not  matter  of  mendicity,  but  of  power. 

J  7.  On  account  then  of  these  either  occupations  of  the    xvi. 
servants    of  God,    or   bodily    infirmities,   which    cannot  be 
altogether  wanting,   not  only   doth  the   Apostle  permit  the 
needs  of  saints  to  be  supplied  by  good  believers,  but  also 
most  wholesomely  exhorteth.     For,  setting  apart  that  power', 
which  he   saith  himself  had  not  used,   which  yet  that  the 
faitlifid  nuist  serve  vmto,  he  enjoins,  saying,  Let  him  that  isGal.  6, 
catechized  in  the  word,  communicate   unto  liiin  that  doth 
catechize  liim,  in  all  good  things:   setting  apart,  then,  this 
power,  which  that  the  preachers  of  the  word  have  over  them 
to  whom  they  preach,  he  often  testifieth;  speaking,  more- 
over, of  the  saints  who  had  sold  all  that  they  had  and  dis- 
tributed the  same,  and  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  in  an 
holy  commimion  of  life,  not  saying  that  any  thing  was  their 
own,  to  whom  all  things  were  in  common,  and  their  soul  and  Acts  2 
heart  one  in  the  Lord:  that  these  by  the  Churches  of  the^^'  ^> 
Gentiles  should  have  what  they  needed  bestowed  upon  them. 


490    The  Corinthians  exhorted  to  relieve  the  saints  in  Judaea. 

DE     he   chavgeth   and  exhorteth.      Thence  is  also  that  to   the 

MONA-  Romans:  Now  therefore  I  icill  go  tinto  Jerusalem^  to  minister 

<^Ho-   unto  the  saints.     For  it  hath  pleased  Alacedonia  and  Achaia 

RUM.  .  '  /.     ,  • 

Eom  15  ^^  make  a  certain   contribution  for  the  poor  of  the  saints 
25—27.  tchich  are  at  Jerusalem.     For  it  hath  pleased  them ;  and 
their  debtors  they  are.     For  if  in  their  spiritual  things  the 
Gentiles  have  communicated,  they  ought  also  in  carnal  things 
to  minister  unto  them.     This  is  like  that  Avhich  he  says  to 
iCor.  9,  the  Corinthians:   If  tee  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual  tilings, 
is  it  a  great  thing  if  we  reap  your  carnal  things  ?    Also  to 
2 Cor. 8, the  Corinthians  in  the  second  Epistle:  Moreover,  brethren, 
we  do  you  to  ivit  of  the  grace  of  God  bestowed  on  the  Churches 
of  Macedonia;  how  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction   the 
abundance  of  their  joy  and  their  deep  ^loverty  abounded  in 
the  riches  of  their  liberality ;  for  to  their  power,  I  bear 
record,  yea,  and  beyond  their  power,  they  were  willing  of 
themselves ;   with  many  j)rayers  beseeching  of  us  the  grace 
and  the  fellowship  of  the  ministering  to  the  saints :  and  not 
as  we  hopjed,  but  first  they  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord, 
and  unto  us  by  the  will  of  God,  insomuch  that  we  desired 
Titus,  that  as  he  had  begun,  so  he  would  also  finish  in  you 
the  same  grace  also.     But  as  ye  abound  in  every  thing,  in 
faith,  and  utterance,  and  knowledge,  and  in  all  diligence, 
and  in  your  love  to  us,  see  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace 
also.     I  spjeak  not  by  commandment,  but  by  occasion  of  the 
forwardness  of  others,  and  to  prove  the  exceeding  dearness 
of  your  love.     For  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that,  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  He  be- 
came poor,  that  ye  through  His  poverty  might  be  made  rich. 
And  herein  I  give  advice:  for  this  is  expedient  for  you,  who 
have  begun  before,  not  only  to  do,  but  also  to  be  willing  a 
year  ago;   now  therefore  perfect  it  in  the  doing;   that  as 
there  is  a  readiness  to  will,  so  of  pierformance  also  out  of 
that  which  each  hath.     For  if  there  be  first  a  ready  mind,  it 
is  acceptable  according  to  that  a  man  hath,  not  according  to 
that  he  hath  not.     Not,  oiamely,  that  others  may  have  ease, 
and  ye  straits:  but  by  an  equality,  that  now  at  this  time 
your  abundance  may  be  a  sup)p)ly  for  their  ivant,  that  their 
abundance  also  may  become  a  supply  for  your  want:  that 
there  may  be  equality,  as  it  is  written,  He  that  had  gathered 


To  supply  the  need  of  God's  saints  is  a  gain  to  the  doer.  491 

7m(ch  had  nothing  over ;  and  he  that  had  gathered  little  had    de 
no  lack.     But  thanks  be  to  God,  ichich  put  the  same  earnest  ^'^^^J' 
carefor  you  into  the  heart  of  Titus:  for  indeed  he  accepted  cho- 
the  exhortation ;  but  being  more  forward,  of  his  own  accord— — — 
he  went  forth  unto  you.     And  we  have  sent  icith  him  the 
brother,  ivhose  praise  is  in  the  Gospel  throughout  all  the 
Churches;  and  not  that  only,  but  he  was  also  ordained  of 
the  Churches  as  a  coinpanion  of  our  travail,  with  this  grace 
which  is  administered  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and 
our  ready  mind:  avoiding  this,  that  no  man  should  blame  us 
in  this  abundance  which  is  administered  by  us.     For  we 
provide  for  honest  things,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord, 
but  also  in  the  sight  of  men.     In  these  words  appeareth  how 
much  '  ihe  Apostle  willed  it  not  only  to  be  the  care  of  the 
holy    congregations'   to    minister   necessaries   to   the    holy  i  pie- 
servants  of  God,  giving  counsel  in  this,  because  this  was 
profitable  more  to  the  persons  themselves  who  did  this,  than 
to  them  towards  whom  they  did  it,  (for  to  those  another 
thing  was  profitable,  that  is,  that  they  should  make  of  this 
service  of  their  brethren  towards  them  an  holy  use,  and  not 
with  an  eye  to  this  serve  God,  nor  take  these  things  but  to 
supply  necessity,  not  to  feed  laziness :)  but  likemse  his  own 
care  the  blessed  Apostle  saidi  to  be  so  great  in  this  minis- 
tration which  was  now  in  transmitting  through  Titus,  that  a 
companion  of  his  journey  was  on  this  account,  he  tells  us, 
ordained  by  the  Churches,  a  man  of  God  well  reported  of, 
whose  praise,  says  he,  is  in  the  Gospel  throughout  all  the 
Churches.     And  to  this  end,  he  says,  was  the  same  ordained 
to  be  his  companion,  that  he  might  avoid  men's  reprehen- 
sions, lest,   without  witness  of  saints  associated  with  him 
in  this  ministry,  he  should  be  thought  by  weak  and  impious 
men  to  receive  for   himself  and    turn    aside  into   his   own 
bosom,  what  he  was  receiving  for  supplying  the  necessities 
of  the  saints,  by  him  to  be  brought  and  distributed  to  the 
needy. 

18.    And   a   little    after   he    saith.    For   as   touching   the^CoT.9. 
ministering  to  the  saints,  it  is  superfluous  for  me  to  write 
to  you.     For  I  know  the  forwardness  of  your  mind,  for 
which  I  boast  of  you  to  them  of  Macedonia,  that  Achaia 

'  Bead  perhaps  '  quantam ;'  '  how  great  the  A  postle  willed  to  be  the  care.' 


492  St.  Paul's  joy  in  tlte  liberality  of  Believers. 

DE  was  ready  a  year  ago ;  and  your  zeal  hath  provoked  very 
MONA-  "tnany.  Yet  have  we  sent  the  brethren,  lest  our  boasting  of 
cHo-   you  shoidd  be  in  vain  in  this  behalf ;    that,  as  I  said,  ye 

g-Q — Q  may  be  ready  :   lest  haply  if  they  of  Macedonia  come  with 
me,    and  find  you   unprepared,  we  {that   ive   say  not,  ye) 
shoidd  be  ashamed  in  this  sidjstance.      Therefore  I  thought 
it  necessary  to  exhort  the  brethren,  that  they  woiUd  go  before 
unto  you,  and  make  up  beforehand  this  your  long  promised 
benediction,  that  the  same  might  be  ready,  as  benediction, 
and  not  as  covetousness.     But  this  I  say.  He  which  soweth 
sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly ;    and  he  which  soweth 
in  benediction  shall  reap  also  in  benediction.     Every  man 
according  as  he  hath  purposed  in  his  heart,  not  grudgingly, 
or  of  necessity  :  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver.     And  God 
is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  in  you ;  that  ye,  always 
having  all  siifficiency  in  all  things,  may  abound  to  every 
good  work  :    as  it  is  icritten.  He  hath  dispersed  abroad ;    he 
hath  given  to  the  jmor :   his  righteousness  remaineth  for 
ever.     But  He  that  ministereth  seed  to  the  sower  will,  both 
7ninister  bread  for  your  food,  and  mxdtiply  your  seed  sown, 
and  increase  the  groicing  frtiits  of  your  righteousness ;   that 
ye  may  be  enriched  in  every  thing  to  all  bountifulness,  which 
causeth  through  us  thanksgiving  to  God:  for  the  administra- 
tion of  this  service  not  only  suptplieth  the  want  of  the  saints, 
but  makes  them  also  to  abound  by  thanksgiving  unto  God  of 
many,  whiles  by  the  proof  of  this  ministration  they  glorify 
God  for  the  obedience  of  your  confession  unto  the  Gospel 
of  Christ,  and  for  your  liberal  distribution  unto  them,  and 
unto  all  men  ;    and  in  the  praying  for  you  of  them  which 
long  after  you  for  the  excellent  grace  of  God  in  you.     Thanks 
be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift.     In  what  richness  of 
holy  gladness  must  the  Apostle  have  been  steeped,  while  he 
speaks  of  the  mutual  supply  of  the  need  of  Christ's  soldiers 

'  pro-  and  His  other  subjects',  on  the  one  part  of  carnal  things  to 
those,  on  the  other  of  spiritual  things  to  these,  to  exclaim  as 
he  does,  and  as  it  were  in  re])letion  of  holy  joys  to  burst 

« '  eruc-out-  with,  Thanks  be  to  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift! 

19.  As  therefore  the  Apostle,  nay  rather  the  Spirit  of  God 
possessing  and  filling  and  actuating  his  heart,  ceased  not  to 
exliort  the  faithful  who   had    such  substance,  that  nothing 


vinci- 
alium 


tuare' 


Psalinodij  no  hindrance  to  buililij  labour.  493 

sliould  be  lacking  to  the  necessities  of  the  servants  of  God,     de 
who  wished  to  hold  a  more  lofty  degree  of  sanctity  in  the  mona- 
Church,  in  cutting  ofTall  ties  of  secular  hope,  and  dedicating    cho- 
a  mind  at  liberty  to  their  godly  service  of  warfare  :    likewise  — ■ — '— 
ought  themselves  also  to  obey  his  precepts,  in  sympathising 
with  the  weak,  and  unshackled  by  love  of  private  wealth,  to 
labour  with  their  hands  for  the  common  good,  and  submit  to 
their  sujieriors  Avitliout  a  murmur  ;    that  there  may  be  made 
up    for  them    out  of  the  oblations  of  good   believers  that 
which,  while  they  labour  and  do  some  work  whereby  they 
may  get  their  living,  yet  still  by  reason  of  bodily  infirmities 
of  some,    and    by    reason  of  ecclesiastical    occupations    or 
erudition  of  the  doctrine  which  bringeth  salvation,  they  shall 
account  to  be  lacking. 

20.   For  what  these  men  are  about,  who  will  not  do  bodily   xvii. 
work,  to  what  thing  they  give  uj)  their  time,  I  should  like  to 
know.     '  To  prayers,'  say  they,  '  and  psalms,  and  reading, 
and  the  word  of  God.'     A  holy  life,  unquestionably,  and  in 
sweetness  of  Christ  worthy  of  praise  ;  but  then,  if  from  these 
we  are  not  to  be  called  off,  neither  must  we  eat,  nor  our  daily 
viands  themselves  be  prepared,  that  they  may  be  put  before  us 
and  taken.    Now  if  to  find  time  for  these  things  the  servants  of 
God  at  certain  intervals  of  times  by  very  infirmity  are  of 
necessity  compelled,  why  do  we  not  make  account  of  some 
portions  of  times  to  be  allotted  also  to  the  observance  of 
Apostolical  precepts  ?     For  one  single   prayer  of  one  who 
obeyeth   is    sooner  heard  than  ten  thousand  of  a  despiser. 
As  for  divine  songs,  however,  they  can  easily,  even  while 
working  with   their  hands,  say  them,  and  like  as  rowers  with 
a  boat-song',  so  with  godly  melody  cheer  up  their  very  toil.'  celeu- 
Or   are  we    ignorant  how  it   is  with  all  workmen,   to  what 
vanities,  and  for  the  most  part  even  filthinesses,  of  theatrical 
fables  they  give  their  hearts  and  tongues,  while  their  hands 
recede  not  from  their  work  ?  What  then  hinders  a  servant  of 
God  while  working  with  his  hands  to  meditate  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  and  sing  unto  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Most  High?  Ps.1,2. 
provided,  of  course,  that  to  learn  what  he  may  by  memory     ' 
reheai'se,  he  have  times  set  apart.     For  to  this  end  also  those 
good   works  of  the    faithful    ought   not   to  be    lacking,  for 
resource    of  making  up  what  is  necessary,  that  the  hours 


494  Special  times  fur  preaching,  uwrking,  S^c. 

DR     which  are  so  taken  up  in    storing  of  the  mind  that  those 

MONA-  bodily  works  cannot  be  carried  on,  may  not  oppress  with 

cHo-   vvant.     But  they  which  say  that  they  give  up  their  time  to 

'-  reading,  do    they    not    there    find    that    which   the  Apostle 

enjoineth  ?  Then  what  perversity  is  this,  to  refuse  to  be 
ruled  by  his  reading  while  he  wishes  to  give  up  his  time 
thereto  ;  and  that  he  may  spend  more  time  in  reading  what 
is  good,  therefore  to  refuse  to  do  what  is  read  ?  For  who 
knows  not  that  each  doth  the  more  quickly  profit  when  he 
reads  good  things,  the  quicker  he  is  in  doing  what  he 
reads  ? 
xviii.  21.  Moreover,  if  discourse  must  be  bestowed  upon  any, 
and  this  so  take  up  the  speaker  that  he  have  not  time  to 
work  with  his  hands,  are  all  in  the  monastery  able  to  hold 
discourse  unto  brethren  which  come  unto  them  from  another 
kind  of  life,  whether  it  be  to  expound  the  divine  lessons,  or 
concerning  any  questions  wliich  may  be  put,  to  reason  in  an 
wholesome  manner  ?  Then  since  not  all  have  the  ability, 
why  upon  this  pretext  do  all  want  to  have  nothing  else  to 
do  ?  Although  even  if  all  were  able,  they  ought  to  do  it  by 
turns;  not  only  that  the  rest  might  not  be  taken  up  from 
necessary  works,  but  also  because  it  sufiiceth  that  to  many 
hearers  there  be  one  speaker.  To  come  now  to  the  Apostle; 
how  could  he  find  time  to  work  with  his  hands,  unless  for 
the  bestowing  of  the  word  of  God  he  had  certain  set  times  ? 
And  indeed  God  hath  not  willed  this  either  to  be  hidden 
from  us.  For  both  of  what  craft  he  was  a  workman,  and  at 
what  times  he  was  taken  up  with  dispensing  the  Gospel, 
holy  Scripture  has  not  left  untold.  Namely,  Avhen  the  day 
of  his  departure  caused  him  to  be  in  haste,  being  at  Troas, 
even  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  when  the  brethren  were 
assembled  to  break  bread,  such  was  his  earnestness,  and  so 
Acts20,  necessary  the  disputation,  that  his  discourse  was  prolonged 
'  ■  even  until  midnight,  as  though  it  had  slipped  from  their  minds 

that  on  that  day  it  was  not  a  fast^:  but  when  he  was  making 
longer  stay  in  any  place  and  disputing  daily,  who  can  doubt 
that  he  had  certain  hours  set  apart  for  this  office  ?    For  at 

^  S.  Augustine  therefore  assumes  receiving  the  Eucharist.  See  St.  Chrys. 
that  the  Christians  of  the  Apostolic  on  Stat.  Horn.  ix.  §.  2.  Tr.  p.  J 59,  and 
age    did   not   break   their   fast   before     note  g. 


St.  PauVs  hours  of  preaching ;  his  handicraft.      495 

Athens,  because  he  had  there  found  most  studious  inquirers     de 
of  things,  it  is  thus  written  of  him :    He  disputed  therefore  ^q^a^ 
with  the  Jews  i/i  the  sijnagoyue^  and  with  the  Gentile  in-    cho- 
habitants^  in  the  market  every  day  to  those  ivho  were  there. 


Acts  17, 
Not,  namely,  in  the  synagogue  every  day,  for  there  it  wasi7. 18. 

his  custom  to  discourse  on  the  sabbath  ;    but  in  the  market^    ' 
saith  he,  every  day ;    by  reason,  doubtless,  of  the  studious- 
ness  of  the  Athenians.     For  so  it  follows  :    Certain  however 
of  the  Epicurean  and  Stoic   philosopjhers   conferred   with 
him.     And  a  little  after,  it  says  :    Now  the  Athenians  and 
strangers  which  icere  there  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else 
hut  either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some  new  thing.    Let  us  suppose 
him  all  those  days  that  he  was  at  Athens  not  to  have  worked: 
on  this  account,  indeed,  was  his  need  supplied  from  Mace- 
donia, as  he  says  in  the  second  to  the  Corinthians  :  though  2  Cor. 
in  fact  he  could  work  both  at  other  hours  and  of  nights,     '    * 
because  he  Avas   so   strong  in  both  mind  and  body.     But 
when  he  had  gone  from  Athens,  let  us  see  what  says  the 
Scripture  :    He  disputed,  saith  it,  in   the  synagogue  every  Acts  18, 
sabbath  ;  this  at  Corinth.     In  Troas,  however,  where  through  *• 
necessity  of  his  departure  being  close  at  hand,  his  discourse 
was  protracted  until   midnight,  it  was   the   first  day  of  the 
week,  which  is  called  the  Lord's  Day  :    whence  we  under- 
stand that  he  was  not  with  Jews  but  with  Christians ;    when 
also  the  narrator  himself  saith  they  were  gathered  together 
to  break  bread.     And  indeed  this  same  is  the  best  manage- 
ment, that  all  things  be  distributed   to  their  times  and  be 
done  in  order,  lest  becoming  ravelled  in  peq)lexing  entangle- 
ments, they  throw  om*  human  mind  into  confusion. 

22.  There  also  is  said  at  what  work  the  Apostle  wrought,    xix. 
After  these  tilings,  it  says,  he  departed  from  Alliens  aiid Actsis, 
came  to  Corinth;  and  having  found  a  certain  Jew,  by  name^~^' 
Aquila,  of  Pontiis   by  birth,  lately  come  from  Italy,   and 
Priscilla  his  wife,  because  that   Claudius  had  ordered  all 
Jews  to  depart  fro7n  Rome,  he  came  unto  them,  and  because 
he  was  of  the  same  craft  he  abode  with  thetn,  doing  work : 
for  they  were  tent-makers.     This  if  they  shall  essay  to  in- 

S  lels  'louSaim;  xa)  ro7s  ffe^efiiyti}  ku)  fiivtis  Aug.  has  et  Gentibus  incolis  : 
»v  tJ5  ayo^S.  Kocra,  Trairav  rifii^av  v^os  rch;  for  which  some  Mss.  have  Gentibus  in 
va^arwy^^dvovreii.     For    xki    reii    cs/3»-     viculis. 


4t)6  What  are  lawful  occasions  for  not  working. 

DE      terpret  allegorically,  they  shew  what  proficients  they  be  in 
MONA-  ecclesiastical  learning,  on  which  they  glory  that  they  bestow 
cHo-    all  their  time.     And,  at  the  least,  touching  those   sayings 
.-p — '—  above  recited.  Or  I  only  and  Barnabas,  have  we  not  power 
6—12.  'to  forbear  working?    and.  We  have  not  used  this  power; 
1  Thess.  ai-id^  When  we  might  be   burdensome  to  you,  as  Apostles  of 
2'Thess.  Christ ;  and,  Night  and  day  working  (hat   we  migJtt   not 
?V^"  „  burden  any  of  you  ;  and,  The  Lord  liath  ordained  for  them 
14. 15.'  which  preach  the  Gospel,  of  the  Gospel  to  live;   but  I  have 
used  none  of  these  things:  and  the  rest  of  this  kind,  let  them 
either  expound  otherwise,  or  if  by  most  clear  shining  light 
of  truth  they  be  put  to  it,  let  them  understand  and  obey ;  or 
if  to  obey  they  be  either  unwilling  or  unable,  at  least  let 
them  own  them  which  be  willing,  to  be  better,  and  them 
which  be  also  able,  to  be  happier  men  than  they.     For  it  is 
one  thing  to  plead  infirmity  of  body,  either  truly  alle^'ed,  or 
falsely  pretended :  but  another  so  to  be  deceived  and  so  to 
deceive,  that  it  shall  even  be  thought  a  proof  of  righteous- 
ness obtaining  more  mightily  in  servants  of  God,  if  laziness 
have  gotten  power  to  reign  among  a  set  of  ignorant  men. 
He,  namely,  who  shews  a  true  infirmity  of  body,  must  be 
humanely  dealt  withal ;  he  who  pretends  a  false  one,  and 
cannot  be  convicted,  must  be  left  unto  God :  yet  neither  of 
them  fixeth  a  pernicious  rule  ;    because  a  good  servant  of 
God  both  serves  his  manifestly  infirm  brother;  and,  when 
the  other  deceives,  if  he  believes  him  because  he  does  not 
think  him  a  bad  man,  he  does  not  imitate  him  that  he  may 
be  bad;  and  if  he  believe  him  not,  he  thinks  him  deceitful, 
and  does,  nevertheless,  not  imitate  him.   But  when  a  man  says, 
'  This  is  true  righteousness,  that  by  doing  no  bodily  work  we 
imitate  the  birds  of  the  air,  because  he  who  shall  do  any 
such  work,  goes  against  the  Gospel :'  whoso  being  infirm  in 
mind  hears  and  believes  this,  that  person,  not  for  that  he  so 
bestows. all  his  time,  but  for  that  he  so   erreth,  must  be 
mourned  over. 
XX.         23.  Hence  arises  another  question ;  for  peradventure  one 
may  say,  '  What  then .''    did   the  other  Apostles,  and   the 
brethren  of  the  Lord,  and  Cephas,  sin,  in  that  they  did  not 
work?    Or  did  they  occasion  an  hindrance  to  the  Gospel, 
because  blessed  Paul  saith  that  he  had  not  used  this  power 


OPERE 

MONa- 


KUM. 


Some  excuse  fur  those  icJio  June  ijiven  up  property.    407 

ou  purpose  that  he  might  not  cause  any  hindrance  to  the     de 
Gospel  of  Christ?     For  if  they  sinned  because  they  wrought 
not,  then  had  thev  not  received   power  not  to  work,  but  to    cho 
hve  instead  by  the  Gospel.     But  if  they   had  received  this 
power,  by  ordinance  of  the   Lord,  that  they  which  preach 
the  Gospel  should  live  by  the  Gospel ;  and  by  His  saying, 
The  uorkman  is  u-orthy  of  his  meat ;   which  poN\  er  Paul, 
laying  out  somewhat  more',  would  not  use;  then  truly  they'  am- 
sinned  not.      If  they  sinned  not,  they  caused  no  hindrance.  aiJquid 
For  it  is  not  to  be  thought  no  sin  to  hinder  the  Gospel.     Iferogans. 

.  .  LukelO, 

this  be  so, '  to  us  also,'  say  they, '  it  is  free  either  to  use  or  not  35. 
to  use  this  power.' 

24.  This  question  I  should  briefly  solve,  if  I  should  say, 
because  I  should  also  justly  say,  that  wo  must  believe  the 
Apostle.  For  he  himself  knew  why  in  the  Churches  of  the 
Gentiles  it  was  not  meet  that  a  venal  Gospel  were  carried 
about;  not  finding  fault  with  his  fellow-apostles,  but  dis- 
tinguishing his  own  ministry;  because  they,  Avithout  doubt 
by  admonition  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  had  so  distributed  among 
them  the  provinces  of  evangelizing,  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  Acts  13, 
should  go  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  they  unto  the  Circumcision,  o'  9.. 
But  that  he  gave  this  precept  to  them  who  had  not  the  like 
power,  those  many  things  already  said  do  make  manifest. 

But  these  brethren  of  ours  rashly  arrogate  unto  themselves,  xxi. 
so  far  as  I  can  judge,  that  they  have  this  kind  of  power. 
For  if  they  be  evangelists,  I  confess,  they  have  it:  if 
ministers  of  the  altar,  dispensers  of  sacraments,  of  course 
it  is  no  arrogating  to  themselves,  but  a  plain  vindicating  of  a 
right. 

25.  If  at  the  least  they  once  had  in  this  world  wherewithal 
ihev  might  easily  without  handiwork  sustain  this  life,  which 
property,  when  they  were  converted  unto  God,  they  disparted 
to  the  needy,  then  must  we  both  believe  their  infirmity,  and 
bear  with  it.  For  usually  such  persons,  having  been,  not 
better  brought  up,  as  many  think,  but  what  is  the  truth, 
more  languidly  brought  up,  are  not  able  to  bear  the  labour 
of  bodily  works.    Such  peradventure  were  many  in  Jerusalem. 

For  it  is  also  written,  that  they  sold  their  houses  and  lands,  Acts  2, 
and  laid  the  prices  of  them  at  the  Apostles'  feet,  that  distri-  '''  '    ' 
bution  might  be  made  to  every  one  as  he  had  need.    Because 

Kk 


498    Many  Monks  came  from  slate  of  labour  or  slavery. 

DE      they  were  found,  being  near,  and  were  useful  to  the  Gentiles, 

MONA-  who,  being  afar  off,  were  thence  called  from  the  worship  of 

'^'"°-   idols,  as  it  is  said,  Out  of  Zion  shall  qo  forth  the  law,  and 

RUM.  '  5  ./  1  P  1         1  1 

Aci^^  the  word  of  tire  Lord  from  Jerusalem,  therefore  hath  the 
^^-         Apostle  called  the  Christians  of  the  Gentiles  their  debtors: 
'    ' their  debtors,  i^mth  \\Q,  theij  are:    and  hath  added  the  reason 
Rom.     why,   For   if  in   their  spiritual    things    the   Gentiles  have 
'     '   communicated,  they  ought  also  in  carnal  things  to  minister 
xxii.  unto  them.     But  now  there  come  into  this  profession  of  the 
service  of  God,  both  persons  from  the  condition  of  slaves,  or 
also  freed-men,  or  persons  on  this  account  freed  by  their 
masters    or   about   to   be    freed,  likewise    from   the   life    of 
peasants,  and  from  the    exercise    and    plebeian    labour   of 
handicraftsmen,   persons  whose   bringing  up   doubtless  has 
been  all  the  better  for  them,  the  harder  it  has  been  :  whom 
not  to  admit,  is  a  heavy  sin.     For  many  of  that  sort  have 
turned  out  truly  great  men  and  meet  to  be  imitated.     For  on 
1  Cor.  1,  this  account  also  hath  God  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
27—29.  ^^^Q^.ifi  iQ   confound  the   things  which  are  mighty,  and  the 
foolish  things  of  tlte  world  hath  He  chosen  to  confound  them 
who  are  wise;  and  ignoble  things  of  the  world,  and  tilings 
which  are  not,  as  though  they  were,  that  the  things  that  are 
may  be  brought  to  nought :  that  no  fiesh  may  glory  before 
God.    This  pious  and  holy  thought,  accordingly,  causeth  that 
even  such  be  admitted  as  bring  no  proof  of  a  change  of  life 
for  the  better.     For  it  doth  not  appear  whether  they  come  of 
purpose  for  the  service  of  God,  or  whether  running  away 
empty  from  a  poor  and  laborious  life  they  want  to  be  fed 
and   clothed ;    yea,  moreover,  to  be   honoured   by   them   of 
whom   they    were   wont   to   be   despised    and    trampled  on. 
Such  persons  therefore  because  they  cannot  excuse  them- 
selves from   working  by  pleading  infirmity  of  body,  seeing 
they  are  convicted  by  the  custom  of  their  past  life,  do  there- 
fore shelter  themselves  under  the  screen  of  an  ill  scholarship, 
that  from  the  Gospel  badly  understood  they  should  essay  to 
pervert  precepts  apostolical :   truly  '  fowls  of  the  air,'  but  in 
lifting  themselves  on  high  through  pride;  and  'grass  of  the 
field,'  but  in  being  carnally  minded. 

2(j.  That,  namely,  befalleth  them  which  in  undisciplined 
younger  widows,  the  same  Apostle  saith  must  be  avoided : 


Idle  Ihiiuj  leads  to  false  and  vahi  lalking.  499 

And  withal  they  learn  to  be  idle ;  and  not  only  idle,  hat    de 
also  busy-bodies  and  full  of  ivords,  speaking  what  they  ought  mon^- 
not.     This  very  thing  said  he  concerning  evil  women,  which    cho- 

,  11-11  •  1    •  BUM. 

we  also  in  evil  men  do  moiini  aud  bewail,  who  against  him,  ^-^-^  g 
the  very  man  in  whose  Epistles  we  read  these  things,  do,  13. 
being  idle  and   full  of  words,  speak  what   they  ought   not. 
And  if  there  be  any  among  them  who  did  with  that  purpose 
come  to   the  holy  warfare,   that   they  may  please   Him   to2Tini.2, 
whom  they  have  proved  themselves,  these,  when  they  be  so  ' 
vigorous  in  strength  of  body,  and  soundness  of  health,  that 
they  are  able  not  only  to  be  taught,  but  also,  agreeably  unto 
the  Apostle,  to  work,  do,  by  receiving  of  these  men's  idle 
and  corrupt  discourses,  which  they  are  unable,  by  reason  of 
their  unskilled   rawness,  to  judge   of,  become  changed   by 
pestiferous  contagion  into  the  same  noisomeness :  not  only 
not  imitating  the  obedience  of  saints  which  quietly  work, 
and  of  other  monasteries  which  in  most  wholesome  discipline  Cassian. 
do  live  after  the  apostolic  rule;  but  also  insulting  better  men  jq  22'' 
than  themselves,  preaching  up  laziness  as  the  keeper  of  the 
Gospel,  accusing  mercy  as  the  prevaricator  therefrom.     For 
a  much  more  merciful  work  is  it  to  the  souls  of  the  weak,  to 
consult  for  the  fair  fame  of  the  servants  of  God,  than  it  is  to 
the  bodies  of  men,  to  break  bread  to  the  hungry.    Wherefore 
I  would  to  God  that  these,  which  want  to  let  their  hands  lie 
idle,  would  altogether  let  their  tongues  lie  idle   too.     For 
they  would  not  make   so  many  willing  to  imitate  them,  if 
the  examples  they  set  were  not  merely  lazy  ones,  but  mute 
withal. 

27.  As  it  is,  however,  they,  against  the  Apostle  of  Christ,  xxiii, 
recite  a  Gospel  of  Christ.  For  so  marvellous  are  the  works  of 
the  sluggards,  hindered  that  they  want  to  have  that  very  thing 
by  Gospel,  which  the  Apostle  enjoined  and  did  on  purpose 
that  the  Gospel  itself  should  not  be  hindered.  And  yet,  if 
from  the  very  vvords  of  the  Gospel  we  should  compel  them 
to  live  agreeably  with  their  way  of  understanding  it,  they 
will  be  the  first  to  endeavour  to  persuade  us  how  they  are 
not  to  be  understood  so  as  they  do  understand  them.  For 
certainly,  they  say  that  they  therefore  ought  not  to  work,  for 
that  the  birds  of  the  air  neither  sow  nor  reap,  of  which  the 
Lord  hath   given   us   a  similitude   that  we  should  take  no 

K  k  2 


500  They  that  refuse  to  '  soiv'  should  not  '■gather  iuto  bams.'' 

DE     thought  about  such   necessaries.      Then  why  do   they  not 
MONA^  attend  to  that  which  follows?    For  it  is  not  only  said,  that 
CHJ-    the!/  sow  not,  neitJier  reap ;  but  there  is  added,  vor  gather 
■^      '■-'■'■  in    apothecas,"       Now    apoikeca;    may    be    called    either 
26.        "  barns,"   or    word    for    word,  "  repositories."      Then    why 
do  these    persons   want   to    have    idle    hands    and    full    re- 
positories }  Why  do  they  lay  by  and  keep  what  they  receive 
of  the  labours  of  others,  that  thereof  may  be  every  day  some- 
what forthcoming?    Why,  in  short,  do  they  grind  and  cook  ? 
For  the  birds  do  not  this.      Or,  if  they  find  some  whom  they 
may  persuade  to  this  work  also,  namely,  to  bring  unto  them 
day  by  day  viands  ready  made ;    at  least  their  water  they 
either  fetch  them  from  springs,  or  from  cisterns  and  wells 
draw   and    set   it   by:    this    the   fowls   do  not.      But   if  so 
please  them,  let  it  be  the  study  of  good  believers  and  most 
devoted  subjects  of  the  Eternal  King,  to  carry  their  service 
to  His  most  valiant  soldiers  even   to  that  length,  that  they 
shall  not  be  forced  even  to  fill  a  vessel  of  water  for  them- 
selves, if  now-a-days  people  have  surpassed  even  them  which 
at  that  time  were  at  Jerusalem,  in  a  new  grade  of  righteous- 
ness,  step])ing    out   beyond    them.      To   them,   namely,   by 
reason  of  famine  being  imminent,  and  foretold  by  the  Pro- 
Acts  ii,phets  which   were  at  that  time,  good  believers  sent  out  of 
28—30.  Gj-eece  supplies  of  corn ;    of  which    I   suppose   they   made 
them  bread,  or  at  least  procured  to  be  made ;  which  thing 
the  birds  do  not.     But  if  now-a-days   these   persons,  as  I 
began    to    say,    have    surpassed    these    in    some    grade    of 
righteousness,   and    do    altogether    in    things    pertaining   to 
the  maintenance  of  this  life,  as  do  the  birds;  let  them  shew 
us  men  doing  such   service  unto   birds  as  they  wish   to  be 
done   unto   them,   except   indeed    birds   caught  and   caged 
because  they  are  not  trusted,  lest  if  they  fly  they  come  not 
back:  and  yet  these  would  rather  enjoy  liberty  and  receive 
from  the  fields  what  is  enough,  than  take  their  food  by  men 
laid  before  them  and  made  ready. 

28,  Here  then  shall  these  persons  in  their  turn  be  in 
another  more  sublime  degree  of  righteousness  outdone,  by 
them  who  shall  so  order  themselves,  that  every  day  they 
shall  betake  them  into  the  fields  as  unto  pasture,  and  at  what 
time  they   shall   find  it,  pick    up    their   meal,  and   having 


OPERE 
MONA- 


Example  of  the  birds  not  in  all  points  binding.      501 

allayed  their  hunger,   return.     But   plainly,  on    account   of     de 
the  keepers    of  the   fields,  how  good  were  it,  if  the   Lord 
should  deiern  to  bestow  wings  also,  that  the  servants  of  God   cho- 

RUM. 

being  found  in  other  men's  fields  should  not  be  taken  up  as 

thieves,  but  as  starlings  be  scared  off.  As  things  are,  how- 
ever, such  an  one  will  do  all  he  can  to  be  like  a  bird,  which  the 
fowler  shall  not  be  able  to  catch.  But,  lo,  let  all  men  allow 
this  to  the  servants  of  God,  that  when  they  will  they  should 
go  forth  into  their  fields,  and  thence  depart  fearless  and 
refreshed  :  as  it  was  ordered  to  the  people  Israel  by  the  law,  Deut. 
that  none  should  lay  hands  on  a  thief  in  his  fields,  unless  ^iQ^b. 
wanted  to  carry  any  thing  away  with  him  from  thence;  for 
if  he  laid  hands  on  nothing  but  what  he  had  eaten,  they 
would  let  him  go  away  free  and  unpunished.  Whence  also 
when  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  plucked  the  ears  of  corn,  the 
Jews  calumniated  them  on  the  score  of  the  sabbath  rather  Mat,i2, 

1    2 

than  of  theft.  But  how  is  one  to  manage  about  those  tmies 
of  year,  at  which  food  that  can  be  taken  on  the  spot  is  not 
found  in  the  fields  ?  Whoso  shall  attempt  to  take  home  with 
him  any  thing  which  by  cooking  he  may  prepare  for  him- 
self, he  shall,  according  to  these  persons'  imderstanding  of 
it,  be  accosted  fi-om  the  Gospel  with,  '  Put  it  down ;  for 
this  the  birds  do  not.' 

29.  But  let  us  grant  this  also,  that  the  whole  year  round 
there  may  in  the  fields  be  found  either  of  tree  or  of  herbs  or 
of  any  manner  of  roots,  that  Avhich  may  be  taken  as  food 
uncooked ;  or,  at  any  rate,  let  so  great  exercise  of  body  be 
used,  that  the  things  which  require  cooking,  may  be  taken 
even  raw  without  hurt,  and  people  may  even  in  winter 
weather,  no  matter  how  rough,  go  forth  to  their  fodder  ;  and 
so  it  shall  be  the  case  that  nothing  be  taken  away  to  be 
prepared,  nothing  laid  up  for  the  morrow.  Yet  will  not 
those  men  be  able  to  keep  these  rules,  who  for  many  days 
separating  themselves  from  sight  of  men,  and  allowing  none 
access  to  them,  do  shut  themselves  up,  living  in  great  earnest- 
ness of  prayers.  For  these  do  use  to  shut  up  with  them- 
selves store  of  aliments,  such  indeed  as  are  most  easily  and 
cheaply  had,  yet  still  a  store  which  may  suffice  for  those 
days  during  which  they  purpose  that  no  man  shall  see  them; 
which  thing  the  birds  do  not.     Now  touching  these  men's 


502     IfkeepiiKj  store  is  not  forbidden,  working  is  not. 

T^K     exercising  of  themselves  in  so  marvellous  continency,  seeing 

ONA-  tliat  they  have  leisure  for  the  doing  of  these  things,  and  not 

cHo-   jjj  pi-Qud  elation  but  in  merciful  sanctity  do  propose  theni- 


M 
C 
RUM. 


selves  for  men's  imitation,  I  not  only  do  not  blame  it,  but  know 
not  how  to  praise  it  as  much  as  it  deserves.  And  yet  what  are 
we  to  say  of  such  men,  according  to  these  persoiis'  under- 
standing of  the  evangelic  words  ?  Or  haply  the  holier  they 
be,  the  more  unlike  are  they  to  the  fowls  ?  because  unless 
they  lay  by  for  themselves  food  for  many  days,  to  shut  them- 
selves up  as  they  do  they  will  not  have  strength?     Howbeit, 

Matt.  (5,  to  them  as  well  as  us  is  it  said,  Take  there/ore  no  thought  for 
the  morrow. 

30.  Wherefore,  that  I  may  briefly  embrace  the  whole 
matter,  let  these  persons,  who  from  perverse  understanding 
of  the  Gospel  labour  to  pervert  apostolical  precepts,  either 
take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  even  as  the  birds  of  the  air; 
or  let  them  obey  the  Apostle,  as  dear  children :  yea  rather, 
let  them  do  both,  because  both  accord.     For  things  contrary 

Eom.  i,to  his  Lord,  Paul  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ  would  never 
advise.  This  then  we  say  openly  to  these  persons ;  If  the 
birds  of  the  air  ye  in  such  wise  understand  in  the  Gospel, 
that  ye  will  not  by  working  with  your  hands  procure  food 
and  clothing ;  then  neither  must  ye  put  any  thing  by  for  the 
morrow,  like  as  the  birds  of  the  air  do  put  nothing  by.  But 
if  to  put  somewhat  by  for  the  morrow,  is  possibly  not  against 

Matt.  6,  the  Gospel  where  it  is  said.  Behold  the  birds  of  the  air,  for 

26  "  •     • 

thei/  neither  sow  nor  reap  nor  gather  into  stores;  then  is  it 

possibly  not  against  the  Gospel  nor  against  similitude  of  the 

birds  of  the  air,  to  maintain  this  life  of  the  flesh  by  labour  of 

corporal  working. 

xxiv.       31.  For  if  they  be  urged  from  the  Gospel  that  they  should 

put  nothing  by  for  the    morrow,  they  most  rightly  answer, 

John  12,  <  Why  then  had  the  Lord  Himself  a  bag  in  which  to  put  by 

the  money  which  was  collected }    Why  so  long  time  before- 

Actsii,hand,   on  occasion   of  impending  famine,  were  supplies  of 

""    ■  corn  sent  to  the  holy  fathers  .?     Why  did  Apostles  in  such 

wise   provide  things   necessary  for  the   indigence   of  saints 

lest  there  should  be  lack  thereafter,  that  most  blessed  Paul 

lCor.16, should   thus  wiite  to  the   Corinthians  in  his  Epistle:  Now 

~  '     concerning  the  collection  for   the  saints,  as  I  have  given 


Working  for  the  Monastery  no  return  to  worldly  life.    503 

order  to  the  Churches  of  Galatia,  even  so  do  ye.     Upon  the     de 
first  day  of  the  week  let  everyone  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  ^o^a^ 
as  God  hath  prospered  him,  that  the  gatherinys  he  not  then    cho- 

Jirst  made  when  I  come.     And  when-  I  come,  ivhomsoever  ye '- 

shall  approve  by  your  letters,  them  will  I  send  to  bring  your 
liberality  unto  Jerusalem.  And  if  it  be  meet  that  I  go  also, 
they  shall  go  with  me  ?  These  and  much  else  they  most 
copiously  and  most  truly  bring  forward.  To  whom  we 
answer:  Ye  see  then,  albeit  the  Lord  said,  Take  no  thought 
for  the  morrotv,  yet  ye  are  not  by  these  words  constrained 
to  reserve  nothing  for  the  morrow :  then  why  do  ye  say  that 
by  the  same  words  ye  are  constrained  to  do  nothing  ?  Why 
are  tlie  birds  of  the  air  not  a  pattern  unto  you  for  reserving 
nothing,  and  ye  will  have  them  to  be  a  pattern  for  working 
nothing  ? 

32.  Some  man  will  say:    'What  then  does    it   profit   a  xxv. 
servant  of  God,  that,  having  left  the  former  doings  which 
he  had  in  the  world  he  is  converted  unto  the  spiritual  life 
and  warfare,   if  it  still  behove  him  to  do   business  as  of  a 
common  workman  ?'     As  if  truly  it  could  be  easily  unfolded 
in  words,  how  greatly  profiteth  what  the  Lord,  in  answer  to 
that  rich  man  who  was  seeking  counsel  of  laying  hold  on 
eternal  life,  told  him  to  do  if  he  would  fain  be  perfect :  sell 
that  he  had,  distribute  all  to  the  indigence  of  the  poor,  and  Mat.  19, 
follow  Him?     Or  who  with  so  unimpeded  course  hath  fol-^^" 
lowed  the  Lord,  as  he  who  saith,  Not  in  vain  have  I  run,  nor  Fhi\.  2, 
in  vain  laboured?  who  yet  both  enjoined  these  works,  and '^' 
did  them.     This  unto  us,  being  by  so  great  authority  taught 
and  informed,  ought  to  suffice  for  a  pattern  of  lelinquishing 
our  old  resources,  and  of  working  with  our  hands.     But  we 
too,  aided  by  the  Lord  Himself,  are  able  perchance  in  some 
sort  to  apprehend  what  it  doth  still  profit  the  servants  of 
God  to  have  left  their  former  businesses,  while  they  do  yet 
thus  work.     For  if  a  person  from  being  rich  is  converted  to 
this  mode  of  life,  and  is  hindered  by  no  infirmity  of  body, 
are  we   so  without  taste  of  the  savour  of  Christ,  as  not  to 
understand  what  an  healing  it  is  to  the  swelling  of  the  old 
pride,  when,  having   pared  off  the   superfluities  by  which 
erewhile  the  mind  was  deadly  inflamed,  he  refuses  not,  for 
the  procuring  of  that  little  which  is  still  naturally  necessary 


'504      Charily  exercised  in  iv  or  king  for  the  common  good. 

t)E     for  this  present  life,  even  a  common  workman's  lowly  toil? 

MONA-  1^  however  he   be  from  a  poor  estate  converted  unto   this 

cHo-   manner  of  life,  let  him  not  account  himself  to  be  doing  that 

—which  he  was  doing  aforetime,  if  foregoing  the  love  of  even 

increasing  his  ever  so  small  matter  of  private  substance,  and 
Phil.  2,  now  no   more    seeking   his   own    but    the    ihinss  which  be 

21  •  -1 

Jesu  Christ's,  he  hath  translated  himself  into  the  charily  of 
a  life  in  common,  to  live  in  fellowship  of  thorn  who  have  one 
soul  and  one  heart  to  Godward,  so  that  no  man  saith  that 
any  thing  is  his  own,  but  they  have  all  things  common. 
Acts  4,  Por  if  in  this  earthly  commonwealth  its  chief  men  in  the 

32. 

old  times  did,  as  their  own  men  of  letters  are  wont  in  their 

most  glowing  phrase  to  tell  of  them,  to  that  degree  prefer 

the  common  weal   of  the   whole  people   of  their   city   and 

Scipio     country  to  their   own  private  affairs,  that   one  of  them,  for 

^^^'4  ^ 'subduing   of  Africa  honoured   with  a  triumph,  would   have 

had  nothing  to  give  to  his  daughter  on  her  marriage,  unless 

by   decree   of  the   senate  she   had  been  dowered  from    the 

public  treasury  :  of  what  mind  ought  he  to  be  towards  his 

commonwealth,  who  is  a   citizen    of  that  eternal  City,  the 

heavenly  Jerusalem,  but  that  even  what  with  labour  of  his 

own  hands  he  earns,  he  should  have  in  common  with  his 

brother,  and  if  the  same  lack  any  thing,  supply  it  from  the 

common  store  ;  saying  with  him  whose  precept  and  example 

2 Cor. 6,  he    halli    followed,  Js    having   notliing^  and  posseaaing  all 
10.  ,,  .         , 

things  f 

3*3.  Wherefore    even    they  which  having  relinquished   or 

distributed    their    former,   whether   ample    or   in    an\'    sort 

opulent,    means,   have    chosen    with    pious    and   wliolesome 

humility  to  be  numbered  among  the  poor  of  Christ ;    if  they 

be  so  strong  in  body  and  free  from  ecclesiastical  occupations, 

(albeit,  bringing  as  they  do  so  great  a  proof  of  their  purpose, 

and  conferring  from  their  former  havings,  either  very  much, 

or  not  a  little,  upon  the  indigence  of  the  same  society,  the 

common    fund    itself  and    brotherly  charity  owes    them    in 

return  a  sustenance  of  their  life,)  yet  if  they  too  work  with 

their  hands,  that  they  may  take  away  all  excuse  fi'om  lazy 

brethren  who  come  from  a  more  hiunble  condition  in  life, 

and  iherelbre  one  more  used   to  toil ;    therein  they  act  far 

more  mercifully  than  when  tlicy  divided  all  tlieir  goods  to 


Claim ofgiving upaViforCiirist.  Scrvin<jGodaiiclM<immon.  505 

the  needy.     If  indeed  they  be  unwilling  to  do  this,  who  can     de 
venture  to  compel  them  ?    Yet  then  there  ought  to  be  found  jjqjj^. 
for  them  works  in  the  monastery,  which  if  more  free  from    cho- 

1         Ti  •  •  1*111  -I'-ij       RUM. 

bodily    exercise,    require    to    be    looked    unto  with  vigilant 

administration,  that  not  even  they  may  eat  their  bread  for 
nought,  because  it  is  now  become  the  common  property. 
Nor  is  it  to  be  regarded  in  what  monasteries,  or  in  what 
place,  any  man  may  have  bestowed  his  former  having  upon 
his  indigent  brethren.  For  all  Christians  make  one  common- 
wealth. And  for  that  cause  whoso  shall  have,  no  matter  in 
what  place,  expended  upon  Christians  the  things  they 
needed,  in  what  place  soever  he  also  receiveth  what  himself 
hath  need  of,  from  Christ's  goods'  he  doth  receive  it.  i  de 
Because  in  what  place  soever  himself  has  given  to  such,  who  ^^"'*'' 
but  Christ  received  it  ?  But,  as  for  them  vvho  before  they 
entered  this  holy  society  got  their  living  by  labour  of  the 
body,  of  which  sort  are  the  more  ]'art  of  them  which  come 
into  monasteries,  because  of  mankind  also  the  more  part  are 
such  ;  if  they  will  not  work,  neither  let  them  eat.  For  not 
to  that  end  are  the  rich,  in  this  Christian  warfare,  brought 
low  unto  piety,  that  the  poor  may  be  lifted  up  unto  pride. 
As  indeed  it  is  by  no  means  e,eemly  that  in  that  mode  of  life 
where  senators  become  men  of  toil,  there  common  workmen 
should  become  men  of  leisure  ;  and  whereunto  there  come, 
relinquishing  their  dainties,  men  who  had  been  masters  of 
houses  and  lands,  there  common  peasants  should  be  dainty. 

34.  '  But  then  the  Iiord  saith.  Be  not  soIicilouH  for  xxvi. 
your  life  tvhni  ye  s/iall  eat,  nor  for  the  body,  ichnt  ye 
shall  put  on.''  Rightly  :  because  He  had  said  above,  Ye 
cannot  serre  God  and  mammon.  For  he  who  preaches  the 
Gospel  with  an  eye  to  this,  that  he  may  have  whereof  he 
may  eat  and  whereof  be  clothed,  accounts  that  he  at  the 
same  time  both  serves  God,  because  he  preaches  the  Gospel  ; 
and  mammon,  because  he  preaches  with  an  eye  to  these 
necessaries:  which  thing  the  Lord  saith  to  be  impossible. 
And  hereby  he  who  doth  for  the  sake  of  these  things  preach 
the  Gospel  is  convicted  that  he  serves  not  God  but  mammon; 
however  God  may  use  him,  he  knows  not  how,  to  other  men's 
advancement.  For  to  this  sentence  doth  He  subjoin,  saying. 
Therefore  I  say  unto  you,  Be  not  solicitous  for  your  life 


'00    Our  Lord  directs  our  Intention  to  reward  in  Heaven. 

DE     what  ye  shall  eat,  nor  for  your  body  what  ye  shall  put  on  : 

jioNA-  ^ot  that  they  should  not  procure  these  tilings,  as  much  as  is 
cHo-   enough  for  necessity,  by  what   means  they  honestly  may  ; 

but  that  they  should  not  look  to  these  things,  and  for  the 

sake  of  these  do  whatever  in  preaching  of  the  Gospel  they 
are  bidden  to  do.  The  intention,  namely,  for  which  a  thing 
is  done.  He  calls  the  eye  :  of  which  a  little  above  He  was 
speaking  with  purpose  to  come  down  to  this,  and  saying, 
The  light  of  thy  body  is  thine  eye :  if  thine  eye  be  single,  thy 
whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light;  but  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy 
whole  body  shall  be  fill  of  darkness  ;  that  is,  such  will  be 
thy  deeds  as  shall  be  thine  intention  for  which  thou  doest 
them.     For   indeed   that    He  might  come  to  this,  He  had 

Matt.  6,  before  given  precept  concerning  alms,  saying,  Lay  not  up 
~  'for  yourselves  treasures  on  earth  where  rust  and  moth  doth 
corrupt,  and  where  thieves  break  through  and  steal.  But  lay 
up)  for  yourselves  treasure  in  heaven,  where  neither  moth  nor 
rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through 
nor  steal.  For  where  thy  treasure  shall  be,  there  will  thy 
heart  be  also.  Thereupon  He  subjoined,  The  light  of  thy 
body  is  thine  eye :  that  they,  to  wit,  which  do  alms,  do  them 
not  with  that  intention  that  they  should  either  wish  to  please 
men,  or  seek  to  have  repayment  on  earth  of  the  alms  they 
do.     Wlience    the  Apostle,  giving    charge    to   Timothy  for 

iTim.c,  Avarning  of  rich  men.  Let  them,  says  he,  readily  give,  com- 
'  ■  municate,  treasure  up  for  themselves  a  good  foundation  for 
the  time  to  come,  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  the  true  life.' 
Since  then  the  Lord  hath  to  the  future  life  directed  the  eye 
of  them  which  do  alms,  and  to  an  heavenly  reward,  in  order 
that  the  deeds  themselves  may  be  full  of  light  when  the  eye 
shall  be  simple,  (for   of  that  last  retribution  is  meant  that 

Mat.) 0,  which  He  says  in  another  place,  He  that  receivelh  you 
~  '  receivelh  Me,  and  he  that  receiveth  Me  receiveth  Him  that 
sent  Me.  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a 
prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward;  and  he  that 
receiveth  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righteous  man 
shall  receive  a  righteous  man''s  reward.  And  whosoever 
shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold 
water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  Lsay  unto  you,  his 
reward  shall  not  be  lost  ;^   lest  haply  after  he  had  reproved 


What  ice  (jain  by  our  oicn  labour  still  comes  frotu  Him.  507 
the  eye'    of  them   which    beston-   things  needful  upon   the     de 

O  P  FR.E 

indigent  both  prophets  and  just  men  and  disciples  of  the  mona- 
Lord,  the  eye  of  the  persons  to   whom   these  things  were   ^ho- 
done    should    become    depraved,    so    that    for    the    sake    ofj-^^^r — 
receiving  these  things  they  should  wish   to  serve  Christ  asrepto 
His  soldiers:    JSo  man,  saitli   He,  can  serve  two  masters. -^g^^^^Q^ 
And   a  litde    after :     Ye   cannot,  saith    He,  serve  God  <^ind^^-^^ 
mammon.     And   straightway  He   hath   added.  Therefore   I 
say  unto  you,  be  not  solicitous  for  your  life  what  ye  shall 
eat,  nor  for  the  body  what  ye  shall  put  on. 

35.  And  that  which  follows  concerning  birds  of  the  air 
and  lilies  of  the  field,  He  saith  to  this  end,  that  no  man  may 
think   that  God  careth  not  for  the  needs  of  His  servants  ; 
when    His    most  wise    Providence    reacheth    unto    these   in 
creating  and  governing  those.     For  it  must  not  be  deemed 
tliat  it  is  not  He  that  feeds  and  clothes  them  also  which 
work  with  their  hands.    But  lest  they  turn  aside  the  Christian 
service  of  warfare  unto  their  purpose  of  getting  these  things,  the 
Lord  in  this  premonisheth  His  servants  that  in  this  ministry 
which  is  due  to  His  Sacrament,  we  shoidd  take  thought,  not  for 
these,  but  for  His  kingdom  and  righteousness  :  and  all  these 
things    shall    be    added    unto  us,  whether  working    by  our 
hands,  or  whether  by  infirmity  of  body  hindered  from  work- 
ing,   or    whether    bound    by    such    occupation    of  our  very 
warfare  that  we  are  able  to  do  nothing  else.     For  neither  xxvii. 
does  it  follow  that  because  the  Lord  hath  said.  Call  upon  Ps.  50, 
Me  in  the  day  of  tribulation  and  I  will  deliver  thee,  and    ' 
tho7C  shall  glorify  3Ie,  therefore  the  Apostle  ought  not  to 
have  fled,  and  to  be  let  down  by  the  wall  in  a  basket  that  he  Acts  9, 
might  escape  the  hands  of  a  pursuer,  but  shoidd  rather  have  2  Cor. 
waited   to  be  taken,  that,  like    the  three  children  from  the  n?  33. 
midst  of  the  iii'es,  the  Lord  might  deliver  him.     Or  for  this 
reason  ought  not  the  Lord  either  to  have  said  this,  If  they  Mat.io, 
shall  persecute  you  in  one  city,  fee  ye  to  another,  namely,  ^^* 
because  He  hath  said.  If  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  a?iy  JohniS, 
thing  in  My  name.  He  will  give  it  you.     As  then  whoever  ^'^' 
to  Christ's  disciples  when  fleeing  from    persecution  should 
cast  up  this  sort  of  question,  why  they  did  not  rather  stand, 
and   by  calling  upon  God  obtain  through  His    marvellous 
works  in  such  wise  deliverance,  as  Daniel  from  the  lions,  as 


CHO- 
RUM. 


508    Prudence  alloiced.     III  name  to  Monks  from  Satan'' s 

DE  Peter  from  his  chains,  they  would  answer  that  they  ought 
MONA-  "ot  to  tempt  God,  but  He  would  tlicn  and  then  only  do  the 
like  for  them,  if  it  should  please  Him,  when  they  had  nothing 
that  they  could  do  ;  but  when  He  put  flight  in  their  power, 
although  they  were  thereby  delivered,  yet  were  they  not 
delivered  but  by  Him:  so  likewise  to  servants  of  God  having 
time  and  strength  after  the  example  and  precept  of  the 
Apostle  to  get  their  living  by  their  own  hands,  if  any  from 
the  Gospel  shall  raise  a  question  concerning  the  birds  of  the 
air,  which  sow  not  nor  reap  nor  gather  into  stores,  and  con- 
cerning lilies  of  the  field  that  they  toil  not  neither  do  they 
spin  ;  they  will  easily  answer,  '  If  we  also,  b}'  reason  of  any 
either  infirmity  or  occupation  cannot  work,  He  will  so  feed 
and  clothe  us,  as  He  doth  the  birds  and  the  lilies,  which  do 
no  work  of  this  kind  :  but  when  we  are  able,  we  ought  not 
to  tempt  our  God  ;  because  this  very  ability  of  ours,  we 
have  it  by  His  gift,  and  in  living  by  it,  we  live  by  His 
bounty  Who  hath  bounteously  bestowed  upon  us  that  we 
should  have  this  ability.  And  therefore  concerning  these 
necessary  things  we  are  not  solicitous  ;  because  when  we  are 
able  to  do  these  things.  He  by  Whom  mankind  are  fed  and 
clothed  doth  feed  and  clothe  us  :  but  when  we  are  not  able 
to  do  these  things,  He  feeds  and  clothes  us  by  Whom  the 
birds  are  fed  and  the  lilies  clothed,  because  we  are  more 
worth  than  they.  Wherefore  in  this  our  warfare,  neither  for 
the  morrow  take  we  thought :  because  not  for  the  sake  of 
these  temporal  things,  whereunto  jiertaineth  To-morrow,  but 
for  the  sake  of  those   eternal  things,  where  it  is  evermore 

2  Tim.  To-day,  have  we  proved  ourselves  unto  Him,  that,  entangled 
'    '      in  no  secular  business,  we  may  ])lease  Him. 

xxviii.  36.  Since  these  things  are  so,  suffer  me  awhile,  holy 
brother,  (for  the  Lord  giveth  me  through  thee  great  bold- 
ness,) to  address  these  same  our  sons  and  brethren  whom 
I  know  with  what  love  ihou  together  with  us  dost  travail  in 
birth  wilhal,  until  the  Apostolic  discipline  be  formed  in  them. 
O  servants  of  God,  soldiers  of  Christ,  is  it  thus  ye  dissemble 
the  plottings  of  our  most  crafty  foe,  who  fearing  your  good 
fame,  that  so  goodly  odour  of  Christ,  lest  good  souls  should 

Cant.  1,  say.  We  uill  run  after  the  odour  of  thine  ointments^  and  so 
should  escape  his  snares,  and  in  every  way  desiring  to  obscure 


emissaries  in  ihcir  garb.      Bishops^  life  laborious.     509 
it  with  his  own  stenches,  hath   dispersed  on  every  side  so     de 

I )  P  F*  R  F 

many  hypocrites   under  the  garb  of  monks,  sti'olhng  about  mona- 
the  provinces,  no  where  sent,  no  where  fixed,  no  where  stand-    "^^o- 

.       .  ,  .  .  ^  RUM. 

ing,  no  where  sitting.    Some  hawking  about  limbs  of  martyrs,  p^~g~ 
if  indeed  of  martyrs;    others  magnifying  their  fringes  andBen.c.l. 
phyhicteries  ;  otlicrs  with  a  lying  story,  how  they  have  heard  Coji' 
say  that  their  parents  or  kinsmen  are  alive  in  this  or  that  ^^"i- 7- 
country,  and  therefore  be  they  on  their  way  to  them:  and  all 
asking,  all  exacting,  either  the  costs  of  their  lucrative  want, 
or  the  price  of  their  pretended  sanctity.     And  in  the  mean- 
while wheresoever  they  be  found  out  in  their  evil  deeds,  or  in 
whatever  way  they  become  notorious,  under  the  general  name 
of  monks,  your  purpose  is  blasphemed,  a  purpose  so  good,  so 
holy,  that  in  Christ's  name  we  desire  it,  as  through  other 
lands  so  through  all  Africa,  to  grow  and  flourish.     Then  are 
ye  not  inflamed  with  godly  jealousy  .?     Does  not  your  heart 
wax  hot  within  you,  and  in  your  meditation  a  fii'e  kindle,  ps.  39, 
that  these  men's  evil  works  ye  should  pursue   with   good^* 
works,  that  ye  should  cut  off  from  them  occasion  of  a  foul 
trafficking,  by  which  your  estimation  is  hurt,  and  a  stumbling- 
block  put    before  the  weak  ?     Have  mercy  then   and   have 
compassion,  and  shew  to  mankind  that  ye  are  not  seeking  in 
ease  a  ready  subsistence,  but  thi'ough  the  strait  and  narrow 
way  of  this  purpose,  are  seeking  the  kingdom  of  God.     Ye 
have   tlie   same    cause  which    the    Apostle   had,   to   cut  off 
occasion  from  them  which  seek  occasion,  that  they  who  by 
their   stinks    are    suffocated,   by  your   good   odour  may  be 
refreshed. 

37.  We  are  not  binding  heavy  burthens  and  laying  themxxix. 
upon  your  shovdders,  while  we  with  a  finger  \\ill  not  touch 
them.  Seek  out,  and  acknowledge  the  labour  of  our  occupations, 
and  in  some  of  us  the  infirmities  of  our  bodies  also,  and  in 
the  Churches  which  we  serve,  that  custom  now  grown  up, 
that  they  do  not  suffer  us  to  have  time  ourselves  for  those 
works  to  which  we  exhort  you.     For  though  we  might  say, 
I'V/io  (joeth  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charges''^     fVho\Cor.9, 
planteth  a  vineyard,  and  eaieth  not  of  the  fruit  thereof?'' 
Who  feedeth  ajiock,  and  partaketh  not  of  the  milk  of  the 
flock  ?  yet  I  call  our  Lord  Jesus,  in  Whose  name  I  fearlessly 
say  these  things,  for  a  witness  upon  my  soul,  that  so  far  as  it 


510         Judging  causes,  harder  than  manual  labour. 
DE      cc  'cerns  mine  own  convenience,  I  would  much  rather  every 

OPERiE 

MONA-  day  at  certain  hours,  as  much  as  is  appointed  by  rule  in  well- 
cHo-   nroverned  monasteries,  do  some  work  with   my  hands,  and 

RUM.     °  ...  f-  r  T  1 

^— -g-have  the  remaniing  hours  free  for  readnig  and  praymg,  or 
Ben.  c.  some  work  pertaining  to  Divine  Letters,  than  have  to  bear 
these  most  annoying  perplexities  of  other  men's  causes  about 
secular  matters,  which  we  must  either  by  adjudication  bring 
to  an  end,  or  by  intervention  cut  short.  Which  troubles 
the  same  Apostle  hath  fastened  us  withal,  (not  by  his  own 
sentence,  but  by  His  who  spake  through  him,)  while  yet  we 
do  not  read  that  he  had  to  put  up  with  them  himself:  indeed 
his  was  not  the  sort  of  work  to  admit  of  it,  while  running  to 
and  fro  in  his  Apostleship.  Nor  hath  he  said,  '  If  then  ye 
have  secular  lawsuits,  bring  them  before  us  ;'  or,  '  Appoint 
iCor.  6,  us  to  judge  them  :""  but,  Thetn  which  are  contemptible  in  the 
~  Church,  these,  saith  he,  put  ye  in  place.  To  your  abashment 
I  say  it :  is  it  so  that  there  is  not  among  you  any  vise  man 
who  can  Judge  between  his  brother,  but  brother  goeth  to  law 
with  brother,  and  that  before  infidels?  So  then  wise  believers 
and  saints,  having  their  stated  abode  in  the  different  places, 
not  those  who  were  running  hither  and  hither  on  the  business 
of  the  Gospel,  were  the  persons  whom  he  willed  to  be  charged 
with  examination  of  such  affairs.  Whence  it  is  no  where 
written  of  him  that  he  on  any  occasion  gave  up  his  time  to 
such  matters  ;  from  which  we  are  not  able  to  excuse  our- 
selves, even  though  we  be  contemptible  ;  because  he  willed 
even  such  to  be  put  in  place,  in  case  there  were  lack  of  wise 
men,  rather  than  have  the  affairs  of  Christians  to  be  brought 
into  the  public  courts.  Which  labour,  however,  we  not 
without  consolation  of  the  Lord  take  upon  us,  for  hope  of 
.eternal  life,  that  we  may  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience.  For 
we  are  servants  unto  His  Church,  and  most  of  all  to  the 
weaker  members,  whatsoever  members  we  in  the  same  body 
may  chance  to  be.  I  pass  by  other  innumerable  ecclesiastical 
cares,  which  perchance  no  man  credits  but  he  who  hath 
experienced  the  same.  Therefore  we  do  not  bind  heavy 
burdens  and  place  them  on  your  shoulders,  while  we  om-selves 
touch  them  not  so  much  as  with  a  finger;  since  indeed  if 
with  safety  to  our  office  we  might,  (He  seeth  it,  Who  tries 
our  hearts!)  we  would  rather  do  these  things  which  we  exhort 


Obedience  to  Bishops  claimed  as  in  any  case  due.     511 
vou  to  do,  than  the  things  which  we  ourselves  are  forced  to     be 

OPE  RE 

do.     True  it  is,  to  all  both  us  and  you,  while  according  to  mona- 
our  degree  and  office  we  labour,  both  the  way  is  strait  in    *^h°- 

'^  •'  ,  RUM. 

labour  and  toil;  and  yet,  while  we  rejoice  in  hope,  His  yoke 
is  easy  and  His  burden  light,  Who  hath  called  us  unto  rest, 
Who  passed  forth  before  us  from  the  vale  of  tears',  where  not 
Himself  either  was  without  pressure  of  griefs.     If  ye  be  our 
brethren,  if  our  sons,  if  we  be  your  fellow-servants,  or  rather 
in  Christ  your  servants,  hear  what  we  admonish,  acknowledge 
what   we    enjoin,    take    what   we    dispense.      But   if  we   be 
Pharisees,  binding  heavy  burdens  and  laying  them  on  your 
shoulders;    yet   do  ye   the   things  we  say,  even  though   yeMat.23, 
disapprove  the  things  we  do.     But  to  us  it  is  a  very  small 
thing  that  we  be  judged  by  you,  or  of  any  human  assize '.  i  Cor.4, 
Of  how  near  and  dear-  charity  is  our  care  on  your  behalf,  letTabhu- 
Him  look  into  it  Who  hath  given  what  we  may  offer  to  be  maao 
looked  into  by  His  eyes.     In  fine  :  think  what  ye  will  of  us  :  2  ger- 
Paul   the  Apostle  enjoins  and  beseeches  you  in  the  Lord,  ™^°^- 
that  with  silence,  that  is,  quietly  and  obediently  ordered,  ye  2  Thess. 
do  work  and  cat  your  own  bread.     Of  him,  as  I  suppose,  ye   ' 
believe  no  evil,  and  He  who  by  him  doth   speak,  on  Him 
have  ye  believed. 

38.  These  things,  my  brother  Aurelius,  most  dear  unto  xxx. 
me,  and  in  the  bowels  of  Christ  to  be  venerated,  so  far  as  He 
hath  bestowed  on  me  the  ability  Who  through  thee  com- 
manded me  to  do  it,  touching  work  of  Monks,  I  have  not 
delayed  to  write ;  making  this  my  chief  care,  lest  good 
brethren  obeying  apostolic  precepts,  should  by  lazy  and 
disobedient  be  called  even  prevaricators  from  the  Gospel : 
that  they  which  work  not,  may  at  the  least  account  them 
which  do  work  to  be  better  than  themselves  without  doubt. 
But  who  can  bear  that  contumacious  persons  resisting  most 
wholesome  admonitions  of  the  Apostle,  should,  not  as  weaker 
brethren  be  borne  withal,  but  even  be  preached  up  as  holier 
men;  insomuch  that  monasteries  founded  on  sounder  doctrine 
should  be  by  this  double  enticement  corrupted,  the  dissolute 
Jicence  of  vacation  from  labour,  and  the  false  name  of 
sanctity  ?  Let  it  be  known  then  to  the  rest,  our  brethren 
and  sons,  who  are  accustomed  to  favour  such  men,  and 
through  ignorance  to  defend  this  kind  of  presumption,  that 


512     )SV.  Paurs  rule  against  men's  ic  earing  long  hair. 

»E     they  need  themselves  most  chiefly  to  be  corrected,  in  order 

MONA^  that  those  may  be  corrected,  not  that  they  become  weary  in 

cHo-    well-doing.      Trnly,   in    that    they    do    promptly    and    with 

T-x,T—^  alacrity  minister  unto  the   servants  of  God  the  things  they 

3,  13.     need,  not  only  we  blame  them  not,  but  we  most  cordially 

embrace  them  :    only  let  them  not  with  perverse  mercy  more 

hurt  these  men's  future  life,  than  to  their  present  life  they 

render  aid. 

39.  For  there  is  less  sin,  if  people  do  not  praise  the  sinner 
Pp.9,24.in  the  desires  of  his  soul,  and  speak  good  of  him  who  prac- 
'-^^'  ^:^  tiselh  iniquities.  Now  what  is  more  an  iniquity  than  to  wish 
to  be  obeyed  by  inferiors,  and  to  refuse  to  obey  superiors  ? 
The  Apostle,  1  mean,  not  us  :  insomuch  that  they  even  let 
their  hair  grow  long  :  a  matter,  of  which  he  would  have  no 
1  Cor.  disputing  at  all,  saying,  If  any  chooseth  to  be  contentious^  we 
J;*  ^^*  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  Church  of  God.  Now  this 
I  command^ ;  which  gives  us  to  understand  that  it  is  not 
cleverness  of  reasoning  that  we  are  to  look  for,  but  authority 
of  one  giving  command  to  attend  unto.  For  whereuhto, 
I  pray  thee,  pertaineth  this  also,  that  people  so  openly 
against  the  Apostle's  precepts  wear  long  hair?  Is  it  that 
there  must  be  in  such  sort  vacation,  that  not  even  the 
barbers  are  to  work?  Or,  because  they  say  that  they  imitate 
the  Gospel  birds,  do  they  fear  to  be,  as  it  were,  plucked,  lest 
they  be  not  able  to  fly  ?  I  shrink  from  saying  more  against 
this  fault,  out  of  respect  for  certain  long-haired  brethren,  in 
whom,  except  this,  we  find  much,  and  well-nigh  every  thing, 
to  venerate.  But  the  more  we  love  them  in  Christ,  the  more 
solicitously  do  we  admonish  them.  Nor  are  we  afraid  indeed, 
lest  their  humility  reject  our  admonition;  seeing  that  we  also 
desire  to  be  admonished  by  such  as  they,  wherever  we  chance 
to  stumble  or  to  go  aside.  This  then  we  admonish  so  holy 
men,  not  to  be  moved  by  foolish  quibblings  of  vain  persons, 
and  imitate  in  this  perversity  them  whom  in  all  else  they  are 
far  from  resembling.  For  those  persons,  hawking  about  a 
venal  hypocrisy,  fear  lest  shorn  sanctity  be  held  cheaper 
than  long-haired ;  because  forsooth  he  who  sees  them  shall 

h  E.  V.  follows  text  rec.  roZvo  Ji  ^ulg.  have  rovre  "Si  ^ra^ayyiXXu  ouk 
^upmyyiXXiiifi  ovx  l-raiyu,  but  good  Mss.  itrxmuv,  hoc  autem  preecipio  non  lau- 
anii    Versions    besides    the    Ital.   and     dans. 


False  pretence  of  Jtnmillly  in  imHaling  Nazarites.       513 

call  to  mind  those  ancients  whom  we  read  of,  Samuel  and  the     de 
rest  who  did  not  cut  off' their  hair.    And  they  do  not  consider  mona- 
what  is  the  difference  between  that  prophetic  veil,  and  this    cho- 
unveiling  which  is  in  the  Gospel,  of  which  the  Apostle  saith,  ^^ — r^ 
When  thou  shalt  go  over'  unto  Christ,  the  veil  shall  be  takenQ,  5. 
away.     That,  namely,  which  was  signified  in  the  veil  inter- ^(5  °'^'  ' 
posed  between  the  face  of  Moses  and  the  beholdin"-  of  theExod. 

...  34    33. 

people  Israel,  that  same  w^as  also  signified  in  those  times  by     ' 
the  long  hair  of  the  Saints.     For  the  same  Apostle  saith,  that 
long  hair  is  also  instead  of  a  veil  :  by  vvhose  authority  these 
men  are  hard  pressed.     Seeing  he  saith  openly.  If  a  man 
wear  long  hair,  it  is  a  disgrace  to  him.     '  The  very  disgrace,' 
say  they,  '  we  take  upon  us,  for  desert  of  our  sins  :'  holding 
out  a  screen  of  simulated  humility,  to  the  end  that  under 
cover  of  it  they  may  carry  on  their  trade  of  self-importance '. '  vena- 
Just  as  if  the  Apostle  were  teaching  pride  when  he  says, '®j^™^^' 
Every  man  praying  or  prophesying  with  veiled  head  shameth  iCor.ii, 
his  head;  and,  A  man  ought  not  to  veil  his  head,  forsomuch^' 
as  he  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God.     Consequently  he  who 
says.  Ought  not,  knows  not  perchance  how  to  teach  humility! 
However,  if  this  same  disgrace  in  time  of  the  Gospel,  which 
was  a  thing  of  a  holy  meaning-  in  time  of  Prophecy,  be  by-sacra- 
these  people  courted  as  matter  of  humility,  then  let  them  i^g™^"*"™ 
shorn,  and  veil  their  head  with  haircloth.     Only  then  there 
will  be  none  of  that  attracting  of  people's  eyes  in  which  ihey 
trade^,  because  Samson  was  veiled  not  with  haircloth,  buts  species 
with  his  long  hair.  ilia  ve- 

°  nahs 

40.  And  then  that  further  device  of  theirs,  (if  words  can  xxxii. 
express  it,)  how  painfully  ridiculous  is  it,  which  they  have 
invented  for  defence  of  their  long  locks  !  '  A  man,'  say  they, 
'  the  Apostle  hath  forbidden  to  have  long  hair:  but  then  they 
who  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
are  no  longer  men.'  O  dotage  unparalleled  !  Well  may  the 
person  who  says  this  arm  himself  against  Holy  Scripture's 
most  manifest  proclamations,  with  counsel  of  outrageous 
impiety,  and  persevere  in  a  tortuous  path,  and  essay  to  bring 
in  a  pestiferous  doctrine  that  not  Blessed  is  the  man  whoVs.l,!. 
hath  not  icalked  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  and  in  the 

'  Cum  transieris.  Gr.  nuKx  3*  a>  i^r/»■r^i^/'«,  sc.  i  'lo^ariX  Chrys.  Theod.  or  rit 
Origen. 

L    1 


DB 
OPERE 


514         Foolish  presumption  of  disown i in/  manhood. 

way  of  sinners  hath  not  stood,  and  in  the  chair  of  noisome 
MONA-  wickedness'^  hath  not  sat.    For  if  he  wot  <i  meditate  in  God's 
'^Ho-   law  dav  and  niaht,  tliere  he  should  find  the  Apostle  Paul 

RUM  *  f-j        ■^  -i 

'^pesTi^  himself,    who    assuredly    professing    highest    chastity    saith, 

Jentiffi  /  woidd  that  all  men  ivere  even  as  I:  and  yet  shews  himself 
a  man,  not  only  in  so  being,  but  also  in  so  speaking.    For  he 

iCor.13,  saith,  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood 
as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child ;  but  when  I  became  a  man^ 
J  put  aivay  childish  things.  But  why  should  T  mention  the 
Apostle,  when  concerning  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Himself 
they  know  not  what  they  think  v/ho  say  these  things.    For  of 

Eph.  4,  Whom  but  Him  is  it  said,  Until  we  come  all  to  unity  of  faith 

13   14 

a7id  to  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  the  Perfect  Man,  to 
the  measure  of  the  age  of  the  fidness  of  Christ;  that  we  be 
no  longer  babes,  tossed  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of 
doctrine,  in  sleight  of  men,  in  cunning  craftiness  for  machi- 
nation of  error.  With  which  sleight  these  persons  deceive 
ignorant  people,  with  which  cunning  craftiness  and  machi- 
nations of  the  enemy  both  they  themselves  are  whirled  round, 
and  in  their  whirling  essay  to  make  the  minds  of  the  weak 
which  cohere  unto  them  so  (in  a  manner)  to  spin  round  with 
them,  that  they  also  may  not  know  where  they  are.    For  they 

Gal.  3,  have  heard  or  read  that  which  is  written,  Whosoever  of  you 
have  been  baptized  in  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ:  where  is  no 
Jew  nor  Greek ;  no  bond  nor  free ;  no  male  nor  female. 
And  they  do  not  understand  that  it  is  in  reference  to  concu- 

2Cor.4,piscence  of  carnal  sex  that  this  is  said,  because  in  the  inner 
man,  wherein  we  are  renewed  in  newness  of  our  mind,  no  sex 
of  this  kind  exists.  Then  let  them  not  deny  themselves  to  be 
men,  just  because  in  respect  of  their  masculine  sex  they  work 
not.  For  wedded  Christians  also  who  do  this  work,  are  of 
course  not  Christians  on  the  score  of  that  which  they  have  in 
common  with  the  rest  who  are  not  Christians  and  with  the 
vezy  cattle.  For  that  is  one  thing  that  is  either  to  infirmity 
conceded  or  to  mortal  propagation  paid  as  a  debt,  but  another 
that  which  for  the  laying  hold  of  incorrupt  and  eternal  life  is 
by  faithful  profession  signified.  That  then  which  concerning 
not  veiling  of  the  head  is  enjoined  to  men,  in  the  body  indeed 
it  is  set  forth  in  a  figure,  but  that  it  is  enacted  in  the  mind, 
wherein  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God,  the  words  themselves 


The  Image  of  God  is  in  the  renewed  Mind.         515 

do  indicate :  A  man  indeed,  it  saith,  ought  not  to  veil  his    de 
head,  forsomuch  as  he  is  the  image  and  g lory  of  God.     For  °^^^^ 


MONA- 

where  this  image  is,  he  doth  himself  declare,  where  he  saith,    ^ho- 
Lie  not  one  to  another;  hut  stripping  off  the  old  man  with  ^^1  3 
his  deeds,  put  ye  on  the  new,  which  is  reneived  to  the  acknow-  9-  10. 
ledging  of  God,  according  to  the  image  of  Him  who  created 
him.     Who  can  doubt  that  this  renewing  takes  place  in  the 
mind?     But  and  if  any  doubt,  let  him  hear  a  more  open 
sentence.     For,  giving  the  same  admonition,  he  thus  saith  in 
another  place :  As  is  the  truth  in  Jesus,  that  ye  put  off  con-  Eph.  4, 
cerning  the  former  conversation  the  old  jnan,  him  which  is'^^~'^'^ 
corrupt  according  to  the  lust  of  deception ;  but  be  ye  renewed 
in  the  spirit  of  your  mind,  and  put  on  the  new  man,  him 
which  after  God  is  created.     What  then?     Have  women  not 
this  renewal  of  mind  in  which  is  the  image  of  God  ?     Who 
would  say  this  ?      But  in  the  sex  of  their  body  they  do  not 
signify  this ;  therefore  they  are  bidden  to  be  veiled.     The 
part,  namely,  which   they  signify  in   the  very  fact  of  their 
being  women,  is  that  which  may  be  called  the  concupiscential 
part,  over  which  the  mind'  bears  rule,  itself  also  subjected  to'  mens 
its  God,  when  life  is  most  rightly  and    orderly  conducted. 
What,  therefore,  in  a  single  individual  human  being  is  tlie 
mind  and  the  concupiscence,  (that  ruling,  this  ruled  ;  that 
lord,  this  subject,)  the  same  in  two  human  beings,  man  and 
woman,  is  in  regard  of  the  sex  of  the  body  exhibited  in  a 
figure.    Of  which  sacred  import-  the  Apostle  speaks  when  he  ^sacra- 
says,  that  the  man  ought  not  to  be  veiled,  the  woman  ought.  '^^"  ""^ 
For  the  mind  doth  the  more  gloriously  advance  to  higher 
things,  the  more  diligently  the  concupiscence  is  curbed  from 
lower  things  ;  until  the  whole  man  together  with  even  this 
now"  mortal  and  frail  body  in  the  last  resurrection  be  clothed 
with  incorruption  and  immortality,  and  death  be  swallowed  iCor  15, 
up  in  victory. 

41.  Wherefore,  they  which  vvill  not  do  right  things,  let  xxxiii. 
them  give  over  at  least  to  teach  wrong  things.  Howbeit  ihey 
be  others  whom  in  this  speech  we  reprove :  but  as  for  those 
who  by  this  one  fault,  of  letting  their  hair  contrary  to 
apostolic  precept  grow  long,  offend  and  trouble  the  Church, 
because  when  some  being  unwilling  to  think  of  them  any 
thing  amiss  are  forced  to  twist  the  manifest  words  of  the 

l12 


516         Earnest  entreaty  to  the  uell- disposed  Monks. 

oE      Apostle  into  a  wrong  meaning,  others  choose  to  defend  the 

monI^  sound  understanding  of  the  Scriptures  rather  than  fawn  upon 

^"°"    any  men,  there  arise  between  the  weaker  and  the  stronger 

brethren  most  bitter  and  perilous  contentions :   which  things 

perchance  if  they  knew,  these  would  correct  without  hesitation 
this  also,  in  whom  we  admire  and  love  all  else.    Those  then  we 
not  reprove,  but  ask  and  solemnly  beseech  by  the  Godhead 
and  the  Manhood  of  Christ  and  by  the  charity  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  that  they  no  more  put  this  stumbling-block  before  the 
weak   for  whom   Christ  died,  and    aggravate   the   grief  and 
torment  of  our  heart  when  we  bethink  us  how  much  more 
readily  evil  men  can  imitate  this  evil  thing  for  deceiving  of 
mankind,  when  they  see  this  in  them  whom  on  the  score  of 
other  so  great  good  we  with  deserved  offices  of  Christian  love 
do  honom*.     If  however,  after  this  admonition,  or  rather  this 
solemn  entreaty  of  ours,  they  shall  think  fit  to  persevere  in 
the  same,  we  shall  do  nothing  else  but  only  grieve  and  mourn. 
This  let  them  know;  it  is  enough.     If  they  be  servants  of 
God,  they  have  pity.     If  they  have  not  pity,  I  will  not  say 
any  thing  worse.     All  these  things,  therefore,  in  the  which 
peradventure  I  have  been  more  loquacious  than  the  occu- 
pations both  of  thee  and  of  me  could  wish,  if  thou  approve 
the  same,  make  thou  to  be  known  to  our  bi-ethren  and  sons, 
on  whose  behalf  thou  hast  deigned  to  put  this  burden  upon 
me :    but  if  ought  seem  to  thee  meet  to  be  withdrawn  or 
amended,  by  reply  of  your  Blessedness  I  shall    know  the 
same. 


S.     AUGUSTINE 

ON  CARE  TO  BE  HAD  FOR  THE  DEAD. 


From  the  Retractations,  Book  ii.  Chap.  64. 

The  book,  On  care  to  be  had  for  the  dead,  I  wrote,  having  being  asked  by 
letter  whether  it  profits  any  person  after  death  that  his  body  shall  be 
buried  at  the  memorial  of  any  Saint*.  The  book  begins  thus:  Long 
time  unto  your  Holiness,  my  venerable  felloiv -bishop  Paidiiius. 


1.  Lo?JG  time,  my  venerable  fellow-bishop  Paulinus,  have      de 
I  been  thy  Holiness's  debtor  for  an  answer;  ever  since  thou  ^^^^ 
wrotest  to  me  by  them  of  the  household  '  of  our  most  reli-    mor- 
gious  daughter  Flora,  asking  of  me  whether  it  profit   any  — -. — '- 
man  after  death  that  his  body  is  buried  at  the  memorial  of  i  j^o^j. 
some  Saint.     This,  namely,  had  the  said  widow  begged  of "es. 
thee   for  her  son  deceased  in   those  parts,  and  thou  hadst 
written   her  an   answer,   consoling  her,  and  announcing  to 
her  concerning  the  body  of  the  faithful  young  man  Cynegius, 
that  the  thing  which  she  with  motherly  and  pious  affection 
desired  was  done,  to  wit,  by  placing  it  in  the  basilica  of 
most  blessed  Felix  the  Confessor.     Upon  which  occasion  it 
came  to  pass,  that  by  the  same  bearers  of  thy  letter  thou 
didst  write  also  to  me,  raising  the  like  question,  and  craving 

»  The  date  may  be  conjectured  from  of  Dulcitius,  Quaest.   ii.  2,  3.      Ben. 

the  order  of  the  Retractations,  where  Paulinus,  to  whom  it  was   addressed, 

this  book  is  mentioned  next  after  the  was  Bishop   of  Nolaj,  and  took   great 

Enchiridion  ad  Laarentium,  which  was  pains  to  honour  the  memory  of  St.  Felix, 

not  finished    earlier   than    A.  D.  421.  who  is  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of 

The    first    two    paragraphs     of    this  it.    Several  poems  of  his  on  the  subject 

treatise  will  be  found  quoted  by  Au-  are  extant, 
gustine  in  his  Book  On  Eight  Questions 


corpus 


518  Prayer  may  aid  the  dead,  yet  each  receive  after  his  deeds. 
DE     that  I  would  answer  what  I  thought  of  this  matter,  at  the 

CURA  ..  X    /■      1  .  , 

PRO    same  time  not  lorbeanng  to  say  what  are  thme  own  senti- 
MOR-  nients.     For  thou  sayest  that  to  thy  thinlvino;  these  be  no 

TUTS.  .  *         .  •'  ° 

empty  motions  of  religious  and  faithful  minds,  which  take 

this  care  for  their  deceased  friends.     Thou  addest,  moreover, 

'  vacare  that  it  cannot  be  void  of  effect'  that  the  whole  Church  is  wont 
to  supplicate  for  the  dejiarted :  so  that  hence  it  may  be 
further  conjectured  that  it  doth  profit  a  person  after  death, 
if  by  the  faith  of  his  friends  for  the  interment  of  his  body 
such  a  spot  be  provided  wherein  may  be  apparent  the  aid, 
likewise  in  this  way  sought,  of  the.  Saints. 

2.  But  this    being    the    case,   hov/   to    this    opinion    that 

2  Cor.6,  should  not  be  contrary  which  the  Apostle  says,  For  we  shall 
all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  that  each  may 

per  receive  according  to  the  things  he  hath  done  by  the  body, 
whether  good  or  had;  this,  thou  signifiest,  thou  dost  not  well 
see.  For  this  apostolic  sentence  doth  before  death  admonish 
to  be  done,  that  which  may  profit  after  death;  not  then,  first, 
when  there  is  to  be  now  a  receiving  of  that  which  a  person 
shall  have  done  before  death.  True,  but  this  question  is  thus 
solved,  namely,  that  there  is  a  certain  kind  of  life  by  which 
is  acquired,  while  one  lives  in  this  body,  that  it  should  be 
possible  for  these  things  to  be  of  some  help  to  the  departed; 
and,  consequently,  it  is  according  to  the  tilings  done  by  the 
body,  that  they  are  aided  by  the  things  which  shall,  after  they 
have  left  the  body,  be  religiously  done  on  their  behalf.  For 
there  are  whom  these  things  aid  nothing  at  all,  namely,  when 
they  are  done  either  for  persons  whose  merits  are  so  evil,  that 
neither  by  such  things  are  they  worthy  to  be  aided;  or  for  per- 
sons whose  merits  are  so  good,  that  of  such  things  they  have  no 
need  as  aids.  Of  the  kind  of  life,  therefore,  which  each  hath 
led  by  the  body,  doth  it  come,  that  these  things  profit  or 
profit  not,  whatever  are  piously  done  on  his  behalf  when  he 
has  left  the  body.  For  touching  merit  whereby  these  things 
profit,  if  none  have  been  gotten  in  this  life,  it  is  in  vain 
sought  after  this  life.  So  it  comes  to  pass  as  well  that  not 
inani-  unmeaningly  -  doth  the  Church,  or  care  of  friends,  bestow 
upon  the  departed  whatever  of  religion  it  shall  be  able ;  as 
also  that,  nevertheless,  each  receiveth  according  to  the 
things   which   he   hath    done   by  the    body,  tvlteiher  it   he 


1 

ter 


CURA 

PRO 

MOK- 

TUIS. 


The  ChurcliS  custom.    Pagan  notions  about  burial.     519 

good  or  bad,  the  Lord  rendering  unto  each  according  to  his      de 

works.     For,  that  this  which  is  bestowed  should  be  capable 

of  profiting  him  after  the  body,  this  was  acquired  in  that  life 

which  he  hath  led  in  the  body. 

3.  Possibly  thy  inquiry  is  satisfied  by  this  my  brief  reply. 

But  what  other  considerations  move  me,  to  which  I  think 

meet  to  answer,  do  thou  for  a  short  space  attend.     In  the 

books  of  the  Maccabees  we  read  of  sacrifice  offered  for  the  2  Mac. 

12  43. 
dead.     Howbeit,  even  if  it  were  no  where  at  all  read  in  the     ' 

Old  Scriptures,  not  small  is  the  authority,  which  in  this 
usage  is  clear,  of  the  whole  Church,  namely,  that  in  the 
prayers  of  the  priest  which  are  offered  to  the  Lord  God  at 
His  altar,  the  commendation  of  the  dead  hath  also  its  place. 
But  then,  whether  there  be  some  profit  accruing  unto  the  "• 
soul  of  the  dead  from  the  place  of  its  body,  requires  a  more 
careful  enquiry.  And  first,  whether  it  make  any  difference 
in  causing  or  increasing  of  misery  after  this  life  to  the  spirits 
of  men  if  their  bodies  be  not  buried,  this  must  be  looked 
into,  not  in  the  light  of  opinion  however  commonly  received, 
but  rather  of  the  holy  writ  of  our  religion.  For  we  are  not 
to  credit  that,  as  is  read  in  Maro,  the  unburicd  are  prohibited 
from  navigating  and  crossing  the  infernal  stream  :  because 
forsooth 

To  none  is  ffiv'n  to  pass  the  hideous  banks  iEneid 

And  waters  hoarse,  ere  in  their  meet  abode  '^i-  327, 

The  bones  have  sunk  to  rest. 

Who  can  incline  a  Christian   heart  to   these   poetical  and 
fabulous  figments,  when  the  I^ord  Jesus,  to  the  intent  that 
under  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  who   should  have  their 
bodies  in  their  power,  .Christians  might  lie  down  witliout 
a  fear,  asserts  that  not  a  hair  of  their   head   shall   perish.  Mat.  10, 
exhorting  that  they  should  not  fear  them  which  when  they  Lukei2, 
have  killed  the  body  have  nothing  more  that  they  can  do  t  *-^  ^^^ 
Of  which  in   the   first   book  On    the  CUy  of  God,  I   have 
methinks  enough  spoken,  to  break  the  teeth  in  their  mouths 
who,  in  imputing   to  Christian  times   the  barbarous  devas- 
tation, especially  that  which   Rome   has   lately  suffered,  do 
cast  up  to  us  this  also,  that  Christ  did  not  there  come  to  the 
succour  of  His  own.    To  whom  when  it  is  answered  that  the 
souls  of  the  faithful  were,  according  to  the  merits  of  their 


520  Chrislians  taiiijhl  not  to  fear  fur  the  body  after  death. 

DE     faith,  by  Him  taken  into  protection,  they  insult  over  us  with 

PRO^  talking  of  their  corjises  left  unburicd.     All  this  matter,  then, 

MOF-   concerning  burial  1  have  in  such  words  as  these  expounded, 

-^      4.  "  But"   (say    1}   "  in    such    a    slaughter-heap    of   dead 

bodies,  could  they  not  even  be  buried  ?  not  this,  either,  doth 

pious  faith  too  greatly  dread,  holding  that  which  is  foretold 

that  not  even  consuming  beasts  will  be  an  hindrance  to  the 

Luke2l,  rising  again  of  bodies  of  which  not  a  hair  of  the  head  shall 

Mat. 10  perish.     Nor  in  any  wise  would  Truth  say,  Fear  not  them 

28—30.  icJiicJi  kill  the  hodi/,  but  cannot  kill  the  soul ;   if  it  could  at 

Lukel2,    ,,  1  .,,,...    ■  ,  .  •    1         1 

4.  7.  all  hnider  the  hie  to  come  whatever  eneunes  might  choose  to 
do  with  tlie  bodies  of  the  slain.  Unless  haply  any  is  so 
absurd  as  to  contend  that  they  ought  not  to  be  feared  before 
death,  lest  ihey  kill  the  body,  but  ought  to  be  feared  after 
death,  lest,  having  killed  the  body,  they  suffer  it  not  to  be 
buried.  Is  that  then  false  which  Christ  says,  fJ  ho  kill  the 
body,  and.  aftericards  hare  no  more  that  they  can  do,  if  they 
have  so  great  things  that  they  can  do  on  dead  bodies  .f'  Far  be 
the  thought,  that  that  should  be  i'alse  which  Truth  hath  said. 
For  the  thing  said  is,  that  they  do  somewhat  when  they  kill, 
because  in  the  body  there  is  feeling  while  it  is  in  killing,  but 
afterward  they  have  nothing  more  that  they  can  do  because 
there  is  no  feeling  in  the  body  when  killed.  Many  bodies, 
then,  of  Chrislians  the  earth  hath  not  covered  :  but  none  of 
them  hath  any  separated  from  heaven  and  earth,  the  whole 
of  which  lie  filleth  with  presence  of  Himself,  Wlio  kuovveth 
whence   to  resuscitate   that  which   He   created.     It  is   said 

Ps.  79,  indeed  in  the  Psalm,  The  dead,  bodies  of  thy  servants  have 
they  yiren  fur  meat  unto  the  fonts  of  the  heaven,  the  Jlesh  of 
thy  saints  unto  tjte  beasts  of  t lie  eartJi:  they  have  shed  their 
blood  like  n  ater  round  abouJ  Jerusalem,  and  there  was  no 
man  to  bury  tJiem:  but  more  to  heighten  the  cruelty  of  thera 
who  did  these  things,  not  to  the  infelicity  of  them  who 
suffered  them.      For,  however,  in  sight  of  men  these  things 

Ps.  110,  may  seem  hard  and  dire,  yet  precious  in  the  sight  of  tlie 
Lord  is  tlie  death  of  His  saints.  So,  then,  all  these  things, 
care  of  funeral,  bestowal  in  sepulture,  pomp  of  obsequies, 
are  more  for  comfort  of  the  living,  than  for  help  to  the  dead. 
If  it  at  all  profit  the  ungodly  to  have  costly  sepulture,  it  shall 
harm  the  godly  to  have  vile  srpidturc  or  none.     Kight  hand- 


Even  Heathens  cuuld  be  above  fear  of  the  bod  if  s  fate.    5-21 
some  obsequies  in  sight  of  men  did  that  rich  man  who  was      de 


CURA 
PRO 


clad  in  purple  receive  of  the  crowd  of  his  houselblk  ;  but  far 
more  handsome  did  that  poor  man  who  was   full  of  sores   m'^R- 

TUTS. 

obtain  of  the  ministry  of  Angels;  who  bore  him  not  out j^^^j^^^g 
into  a  marble  tomb,  but  into  Abraham's  bosom  bore  him  on  19—22. 
high.  All  this  they  laugh  at,  against  whom  we  have  under- 
taken to  defend  the  City  of  God:  but  for  all  that  their  own 
philosophers,  even,  held  care  of  sepulture  in  contempt;  and 
often  whole  armies,  while  dying  for  their  earthly  country, 
cared  not  where  they  should  after  lie,  or  to  what  beasts  they 
should  become  meat;  and  the  poets  had  leave  to  say  of  this 
matter  with  applause 

tJiough  all  unurn^d  he  lie. 
His  covring  is  the  uverarchivg  skr/^. 

How  much  less  ought  they  to  make  a  vauntingji  about 
unburied  bodies  of  Christians,  to  whom  the  flesh  itself  with 
all  its  members,  refashionod,  not  only  from  the  earth,  but 
even  from  the  other  elements,  yea,  from  their  most  secret 
windings,  whereinto  these  evanished  corpses  have  retired,  is 
assured  to  be  in  an  instant  o^'  time  rendered  back  and  made 
entire  as  at  the  first,  according  to  His  promise  ? 

5.  Yet  it  follows  not  that  the  bodies  of  the  departed  are     iii. 
to  be  despised  and  flung  aside,  and  above  all  of  just  and 
faithful  men,  which  bodies  as  organs  and  vessels  to  all  good 
works    their    spirit    hath    holily    used.       For   if    a   father's 
garment  and  ring,  and  whatever  such  like,  is  the  more  dear 
to  those  whom  they  leave  behind,  the  greater  their  affection 
is  towards  their  parents,  in  no  wise  are  the  bodies  themselves 
to  be  spurned,  which  truly  we  wear  in  more  familiar  and 
close  conjunction  than   any  of  our  ])Utting  on.     For  these 
pertain  not  to  ornament  or  aid  which  is  applied  from  without, 
l)nt  to  the  very  nature  of  man.     Whence  also  the  funerals  of  Gen. 23; 
the  just  men  of  old  were  with  dutiful  ]jiety  cared  for,  ^md  4^' ^q  ' 
their   obsequies    celebrated,   and    sepulture    provided :    and 
themselves  while  living  did  touching  burial  or  even  transla- 
tion of  their  bodies  give  charge  to  their  sons.     Tobias  also,  Tobit  2, 

•  •    7'  12  12 

to  have  by  burying  of  the  dead  obtained  favour  with  God,  is  '     '    ' 

by   Nvitness  of  an  Angel  commended.     The   Lord  Himself 

*>  Lucan  vii.  819.  speaking  of  the  slain  in  the  battle  of  Pharsalia,  whose  bodies 
Caesar  forbad  to  burn  or  inter. 


522     Care  due  to  the  body  as  to  rise  again,  not  needed, 

DE     also,  about  to  rise   on    the  third    day,  both   preaches,  and 

pjjo    commends   to  be   preached,  the   good  work   of  a  religious 

MOR-   woman,  that  she  poured  out  a  precious  ointment  over  His 

TUIS.       .  ...  .  . 

jyj^^  ^g  limbs,  and  did  it  for  His  burial :  and  they  are  with  praise 
7 — 13.  commemorated  in  the  Gospel,  who  having  received  His 
Jolini9,  Body  from  the  cross  did  carefully  and  with  reverend  honour 
see  it  wound  and  laid  in  the  sepulchre.  These  authorities 
however  do  not  put  us  upon  thinking  that  there  is  in  dead 
bodies  any  feeling  ;  but  rather,  that  the  Providence  of  God 
(Who  is  moreover  pleased  with  such  offices  of  piety)  doth 
charge  itself  with  the  bodies  also  of  the  dead,  this  they 
betoken,  to  the  intent  our  faith  of  resurrection  might  be 
stayed  up  thereby.  Where  also  is  wholesomely  learned,  how 
great  may  be  the  reward  for  alms  which  we  do  unto  the 
living  ii^d  feeling,  if  not  even  that  be  lost  before  God, 
whatever  of  duty  and  of  diligence  is  paid  to  the  lifeless 
members  of  men.  There  are  indeed  also  other  things,  which 
in  speaking  of  the  bestowal  or  removal  of  their  bodies  the 
holy  Patriarchs  willed  to  be  understood  as  spoken  by  the 
prophetic  Spirit :  but  this  is  not  the  place  to  treat  thoroughly 
of  these  things,  seeing  that  sufficeth  which  we  have  said. 
But  if  the  lack  of  those  things  which  are  necessary  for 
sustentation  of  the  living,  as  food  and  clothing,  however 
.  heavy  affliction  attend  the  lacking,  do  not  break  in  good 
men  the  manly  courage  of  bearing  and  enduring,  nor  eradicate 
piety  from  the  mind,  but  by  exercising  make  it  more  fruitful; 
how  much  more  doth  lack  of  those  things  which  are  wont  to 
be  applied  for  care  of  funerals  and  bestowal  of  bodies  of  the 
departed,  not  make  them  wretched,  now  that  in  the  hidden 
abodes  of  the  pious  they  are  at  rest  !  And  therefore,  when 
these  things  have  to  dead  bodies  of  Christians  in  that 
devastation  of  the  great  City  or  of  other  towns  also  been  lack- 
ing, there  is  neither  fault  of  the  living,  who  could  not  afford 
these  things,  nor  pain  of  the  dead  who  could  not  feel  the 
same."  This  is  my  opinion  concerning  the  ground  and 
reason  of  sepulture.  Which  I  have  therefore  from  another 
book  of  mine  transferred  to  this,  because  it  was  easier  to 
rehearse  this,  than  to  express  the  same  matter  in  another 
way. 

•^  On  the  City  of  God,  book  i,  chap.  J  2,  13. 


Memorials  of  Martyrs  rerniiid  us  lo  ask  their  aid.     523 

G.  If  this  be  true,  doubtless  also  the  jivoviding  for  the  de 
inlemient  ot  bodies  a  place  at  the  Memorials  of  Saints,  is  a  ^^^q 
mark  of  a  good  human  affection  towards  the  remains  of  one's    ^'^^- 

TU  IS 

friends :    since  if   there   be   religion    in   the    burying,  there  — : — - 
cannot  but  bo  religion  in  taking  thought  where  the  burying 
shall   be.     But  while   it   is  desirable  there  should  be  such 
like  solaces  of  survivors,  for  the  shewing  forth  of  their  pious 
mind  towards  their  beloved,  I  do  not  see  what  helps  they  be 
to  the  dead  save  in  this  way :    that  upon  recollection  of  the 
place  in  which  are  deposited  the  bodies  of  those  whom  they 
love,  they  should  by  prayer  commend  them  to  those  same 
Saints,  who  have  as  patrons  taken  them  into  their  charge  to 
aid  them  before  the  Lord.     Which  indeed  they  would  be 
still  able   to  do,  even  though   they  were   not  able  to   inter 
them  in  such  places.     But  then  the  only  reason  why  the 
name  Memorials  or  Monuments  is  given  to  those  sepulchres 
of  the  dead  which  become  specially   distinguished,  is  that 
they  recal  to  memory,  and  by  putting  in  mind  cause  us  to 
think  of,  them  who  by  death  are  withdrawn  from  the  eyes  of 
the  living,  that  they  may  not  by  forgetfulness  be  also  with- 
drawn   from  men's  hearts.     For  both    the   term   MemoriaP '  Me- 
most  plainly  shews  this,  and  Monument  is  so  named  from 
mouishing,  that  is,  putting  in  mind.     For  which  reason  the 
Greeks  also  call  that  jU,vr]]w.s7ov  which  we  call  a  Memorial  or 
Moninuent :    because  in  their  tongue  the  memory  itself,  by 
which  we  remember,  is  called  n^vijiarj.      When  therefore  the 
mind  recollects  where  the  body  of  a  very  dear  friend  lies 
buried,  and  thereupon  there  occurs  to  the  thoughts  a  place 
rendered  venerable  by  the  name  of  a  Martyr,  to  that  same 
Martyr  doth  it  commend  the  soul  in  affection  of  heartfelt 
recollection  ^  and  prayer.   And  when  this  affection  is  exhibited  ^  recor- 
to  the  departed  by  faithful  men  who  were  most  dear  to  them,  ^*'°'"® 
there  is  no  doubt  that  it  profits  them  who  while  living  in  the 
body  merited  that  such  things  should  profit  them  after  this 
life.     But  even  if  some  necessity  should  through  absence  of 
all  i'acility  not  allow  bodies  to  be  interred,  or  in  such  places 
interred,  yet  should  there  be  no  pretermitting  of  supplications 
for  the  spirits  of  the  dead :    which  supplications,  that  they 
should  be  made  for  all  in  Christian  and  catholic  fellowship 
departed,  even  without  mentioning  of  their  names,  under  a 


524       The  place  profiis  through  the  prayers  it  occaaions. 
BE     general    commemoration,  the  Church  hath    charged  herself 

C  UK.  A 

PRO  ^'''itlial ;  to  the  intent  that  they  which  lack,  for  these  offices, 
MOH-  parents  or  sons  or  whatever  kindred  or  friends,  may  have  the 
same  afforded  unto  them  by  the  one  pious  mother  which  is 
common  to  all.  But  if  there  were  lack  of  these  supplications, 
which  are  made  with  right  faith  and  piety  for  the  dead,  I 
accoimt  that  it  should  not  a  whit  profit  their  spirits,  how- 
soever in  holy  places  the  lifeless  bodies  should  be  deposited. 
^'-  7.  When  therefore  the  faithful  mother  of  a  faithful  son 

departed  desired  to  have  his  body  deposited  in  the  basilica 
of  a  Martyr,  forasmuch  as  she  believed  that  his  soul  would  be 
aided  by  the  merits  of  the  Martyr,  the  very  believing  of  this 
was  a  sort  of  supplication,  and  this  profited,  if  ought  profited. 
And  in  that  she  recurs  in  her  thoughts  to  this  same  sepulchre, 
and  in  her  prayers  more  and  more  commends  her  son,  the 
spirit  of  the  departed  is  aided,  not  by  the  place  of  its  dead 
body,  but  by  that  which  springs  from  memoiy  of  the  place, 
the  living  affection  of  the  mother.     For  at  once  the  thought, 
who  is  commended  and  to  whom,  doth  touch,  and  that  with 
no  unprofitable  emotion,  the  religious  mind  of  her  who  prays. 
'orantesFor  also  in  prayer  to  God',  men   do  with  the  members  of 
their  bodies  that  which  becometh  suppliants,  when  they  bend 
their   knees,  when  they  stretch    forth  their  hands,  or   even 
prostrate  themselves  on  the  ground,  and  whatever  else  they 
visibly  do,  albeit  their  invisible  will  and  hearts'  intention  be 
knovvn  unto  God,  and  He  needs  not  these  tokens  that  any 
man's  mind  should  be  opened  unto  Him  :    only  hereby  one 
more  excites  himself  to  pray  and  groan  more  humbly  and 
more  fervently.     And  I  know  not  how  it  is,  that,  while  these 
motions  of  the  body  cannot  be  made  but  by  a  motion  of  the 
mind  preceding,  yet  by  the  same  being  outwardly  in  visible 
sort    made,  that  inward  invisible  one  which  made  them  is 
increased:    and  thereby  the  heart's  affection  which  preceded 
that  they  might  be  made,  groweth  because  they  are  made. 
But  still  if  any  be  in  that  way  held,  or  even  bound,  that  he 
is  not  able  to  do  these  things  with  his  limbs,  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  inner  man  does  not  pray,  and  before  the  eyes 
of  God  in  its  most  secret  chamber,  where  it  hath  compuncdon, 
cast  itself  on   the  ground.     So  likewise,  while  it  makes  very 
much  difference,  where  a  person  deposits  the  body  of  his  dead, 


Bones  of  Martyrs  sometimes  deprived  of  burial.         525 

while  he  supplicates  for  his  spirit  unto  God,  because  both  de 
the  affection  preceding  chose  a  spot  which  was  holy,  and  p^„ 
after  the  bodv  is  there  deposited  the  recalling  to  mind  of  mor- 

TUIS. 

that  holy  spot  renews  and  increases  the  affection  which  had 

preceded  ;  yet,  though  he  may  not  be  able  in  that  place 
which  his  religious  mind  did  choose  to  lay  in  the  ground 
him  whom  he  loves,  in  no  wise  ought  he  to  cease  from 
necessary  supplications  in  commending  of  the  same.  For 
wheresoever  the  flesh  of  the  departed  may  lie  or  not  lie,  the 
spirit  requires  rest  and  must  get  it :  for  the  spirit  in  its 
departing  from  thence  took  with  it  the  consciousness  without 
which  it  could  make  no  odds  how  one  exists,  whether  in  a 
good  estate  or  a  bad  :  and  it  does  not  look  for  aiding  of  its 
life  from  that  flesh  to  which  it  did  itself  afford  the  life  which 
it  withdrew'  in  its  departing,  and  is  to  render  back  in  its 
returning ;  since  not  flesh  to  spirit,  but  spirit  unto  flesh 
procurelh  merit  even  of  very  resurrection,  whether  it  be  unto 
punishment  or  unto  glory  that  it  is  to  come  to  life  again. 

8.   We  read  in  the  Ecclesiastical  History  which  Eusebius     vi. 
wrote  in  Greek,  and  Ruffinus  turned  into  the  Latin  tongue, 
of  Martyrs'  bodies  in  Gaul  exposed  to  dogs,  and  how  the 
leavings  of  those  dogs  and  bones  of  the  dead  were,  even  to 
uttermost  consumption,  by  fire  burned  up  ;   and  the  ashes  of 
the  same  scattered  on  the  river  Rhone,  lest  any  thing  should 
be  left  for  any  sort  whatever  of  memorial ''.     Which  thing 
must    be  believed    to  have  been  to   no  other  end  divinely 
permitted,  but    that  Christians    should   learn  in    confessing 
Christ,  while  they  despise  this  life,  much  more  to  despise 
sepulture.      For   this   thing,  which    with    savage    rage   was 
done  to   the  bodies   of  Martyrs,  if  it  could   any  whit  hurt 
them,  to  impair  the  blessed  resting  of  their  most  victorious 
spirits,  would  assuredly  not  have  been  suffered  to  be  done. 
In  very  deed  therefore    it  was    declared,  that    the  Lord  in 
saying,  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  bodi/,  and  after  ward  M&tAO, 
have  no  more  that  they  can  do,  did  not  mean  that  He  would  Lutei2 
not   permit   them   to    do    any  thing   to    the  bodies   of   His  4. 
followers    when    dead ;    but    that    whatever   they   might   be 

"*  Eusebius,  H.  E.  book  v.  chap.  1.  for  six  days  successi'vely,  and  were 
relates,  that  the  bodies  of  these  martyrs  then  burned  and  cast  into  the  Rhone, 
of  Lyons  lay  exposed  in  the  open  air     Ben. 


526    How  far  the  'Man  of  God  from  Judalt  was  piifiished. 
DE     permitted  to  do,  nothing  should  be  done  that  could  lessen 


CURA 
PRO 


the  Christian  felicity  of  the  departed,  nothing  thereof  reach 
MOR-   to  their  consciousness  while  yet  living  after  death  ;  nothing 

avail  to  the  detriment,  no,  not  even  of  the  bodies  themselves, 

to  diiiiinish  anght  of  their  integrity  when  they  should  rise 
again, 
vii.  9.  And  yet,  by  reason  of  that  affection  of  the  human 
Eph.  5,  heart,  whereby  7io  man  ever  hatelh  his  own  Jlesh,  if  men 
^^*  have  reason  to  know  that  after  their  death  their  bodies  will 
lack  any  thing  which  in  each  man's  nation  or  country  the 
wonted  order  of  sepulture  demandeth,  it  makes  them  sorrowful 
as  men  ;  and  that  which  after  death  reacheth  not  unto  them, 
they  do  before  death  fear  for  their  bodies :  so  that  we  find  in 
the  Books  of  Kings,  God  by  one  prophet  threatening  another 
prophet  who  had  transgressed  His  word,  that  his  carcase 
should  not  be  brought  into  the  sepulchre  of  his  fathers. 
1  Kings  Which  the  Scripture  hath  on  this  wise :  T/ms  sailh  the 
13,21.  j^Q^fj^  Because  thou  hast  been  disobedient  to  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord,  and  hast  not  kept  the  charge  which  the  Lord  thy 
God  commanded  thee,  and  hast  returned  and  eaten  bread 
and  drunk  ivater  in  the  place  in  ivhich  He  commanded  thee 
not  to  eat  bread,  nor  drink  loater,  thy  carcase  shall  not  be 
brought  into  the  sepulchre  of  thy  fathers.  Now  if  in  con- 
sidering what  account  is  to  be  made  of  this  punishment,  we 
go  by  the  Gospel,  where  we  have  learned  that  after  the 
slaying  of  the  body  there  is  no  cause  to  fear  lest  the  lifeless 
members  should  suffer  any  tiling,  it  is  not  even  to  be  called 
a  punishment.  But  if  we  consider  a  man's  human  affection 
towards  his  own  flesh,  it  was  possible  for  him  to  be  frightened 
or  saddened,  while  living,  by  that  of  which  he  would  have  no 
sense  when  dead :  and  this  was  a  punishment,  because  the 
mind  was  pained  by  that  thing  about  to  happen  to  its  body, 
howsoever  when  it  did  happen  it  would  feel  no  pain.  To 
this  intent,  namely,  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  punish  His  servant, 
who  not  of  his  own  contumacy  had  spurned  to  fulfil  His 
command,  but  by  deceit  of  another's  falsehood  thought 
himself  to  be  obeying  when  he  obeyed  not.  For  it  is  not  to 
be  thought  that  he  was  killed  by  the  teeth  of  the  beast  as 
one  whose  soul  should  be  thence  snatched  away  to  the 
torments  of  hell :    seeing  that  over  his  very  body  the  same 


The  lying  PropheVs  care  for  his  own  body.  527 

lion  which  had  killed  it  did  keep  watch,  while  moreover  the  de 
beast  on  which  he  rode  was  left  unhurt,  and  along  with  that  pro 
fierce  beast  did  with  intrepid  presence  stand  there  beside  his   ^'^^' 

\  '  .  .  TUIS. 

master's  corpse.  By  which  marvellous  sign  it  appeareth,  ~ 
that  the  man  of  God  was,  say  rather,  checked  temporally 
even  unto  death,  than  punished  after  death.  Of  which 
matter,  the  Apostle  when  on  account  of  certain  offences  he 
had  mentioned  the  sicknesses  and  deaths  of  many,  says,  For  1  Cor. 
if  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged  of  the  32.' 
Lord.  But  ivhen  we  are  judged  we  are  chastened  of  the 
Lord,  that  ice  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  That 
Prophet,  truly,  the  very  man  who  had  beguiled  him,  did  with 
much  respect  bury  in  his  own  tomb,  and  took  order  for  his 
own  burying  beside  his  bones :  in  hope  that  thereby  his  own 
bones  might  be  spared,  when,  according  to  the  prophecy  of 
that  man  of  God,  Josiah  king  of  Judah  did  in  that  land 
disinter  the  bones  of  many  dead,  and  with  the  same  bones 
defile  the  sacrilegious  altars  which  had  been  set  up  for  the 
graven  images.  For  he  spared  that  tomb  in  which  lay  the 
prophet  who  more  than  three  hundred  years  before  predicted 
those  things,  and  for  his  sake  neither  was  the  sepulture  of 
him  who  had  seduced  him  violated.  By  that  affection, 
namely,  which  causes  that  no  man  ever  hateth  his  own  flesh, 
this  man  had  taken  forethought  for  his  carcase,  who  had 
slain  with  a  lie  his  own  soul.  By  reason  then  of  this,  the 
natural  love  which  every  man  hath  for  his  own  flesh,  it  was 
both  to  the  one  a  punishment  to  learn  that  he  should  not  be 
in  the  sepulchre  of  his  fathers,  and  to  the  other  a  care  to  take 
order  beforehand  that  his  own  bones  should  be  spared,  if  he 
should  lie  beside  him  whose  sepulchre  no  man  should 
violate. 

10.  This  affection  the  Martyrs  of  Christ  contending  for  viii. 
the  truth  did  overcome :  and  it*  is  no  marvel  that  they  de- 
spised that  whereof  they  should,  when  death  was  overpast, 
have  no  feeling,  when  they  could  not  by  those  torlm-es,  which 
while  alive  they  did  feel,  be  overcome.  God  was  able,  no 
doubt,  (even  as  He  permitted  not  the  lion  when  it  had  slain 
the  Prophet,  to  touch  his  body  further,  and  of  a  slayer  made 
it  to  be  a  keeper:)  He  was  able,  I  say,  to  have  kept  the 
slain  bodies  of  His  own  from  the  dogs  to  w^hich  they  had 


CtTRA 
PRO 


TUIS. 


528    Mar  I  i/rs  feared  not;  survivors  grieve  for  their  hones. 

DE     been  flung;  He  was  able  in  innumerable  ways  to  have  de- 
terred the  rage  of  the  men  themselves,  that  to  bm-n  the  car- 
MOR-  cases,  to  scatter  the  ashes,  they  should  not  dare  :  but  it  was 
fit  that  this  experience  also  should  not  be  lacking  to  mani- 
fold variety  of  temptations,  lest  the  fortitude   of  confession 
which  would  not  for  the  saving  of  the  life  of  the  body  give 
way  to  the  savageness  of  persecution,  should  be  tremblingly 
anxious  for  the  honour  of  a  sepulchre  :  in  a  word,  lest  faith 
of  resurrection  should  dread  the  consuming  of  the  body.     It 
was  fit  then,  that  even  these  things  should  be  permitted,  in 
order  that,  even  after  these  examples  of  so  great  horror,  the 
Martyrs,  fervent  in  confession  of  Christ,  should  become  wit- 
nesses of  this  truth   also,   in   which  they   had  learned  that 
Mat.  10,  they  by  whom  their  bodies  should  be  slain  had  after  that  no 
^^'        more  that  they  could  do.     Because,  whatever  they  should 
do  to  dead  bodies,  they  would  after  all  do  nothing,  seeing 
that  in  flesh  devoid  of  all  life,  neither  was  it  possible  for  him 
to  feel  ought  who  had  thence  departed,  nor  for  Him  to  lose 
ought  thereof,  Who    created    the    same.     But    while    these 
things   were   doing   to  the  bodies    of  the  slain,  albeit    the 
Martyrs,  not  frightened  by  them,  did  with  great  fortitude 
suff"er,  yet  among  the  brethren  was  there  exceeding  sorrow, 
because  there  was  given  them  no  means  of  paying  the  last 
honours  to  the  remains  of  the  Saints,  neither  secretly  to  with- 
draw any  part  thereof,  (as  the  same  history  testifies,)  did  the 
watchings  of  cruel  sentinels  permit.     So,  while  those  which 
had  been  slain,  in  the  tearing  asunder  of  their  limbs,  in  the 
burning  up  of  their  bones,  in  the  dispersion  of  their  ashes, 
could  feel  no  misery;   yet  these  who  had  nothing  of  them 
that  they  could  bury,  did  suffer  torture  of  exceeding  grief  in 
pitying  them;  because  what  those  did  in  no  sort  feel,  these 
in  some  sort  did  feel  for  them,  and  where  was  henceforth  for 
those  no  more  suffering,  yet  these  did  in  woful  compassion 
suffer  for  them. 
ix.  11.   In  regard    of  that    woful   compassion   which   I  have 

2  Sam.  mentioned,  are  those  praised,  and  by  king  David  blessed,  who 
^'  ^'      to  the  dry  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  afforded  mercy  of 
sepulture.     But  yet  what  mercy  is  that,  which  is  afforded  to 
them  that  have  feeling  of  nothing  ?     Or  haply  is  this  to  be 
challenged  back  to  that  conceit  of  an  infernal  river  which 


Charity  of  sepulture.     Apparitlotifi  asking  hurial.      529 
men  unburied  were  not  able  to  pass  over  ?     Far  be  tins  from      de 


the  faith  of  Christians :  else  hath   it  gone  most  ill  with  so 
great  a  multitude  of  Martyrs,  for  whom  there  could  be  no    mok- 


CURA 
PItO 


TUTS. 


bui-ying  of  their  bodies,  and  Truth  did  cheat  them  when  It 
said,  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  /mreLukei2, 
no  more  that  they  can  do,  if  these  have  been  able  to  do  to^' 
them  so  great  evils,  by  which  they  were  hindered  to  pass 
over  to  the  places  which  they  longed  for.  But,  because  this 
without  all  doubt  is  most  false,  and  it  neither  any  whit  hurts 
the  faithful  to  have  their  bodies  denied  sepulture,  nor  any 
whit  the  giving  of  sepulture  unto  infidels  advantageth  them ; 
why  then  are  those  who  buried  Saul  and  his  son  said  to  have 
done  mercy,  and  for  this  are  blessed  by  that  godly  king,  but 
because  it  is  a  good  affection  with  which  the  hearts  of  the 
pitiful  are  touched,  when  they  grieve  for  that  in  the  dead 
bodies  of  other  men,  which,  by  that  affection  through  which 
no  man  ever  hateth  his  own  flesh,  they  would  not  have  done 
after  their  own  death  to  their  own  bodies;  and  what  they 
would  have  done  by  them  when  they  shall  have  no  more 
feeling,  that  they  take  care  to  do  by  others  now  having  no 
feeling  while  themselves  have  yet  feeling  ? 

I'i.  Stories  are  told  of  certain  appearances  or  visions',  which  x. 
may  seem  to  bring  into  this  discussion  a  question  which 
should  not  be  slighted.  It  is  said,  namely,  that  dead  men 
have  at  times  eitlier  in  dreams  or  in  some  other  way  ap- 
peared to  the  living  who  knew  not  where  their  bodies  lay 
unburied,  and  have  pointed  out  to  them  the  place,  and 
admonished  that  the  sepulture  which  was  lacking  should  be 
afforded  them.  These  things  if  we  shall  answer  to  be  false, 
we  shall  be  thought  impudently  to  contradict  the  writings  of 
certain  faithful  men,  and  the  senses  of  them  who  assure  us 
that  such  things  have  happened  to  themselves.  But  it  is  to 
be  answered,  that  it  does  not  follow  that  vve  are  to  account 
the  dead  to  have  sense  of  these  things,  because  they  appear 
in  dreams  to  say  or  indicate  or  ask  this.  For  living  men  do 
also  appear  ofttimes  to  the  living  as  they  sleep,  while  they 
themselves  know  not  that  they  do  appear;  and  they  are  told 
by  them,  what  they  dreamed,  namely,  that  in  their  dream  the 
speakers  saw  them  doings  or  saying  something.  Then  if  it 
may  be  that  a  person  in  a  dream  should  see  me  indicating 

M  m 


visa 


CURA 
PRO 


530  Not  spiriis  but  likenesses  seen  in  dreams. 

DE     to  hiiu   something   that  has  happened  or    even  foretelling 
something  about  to  happen,  while  I  am  perfectly  unwitting 
MOK-  of  the  thing  and   altogether  regardless    not    only  what   he 

^dreams,  but  whether  he  is  awake  while  I  am  asleep,  or  he 

asleep  while  I  am  awake,  or  whether  at  one  and  the  same 
time  we  are  both  awake  or  asleep,  at  what  time  he  has  the 
dream  in  which  he  sees  me :  what  marvel  if  the  dead  be 
unconscious  and  insensible  of  these  things,  and,  for  all  that, 
are  seen  by  the  living  in  their  dreams,  and  say  something 
which  thdse  on  awaking  find  to  be  true  ?  By  angelical 
operations,  then,  I  should  think  it  is  effected,  whether  per- 
mitted from  above,  or  commanded,  that  they  seem  in  dreams 
to  say  something  about  burying  of  their  bodies,  when  they 
whose  the  bodies  are  are  utterly  unsconscious  of  it.  Now  this 
is  sometimes  serviceably  done ;  whether  for  some  sort  of 
solace  to  the  survivors,  to  whom  pertain  those  dead  whose 

lima-    likenesses'    appear   to    them    as    they    dream;    or  whether 

^'°^'^  that  by  these  admonitions  the  human  race  may  be  made 
to  have  regard  to  humanity  of  sepulture,  which,  allow 
that  it  be  no  help  to  the  departed,  yet  is  there  culpable 
irreligiousness  in   slighting   of  it.     Sometimes   however,  by 

2visis  fallacious  visions-,  men  are  cast  into  great  errors,  who  de- 
serve to  suffer  this.  As,  if  one  should  see  in  a  dream, 
what  yEneas  by  poetic  falsity  is  told  to  have  seen  in  the 
world  beneath  :  and  there  should  appear  to  him  the  likeness 
of  some  unburied  man,  which  should  speak  such  words  as 
Palinurus  is  said  to  have  spoken  to  him;  and  when  he 
.awakes,  he  should  find  the  body  in  that  place  where  he 
heard  say  while  dreaming,  that  it  lay  unburied,  and  was 
admonished  and  asked  to  bury  it  when,  found;  and  because 
he  finds  this  to  be  true,  should  believe  that  the  dead  are 
buried  on  purpose  that  their  souls  may  pass  to  places  from 
which  he  dreamed  that  the  souls  of  men  unburied  are  by  an 
infernal  law  prohibited :  does  he  not,  in  believing  all  this, 
exceedingly  swerve  from  the  path  of  truth  ? 
xi.  13.   Such,  however,  is  human   infirmity,  that  when  in   a 

dream  a  person  shall  see  a  dead  man,  he  thinks  it  is  the  soul 
that  he  sees:  but  when  he  shall  in  like  manner  dream  of  a 
living  man,  he  has  no  doubt  that  it  is  not  a  soul  nor  a  body, 
but  the  likeness  of  a  man  that  has  appeared  to  him :  just  as 


The  living  know  not  when  they  appear;  ivhy  then  the  dead?  53 1 

if  it  were  not  possible  in  regard  of  dead  men,  in  the  same     de 
sort  unconscious  of  it,  that  it  should  not  be  their  souls,  but    p^o 
their  likenesses  that  appear  to  the  sleepers.     Of  a  surety,   ^'^^• 

when  we  were  at  Milan,  we  heard  tell  of  a  certain  person  of - 

whom  was  demanded  payment  of  a  debt,  with  production  of 
his  deceased  father's  acknowledgment  ^,  which  debt  unknown '  cautio. 
to  the  son  the  father  had  paid,  whereupon  the  man  began  to 
be  very  sorrowful,  and  to  marvel  that  his  father  while  dying 
did  not  tell  him  what  he  owed  when  he  also  made  his  will. 
Then  in  this  exceeding  anxiousness  of  his,  his  said  father 
appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  and  made  known  to  him  where 
was  the  counter^  acknowledgment  by  which  that  acknow-^  recau- 
ledgment  was  cancelled.  Which  when  the  young  man  had 
found  and  shewed,  he  not  only  rebutted  the  wrongful 
claim  of  a  false  debt,  but  also  got  back  his  father's 
note'  of  hand  which  the  father  had  not  got  back  when  the^chiro- 
money  was  paid.  Here  then  the  soul  of  a  man  is  supposed  pt,um. 
to  have  had  care  for  his  sou,  and  to  have  come  to  him  in  his 
sleep,  that,  teaching  him  what  he  did  not  knowj  he  might 
relieve  him  of  a  great  trouble.  But  about  the  very  same 
time  as  we  heard  this,  it  chanced  at  Carthage  that  the 
rhetorician  Eulogius,  who  had  been  my  disciple  in  that  art, 
being  (as  he  himself,  after  our  return  to  Africa,  told  us  the 
story)  in  course  of  lecturing  to  his  disciples  on  Cicero's 
rhetorical  books,  as  he  looked  over  the  portion  of  reading 
which  he  was  to  deliver  on  the  following  day,  fell  upon 
a  certain  passage,  and  not  being  able  to  understand  it,  was 
scarce  able  to  sleep  for  the  trouble  of  his  mind  :  in  which 
night,  as  he  dreamed,  I  expounded  to  him  that  which  he  did 
not  understand;  nay,  not  I,  but  my  likeness,  while  I  was  un- 
conscious of  the  thing,  and  far  away  beyond  sea,  it  might  be, 
doing,  or  it  might  be  dreaming,  some  other  thing,  and  not  in 
the  least  caring  for  his  cares.  In  what  way  these  things 
come  about,  I  know  not :  but  in  what  way  soever  they  come, 
why  do  we  not  believe  it  comes  in  the  same  way  for  a 
person  in  a  dream  to  see  a  dead  man,  as  it  comes  that  he 
sees  a  living  man .''  both,  no  doubt,  neither  knowing  nor  caring 
who,  or  where,  or  when,  dreams  of  their  images. 

14.    Like    dreams,   moreover,    are    also    some    visions   of    xii. 
persons  awake,  who  have  had  their  senses  troubled,  such 

M  m  2 


CURA 
PRO 


532  Trance  and  vision  of  Curma. 

DE  as  phrenetic  persons,  or  those  who  are  mad  in  any  way  :  for 
they  too  talk  to  themselves  just  as  though  they  were  speaking 
MOK-   to  people  verily  present,  and  as  well   with  absent  as  with 

'-  present,  whose  images  they  perceive,  whether  persons  living 

or  dead.  But  just  as  they  which  live,  are  unconscious  that 
they  are  seen  of  them  and  talk  with  theui ;  for  indeed 
they  are  not  really  themselves  present,  or  themselves  make 
speeches,  but  through  troubled'  senses,  these  persons  are 
wrought  upon  by  suchlike  imaginary  visions  ;  just  so  they 
also  who  have  departed  this  life,  to  persons  thus  affected 
appear  as  present,  while  they  be  absent,  and  whether  any 

1  imagi-  man  sees  them  in   regard  of  their  image  S  are   themselves 

naliter.    ^j^g^q^  unCOnScioUS. 

15.  Similar  to  this  is  also  that  condition  when  persons, 

with  their  senses  more  profoundly  in  abeyance  than  is  the 

case  in  sleep,  are  occupied  with   the  like  visions.     For  to 

them  also  appear  images  of  quick  and  dead;  but  then,  when 

they  return  to  their  senses,   whatever   dead   they  say  they 

have  seen  are  thought  to  have  been  verily  with  them  :  and 

they  who  hear  these  things  pay  no  heed  to  the  circumstance 

that  there  were  seen  in  like  manner  the  images  of  certain 

living  persons,  absent  and  unconscious.     A  certain  man  by 

name  Curma,  of  the  municipal  town  of  Tullium,  which  is 

2curi-    hard  by  Hippo,  a  poor  member  of  the  Curia  ^,  scarcely  com- 

f?'       petent  to  serve  the  office  of  a  duumvir^  of  that  place,  and 

viraii-    a  mere  rustic,  being  ill,  and  all  his  senses  entranced,  lay  all 

^'"^'       but  dead   for  several  days:    a  very  slight  breathing  in  his 

nostrils,  which   on   applying  the   hand  Avas  just    felt,   and 

barely  betokened  that  he  lived,  was  all  that  kept  him  from 

being  buried  for  dead.     Not  a  limb  did  he  stir,  nothing  did 

he  take  in  the  way  of  sustenance,  neither  in  the  eyes  nor  in 

any  other  bodily  sense  was  he  sensible  of  any  annoyance 

that  impinged  upon  them.     Yet  he  was  seeing  many  things 

like  as  in  a  dream,  which,  when  at  last  after  a  great  many 

days  he   woke  up,  he  told  that   he   had  seen.      And  first, 

presently  after  he  opened  his  eyes.  Let  some  one  go,  said 

he,  to  the  house  of  Curma  the  smith,  and  see  what  is  doing 

there.     And  when  some  one  had  gone  thither,  the  smith  was 

found  to  have  died  in  that  moment  that  the  other  had  come 

back  to  his  senses,  and,  it  might  almost  be  said,  revived  from 


The  persons  he  saw.     His  Baptism  at  Hippo.       533 

death.     Then,  as  those  who  stood  by  eagerly  listened,  he     de 
told  them  how  the  other  had  been  ordered  to  be  had  up,  ^^^^ 

«   '        PRO 

when  he  himself  was  dismissed ;  and  that  he  had  heard  it   mor- 

said  in  that  place  from  which  he  had  returned,  that  it  was  ^ 

not  Curma  of  the  Curia,  but  Curma  the  smith  who  had  been 
ordered  to  be  fetched  to  that  place  of  the  dead.  Well,  in 
these  dream-like  visions  of  his,  among  those  deceased  per- 
sons whom  he  saw  handled  according  to  the  diversity  of 
their  merits,  he  recognised  also  some  whom  he  had  known 
.when  alive.  That  they  were  the  very  persons  themselves 
I  might  perchance  have  believed,  had  he  not  in  the  course 
of  this  seeming  dream  of  his  seen  also  some  who  are  alive 
even  to  this  present  time,  namely,  some  clerks  of  his  district, 
by  whose  presbyter  there  he  was  told  to  be  baptized  at 
Hippo  by  me,  which  thing  he  said  had  also  taken  place. 
So  then  he  had  seen  a  presbyter,  clerks,  myself,  persons,  to 
wit,  not  yet  dead,  in  this  vision  in  which  he  afterwards  also 
saw  dead  persons.  Why  may  he  not  be  thought  to  have 
seen  these  last  in  the  same  way  as  he  saw  us  ?  that  is,  both 
the  one  sort,  and  the  other,  absent  and  unconscious,  and  con- 
sequently not  the  persons  themselves,  but  similitudes  of  them 
just  as  of  the  places.?  He  saw,  namely,  both  a  plot  of  ground 
where  was  that  presbyter  with  the  clerks,  and  Hippo  where 
he  was  by  me  seemingly  baptized :  in  which  spots  assuredly 
he  was  not,  when  he  seemed  to  himself  to  be  there.  For  what 
was  at  that  time  going  on  there,  he  knew  not :  which,  without 
doubt,  he  would  have  known  if  he  had  verily  been  there. 
Tlie  sights  beheld,  therefore,  Avere  those  which  are  not 
presented  in  the  things  themselves  as  they  are,  but  shadowed 
forth  in  a  sort  of  images  of  the  things.  In  fine,  after  much 
that  he  saw,  he  narrated  how  he  had,  moreover,  been  led 
into  Paradise,  and  how  it  was  there  said  to  him,  when  he 
was  thence  dismissed  to  return  to  his  own  family,  '  Go,  be 
baptized,  if  thou  wilt  be  in  this  place  of  the  blessed.'  There- 
upon, being  admonished  to  be  baptized  by  me,  he  said  it  was 
done  already.  He  who  was  talking  with  him  replied,  '  Go, 
be  truly  baptized ;  for  that  thou  didst  but  see  in  the  vision.' 
After  this  he  recovered,  went  his  way  to  Hippo.  Easter 
was  now  approaching,  he  gave  his  name  among  the  other 
Corapetents,  alike  with  very  many  unknown  to  us ;  nor  did 


534  How  Si.  Austin  learnedCurnuCssiory.  His  mother  not  seen. 

DE  he  cave  to  make  known  the  vision  to  nie  or  to  any  of  our 
^vKo  people.  He  was  baptized,  at  the  close  of  the  holy  days  he 
MOR-  returned  to  his  own  place.     After  the  space  of  two  years  or 

^  more,  I  learned  the  whole  matter;   first,  through  a  certain 

friend  of  mine  and  his  at  my  own  table,  while  we  were 
talking  about  some  such  matters :  then  I  took  it  up,  and 
made  the  man  in  his  own  person  tell  me  the  story,  in  the 
presence  of  some  honest  townsmen  of  his  attesting  the  same, 
both  concerning  his  marvellous  illness,  how  he  lay  all  but 
dead  for  many  days,  and  about  that  other  Curma  the  smith, 
what  I  have  mentioned  above,  and  about  all  these  matters; 
which,  while  he  was  telling  me,  they  recalled  to  mind,  and 
assured  me,  that  they  had  also  at  that  time  heard  them  from 
his  lips.  Wherefore,  just  as  he  saw  his  own  baptism,  and 
myself,  and  Hippo,  and  the  basilica,  and  the  bajHistery,  not  in 
the  very  realities,  but  in  a  sort  of  similitudes  of  the  things ; 
and  so  likewise  certain  other  living  persons,  without  consci- 
xiii.  ousness  on  the  part  of  the  same  living  persons  :  then  why  not 
just  so  those  dead  persons  also,  without  consciousness  on  the 
part  of  the  same  dead  persons  ? 

16.  Why  should  we  not  believe  these  to  be  angelic 
operations  through  dispensation  of  the  providence  of  God, 
Who  maketh  good  use  of  both  good  things  and  evil, 
according  to  the  unsearchable  depth  of  His  judgments? 
whether  thereby  the  minds  of  mortals  be  instructed,  or 
whether  deceived ;  whether  consoled,  or  whether  terrified  : 
according  as  unto  each  one  there  is  to  be  either  a  shewing 
of  mercy,  or  a  taking  of  vengeance,  by  Him  to  Whom,  not 
Ps.  101,  without  a  meaning,  the  Church  doth  sing  of  mercy  and 
'•  of  judgment.     Let  each,  as  it  shall  please  him,  take  what 

I  say.  If  the  souls  of  the  dead  took  part  in  the  affairs  of 
the  living,  and  if  it  were  their  very  selves  that,  when  we  see 
them,  speak  to  us  in  sleep  ;  to  say  nothing  of  others,  there 
is  my  own  self,  whom  my  pious  mother  would  no  night  fail 
to  visit,  that  mother  who  by  land  and  sea  followed  me  that 
she  might  live  with  me.  Far  be  the  thought  that  she  should, 
by  a  life  more  happy,  have  been  made  cruel,  to  that  degree 
that  when  any  thing  vexes  my  heart  she  should  not  even 
console  in  his  sadness  the  son  whom  she  loved  with  an  only 
love,  whom  she  never  wished  to  see  mournful.    But  assuredly 


Patriarchs  unknowing.     Josiah  not  to  see  the  evil.    535 

that  which   the    sacred   Psalm   sings  in   our  ears,   is   tvwyi ;     de 
Because  my  father  and  my  mother  have  forsaken  me,  hut    p^Q 
the  Lord  hath   taken   me  up.      Then   if  our  parents   have    ^o«.- 

TUIS. 

forsaken  us,  how  take  tliey  part  in  our  cares  and  affairs  ?  p — ~ 
But  if  parents  do  not,  who  else  are  there  of  the  dead  who  lo. 
should  know  what  we  are  doing,  or  what  we  suffer  ?     Isaiah 
the  Prophet  says.  For  Thou  art  our  Father:  because  Abra- is.  63, 
ham  hath  not  known  tis,  and  Israel  is  not  cognisant  of  ns. 
If  so  great  Patriarchs  were  ignorant  what  was  doing  towards 
the  People  of  them  begotten,  they  to  whom,  believing  God, 
the  People  itself  to  spring  from  their  stock  was  promised  ; 
how  are  the  dead  mixed  up  with  affairs  and  doings  of  the 
living,  either  for  cognisance  or  help?   How  say  we  that  those 
were  favoured  who  deceased  ere  the  evils  came  which  fol- 
lowed hai'd  upon  the  decease,  if  also  after  death  they  feel 
whatever  things  befal  in  the  calamitousness  of  human  life  ? 
Or  haply  do  we  err  in  saying  this,  and  in  accounting  them 
to  be  quietly  at  rest  whom  the  luiquiet  life  of  the  living- 
makes  solicitous?  What  then  is  that  which  to  the  most  godly 
king  Josias  God  promised  as  a  great  benefit,  that  he  should 
first  die,  that  he  might  not  see  the  evils  which  He  threatened 
should  come  to  that  place  and  People?   Which  words  of  God 
are  these:   Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel :  concerning  ^YAnga 
My  words  which  thou  hast  heard,  and  didst  fear  before  ili^^^'^^~ 
face  when  thou  didst  hear  what  I  have  spoken  concerning 
this  place  and  them  which  dwell  therein,  that  it  should  be 
forsaken  and  under  a  curse;  and  hast  rent   thy  garments, 
and  wept  before  Me,  and  I  have  heard  thee,  saith  the  Lord 
of  Sabaoth:  not  so;  behold,  I  will  add  thee  unto  thy  fathers, 
and  thou  shall  be  added  unto  them  in  peace;  and  thine  eyes 
shall  not  see  all  the  evils  which  I  am  bringing  upon  this 
place  and  upon  them  that  dwell  therein.     He,  frightened  by 
God's  comminations,  had  wept,  and  rent  his  garments,  and 
is  made,  by  hastening  on  of  his  death,  to  be  without  care  of 
all  future  evils,  because  he  should  so  rest  in  peace,  that  all 
those  things  he  should  not  see.     There  then  are  the  spirits 
of  the   departed,  where   they  see   not  whatever  things   are 
doing,  or  events  happening,  in  this  life  to  men.     Then  how 
do  they  see  their  own  graves,  or  their  own  bodies,  whether 
they  lie  cast  away,  or  buried  ?   How  do  they  take  part  in  the 


536     Abraham  might  knoiv  some  things  from  Lazarus. 

DE  miseiy  of  the  living,  when  they  are  either  suffering  their 
PRO  own  evils,  if  they  have  contracted  such  merits;  or  do  rest 
Moii-  \yi    peace,    as    was    promised    to    this    Josiah,    where    they 

-undergo    no    evils,    either    by   suffiering    theiDselves,    or   by 

compassionate    suffering   with    others,  freed    from   all    evils 
which   by  suffering  themselves   or   with   others   while    they 
lived  here  they  did  undergo  ? 
xiv.         17.  Some  man  may  say;  '  If  there  be  not  in  the  dead  any 

Lukeie,  care  for  the  living,  how  is  it  that   the  rich  man,  who  was 

24—29.  tormented  in  hell,  asked  father  Abraham  to  send  Lazarus  to 
his  five  brothers  not  as  yet  dead,  and  to  take  com'se  with 
them,  that  they  should  not  come  themselves  also  into  the 
same  place  of  torments  ?'  But  does  it  follow,  that  because 
the  rich  man  said  this,  he  knew  what  his  brethren  were 
doing,  or  what  they  were  suffering  at  that  time }  Just  in  that 
same  way  had  he  care  for  the  living,  albeit  what  they  were 
doing  he  wist  not  at  all,  as  we  have  care  for  the  dead,  albeit 
what  they  do  w^e  confessedly  wot  not.  For  if  we  cared  not 
for  the  dead,  we  should  not,  as  we  do,  supplicate  God  on 
their  behalf.  In  fine,  Abraham  did  not  send  Lazarus,  and 
also  answered,  that  they  have  here  Moses  and  the  Prophets, 
whom  they  ought  to  hear  that  they  might  not  come  to  those 
torments.  Where  again  it  occurs  to  ask,  how  it  was  that  what 
was  doing  here,  father  Abraham  himself  wist  not,  while  he 
knew  that  MoSes  and  the  Prophets  are  here,  that  is,  their 
books,  by  obeying  which  men  should  escajie  the  torments  of 
hell :  and  knew,  in  short,  that  rich  man  to  have  lived  in 
delights,  but  the  poor  man  Lazarus  to  have  lived  in  labours 
and  sorroAvs  .?  For  this  also  he  says  to  him;  Son,  remember 
that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  hast  received  good  things,  hut 
Lazarus  evil  tilings.  He  knew  then  these  things  which 
had  taken  place  of  course  among  the  living,  not  among  the 
dead.  True,  but  it  may  be  that,  not  while  the  things  were 
doing  in  their  lifetime,  but  after  their  death,  he  learned  tliese 
things,  by  information  of  Lazarus :  that  it  be  not  i'alse  which 

Is.  ()3,    the  Pro])het  saith,  Abrahaiii  hatlt  not  knoivn  us. 

18.   So  then  we  must  confess  that  the  dead  indeed  do  not 

XV. 

know  what  is  doing  here,  but  while  it  is  in  doing  here:  after- 
wards, however,  they  hear  it  from  those  who  from  hence  go 
to  them  at  their  death ;    not  indeed  every  thing,  but  what 


Angels  free  of  both  worlds.    Samuel.    Moses  and  Elias.  537 

things  those  are  allowed  to  make  known  who  are  suffered     be 
also  to  remember  these  things;    and  which  it  is  meet  for  ^"p^* 
those  to  hear,  whom  they  inform  of  the  same.     It  may  be    mor- 

*'  TU  I S. 

also,  that  from  the   Angels,  wlio  are  present  in  the  things "— 

which  are  doing  here,  the  dead  do  hear  somewhat,  which  for 
each  one  of  them  to  hear  He  judgeth  right  to  Whom  all 
things  are  subject.     For  were  there  not  Angels,  who  could  be 
present  in  places  both  of  quick  and  dead,  the  Lord  Jesus 
had  not  said.  It  came  to  pass  also  thai  the  poor  man  died,Lu}Le]6, 
and   was    carried    h>j    the   angels   into    Abrahain''s   bosom. 
Therefore,  now  here,  now  there,  were  they  able  to  be,  who 
from  hence  bore  thither  whom  God  willed.     It  may  be  also, 
that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  do  learn  some  things  which  are 
doing  here,  what   things   it  is   necessary   that   they   should 
know,  and  what   persons   it  is  necessary  should   know  the 
same,  not  only  things  past  or  present,  but  even  future,  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  revealing  them :  like   as  not  all  men,  but 
the  Prophets  while  they  lived  here  did  know,  nor  even  they 
all  things,  but  only  what  things  to  be  revealed  to  them  the 
providence  of  God  judged  meeL     Moreover,  that  some  from 
the  dead  are  sent  to  the  living,  as,  on  the  other  hand,  Paul  2  Cor. 
from  the  living  was  rapt  into  Paradise,  divine  Scripture  doth     '  ^' 
testify.     For  Samuel  the  Prophet,  appearing  to  Saul  when  1  Sam. 
living,  predicted  even  what  should  befal  the  king:  although  ?g' '^ 
some  think  it  was  not  Samuel  himself,  that  could  have  been 
by  magical  arts  evoked,  but  that  some  spirit,  meet  for  so  evil 
works,  did  figure  his  semblance"":  though  the  book  Eccle- 
siasticus,  which   Jesus,   son   of  Sirach,   is  reputed   to   have 
written,  and  M-hich  on  account  of  some  resemblance  of  style 
is  pronounced  to  be  Solomon's*^,  contains  in  the  praise  of  the 
Fathers,  that  Samuel  even  when  dead  did  prophesy.     But  if  Ecclus. 
this  book  be  spoken  against  from  the  canon  of  the  Hebrews,     '     * 
(because  it  is  not  contained  therein,)  what  shall  we  say  of 
Moses,  whom  certainly  we  read  both  in  Deuteronomy  to  haveDeut. 
died,  and  in  the  Gospel  to  have,  together  with  Elias  who  died  jyj .',"'. - 
not,  appeared  unto  the  living?  3. 

19.   Hence  too  is  solved  that  question,  how  is  it  that  the    xvi. 
Martyrs,  by  the   very  benefits  which  are  given  to  them  that 

•■  Quitst.    ad    S:niplicinnum,   lib.   ii.         <'   Retract,  ii.  4.  and  '  On   Christian 
qu.  4.  Doctrine,'  book  ii.  chap.  8.  n.  13.  Ben. 


538     Interposition  permitted  to  Martyrs  extraordinary. 

DE     pray,  indicate  that  they  take  an  interest  in  the  affairs  of  men, 

pjio    if  the  dead  know  not  what  the  quick  are  doing.     For  not 

MOR-   only  by  effects  of  benefits,  but  in  the  very  beholding  of  men, 

TUIS.     ...  '  °  ' 

linqujli.it  IS  certain,  that  the  Confessor  Felix  (whose  denizenship 
natum  among  you  thou  piously  lovest)  appeared  when  the  barbarians 
were  attacking  Nola,  as  we  have  heard  not  by  uncertain 
rumours,  but  by  sure  witnesses.  But  such  things  are  of  God 
exhibited,  far  otherwise  than  as  the  usual  order  hath  itself, 
unto  each  kind  of  creatures  apportioned.  For  it  does  not 
follow  because  water  was,  when  it  pleased  the  Lord,  in  a 
moment  changed  into  wine,  that  we  are  not  to  regard  the 
worth  and  efficacy  of  water  in  the  proper  order  of  the 
elements,  as  distinct  from  the  rarity,  or  rather  singularity,  of 
that  divine  work  :  nor  because  Lazarus  rose  again,  therefore 
that  every  dead  man  rises  when  he  will;  or  that  a  lifeless  man 
is  raised  up  by  a  living,  in  the  same  way  as  a  sleeping  man 
by  one  who  is  awake.  Other  be  the  limits  of  human  things, 
other  the  signs  of  divine  virtues :  other  they  be  that  are 
naturally,  other  that  be  miraculously  done  :  albeit  both  unto 
nature  God  is  present  that  it  may  be,  and  unto  miracles 
nature  is  not  lacking.  We  are  not  to  think  then,  that  to  be 
interested  in  the  affairs  of  the  living  is  in  the  power  of  any 
departed  who  please,  only  because  to  some  men's  healing  or 
help  the  Martyrs  be  present :  but  rather  we  are  to  under- 
stand that  it  must  needs  be  by  a  Divine  power  that  the 
Martyrs  are  interested  in  affairs  of  the  living,  from  the  very 
fact  that  for  the  departed  to  be  by  their  proper  nature 
interested  in  affairs  of  the  living  is  impossible. 

20.  Howbeit  it  is  a  question  which  surpasses  the  strength 
of  my  understanding,  after  what  manner  the  Martyrs  aid 
them  who  by  them,  it  is  certain,  are  helped  ;  whether  them- 
selves by  themselves  be  present  at  one  same  time  in  so 
different  places,  and  by  so  great  distance  lying  apart  one  from 
another,  either  where  their  Memorials  are,  or  beside  their 
Memorials,  wheresoever  they  are  felt  to  be  present :  or 
whether,  while  they  themselves,  in  a  place  congruous  with 
their  merits,  are  removed  from  all  converse  with  mortals,  and 
yet  do  in  a  general  sort  pray  for  the  needs  of  their  suppliants, 
(like  as  we  pray  for  the  dead,  to  whom  however  we  are  not 
present,  nor  know  where  they  be  or  what  they  be  doing,) 


Douhlful  whether  themselves  or  Angels  are  employed.    539 

God  Almighty,  Who  is  everywhere  present,  neither  bounded  de 
in'  with  us  nor  remote  from  us,  hearing  and  granting  the  p^^^ 
Martx'rs'  prayers,   doth    by  angelic    ministries  every  where    mor- 

■  •  TUIS. 

diffused  aflbrd  to  men  those  solaces,  to  whom  in  the  misery, '- 

'  .       '  con- 

of  this  life  He  seeth  meet  to  afford  the  same,  and,  touching cretus 
His  Martyrs,  doth  where  He  will,  when  He  will,  how  He 
will,  and  chiefest  through  tlieir  Memorials,  because  this  He 
knoweth  to  be  expedient  for  us  unto  edifying  of  the  faith  of 
Christ   for  Whose    confession  they  suffered,  by   marvellous 
and  ineffable  power  and  goodness  cause  their  merits  to  be 
had  in  honour.     A  matter  is  this,  too  high  that  I  should  have 
power  to  attain  unto  it,  too  abstruse  that  I  shoidd  be  able  to 
search  it  out ;  and  therefore  w^hich  of  these  two  be  the  case, 
or  whether  perchance  both  one  and  the  other  be  the  case, 
that  sometimes  these  things  be  done  by  very  presence  of  the 
Martyrs,  sometimes  by  Angels  taking  upon  them  the  person 
of  the  Martyrs,  I  dare  not  define;    rather  would  I  seek  this 
at  them  who  know  it.     For  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  uo 
man    knows   these   things :    (not   indeed  he   who  thinks  he 
knows,    and  knows    not,)   for    there  be  gifts    of  God,  Who 
bestows  on  these  some  one,  on  those  some  other,  according 
to  the  Apostle  who  says,  that  to  each  one  is  given  the  mani-i  Cor. 
festation  of  the  Spirit  to  projit  withal ;  to  one^  indeed,  saith  P','.'^^* 
he,  is  given  by  the  Spirit  discourse  of  wisdom  ;    to  another^  «■>■>■» 
discourse  of  science  according  to  the  same  Spirit ;    white  to 
anuther^  faith  in  the  same  Spirit ;    to  another^  the  gift  ox's  akeri, 
healings  in  0)ie  Spirit;    to  one^  workings  of  iniracles ;    to     '** 
on  c"^  prophecy  ;    to  one'^  discerning  of  spirits ;    to  on  e^  kinds 
of  tongues ;    to  one^  interpretation  of  discourses.     But  all 
these  worketh   one  and  the  same  spirit,  dividing  to  every 
man  severally  as  He  it  ill.     Of  all  these  spiritual  gifts,  which 
the    Apostle  hath    rehearsed,    to   whomsoever  is   given   dis- 
cerning of  spirits,  the  same  knoweth  these  things  as  they  are 
meet  to  be  known. 

21.  Such,  we  may  believe,  was  that  John  the  Monk,  whom  xvii. 
the  elder  Theodosius,  the  Emperor,  consulted  concerning 
the  issue  of  the  civil  war  :  seeing  he  had  also  the  gift  of 
prophecy.  For  that  not  each  several  person  has  a  several 
one  of  those  gifts,  but  that  one  man  may  have  more  gifts 
than  one,  I  make  no  question.     This  John,  then,  when  once 


540  Appearance  of  John ^  the  Mo)tk,  in  a  dream ,  foreknown. 

DE  a  certain  most  religious  woman  desired  to  see  him,  and  to 
p^Q  obtain  this  did  through  her  husband  make  vehement  intreaty, 
MOR-   refused  indeed  this  request  because  he  had  never  allowed 

TUIS, 

this  to  women,  but  '  Go,'  said  he,  '  tell  thy  wife,  she  shall  see 

me  this  night,  but  in  her  sleep.'     And  so  it  came  to  pass  : 
and  he  gave  her  advice,  whatever  was  meet  to  be  given  to  a 
wedded  believing  woman.     And  she,  on  her  awaking,  made 
known    to  her  husband  that  she  had  seen   a  man  of  God, 
such  as  he  knew  him  to  be,  and  what  she  had  been  told  by 
him.     The  person  who  learned  this  from  them,  reported  it 
to  me,  a  grave  man    and  a  noble,  and  most  worthy  to   be 
believed.     But  if  I  myself  had  seen  that  holy  monk,  because 
(it   is   said)  he  was  most  patient  in  hearing  questions  and 
most  wise    in    answering,  I  would  have  sought   of  him,  as 
touching    our  question,   whether   he    himself  came  to    that 
woman  in  sleep,  that  is  to  say,  his  spirit  in  the  form  of  his 
body,  just  as  we  dream  that  we  see  ourselves  in  the  form  of  our 
own  body  ;    or  whether,  while  he  himself  was  doing  some- 
thing else,  or,  if  asleep,  was  dreaming  of  something  else,  it 
was  either  by  an  Angel   or   in    some  other  way  that  such 
vision  took  place  in  the  woman's  dream  ;    and  that  it  would 
so  be,  as  he  promised,  he  himself  foreknew  by  the  Spirit  of 
prophecy  revealing  the  same.     For  if  he  was  himself  present 
to  her  in  her  dream,  of  course  it  was  by  miraculous  grace 
that  he  was  enabled  so  to  do,  not  by  nature  ;    and  by  God's 
gift,  not  l)y  faculty  of  his  own.     But  if,  while  he  was  doing 
some  other  thing  or  sleeping  and  occupied  with  other  sights, 
the  woman  saw  him  in  her  sleep,  then  doubtless  some  such 
thing  took  place,  as  that  is  which  we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  where  the  Lord  Jesus  speaks  to  Ananias  concerning 
Acts  9,  Saul,  and  informs  him  that  Saul  has  seen  Ananias  coming 
^^'         unto  him,  while  Ananias  himself  wist  not  of  it.     The  man  of 
God  would  make  answer  to  me  of  these  things  as  the  case 
mi""ht  be,  and  then  about  the  Martyrs  I  should  go  on  to  ask 
of  him,  whether  they  be  themselves  present  in  dreams,  or  in 
whatever  other  way  to  those  who  see  them,  in  what  shape 
they  will ;    and  above  all  when  the  demons  in  men  confess 
themselves  tormented  by  the  Martyrs,  and  ask  them  to  spare 
them  ;    or  whether  these  things  be  wrought  through  angelic 
powers,  to  the  honour  and  commendation  of  the  Saints  for 


Teslimoiries  of  demons.     Content  in  uncertainty.     541 

men's  profit,  while  those  are  in  supreme  rest,  and  wholly  free  de 
for  other  far  better  sights,  apart  from  us,  and  praying  for  us.  p^o 
For  it  chanced  at  Milan  at  (the  tomb  of)  the  holy  Martvrs   ^'^*" 

x^  •  1     /^  •  1  •  TUIS. 

Protasius  and  Gervasius,  that  Ambrose  the  bishop,  at  that 

time  living,  being  expressly  named,  in  like  manner  as  were 
the  dead  whose  names  they  were  rehearsing,  the  demons 
confessed  him  and  besought  him  to  spare  them,  he  being  the 
while  otherwise  engaged,  and  when  this  was  taking  place, 
altogether  unwitting  of  it.  Or  whether  indeed  these  things 
are  wrought,  somewhilesby  very  presence  of  the  Martyrs,  other- 
whiles  by  that  of  Angels  ;  and  whether  it  be  possible,  or  by 
what  tokens  possible,  for  us  to  discriminate  these  two  cases ; 
or  whether  to  perceive  and  to  judge  of  these  things  none  be 
able,  but  he  which  hath  that  gift  through  God's  Spirit, 
dividing  unto  every  man  severally  as  He  will:  the  samel  Cor. 
John,  methinks,  would  discoiu-se  to  me  of  all  these  matters,  ' 
as  I  should  wish  ;  that  either  by  his  teaching  I  might  learn, 
and  what  I  should  be  told  should  know  to  be  true  and 
certain  ;  or  I  should  believe  what  I  knew  not,  upon  his 
telling  me  what  things  he  knew.  But  if  peradventure  he 
should  make  answer  out  of  holy  Scripture,  and  say,  T/iinysEcc\na. 
higlier  than  thou,  seek  thou  not ;  and  tilings  stronger  than^^'^^' 
thou,  search  thou  not ;  hut  what  the  Lord  hath  commanded 
thee,  of  those  things  bethink  thee  alway  :  this  also  I  should 
thankfully  accept.  For  it  is  no  small  gain  if,  when  any 
things  are  obscure  and  uncertain  to  us,  and  we  not  able  to 
comprehend  them,  it  be  at  any  rate  clear  and  certain  that 
we  are  not  to  seek  them  ;  and  what  thing  each  one  wishes 
to  learn,  accounting  it  to  be  profitable  that  he  should  know 
it,  he  should  learn  that  it  is  no  harm  that  he  know  it  not. 

22.  Which  things  being  so,  let  us  not  think  that  to  the  xviii. 
dead  for  whom  we  have  a  care,  any  thing  reaches  save 
what  by  sacrifices  either  of  the  altar,  or  of  prayers,,  or  of 
alms,  we  solemnly  supplicate  :  although  not  to  all  for  whom 
they  are  done  be  they  profitable,  but  to  them  only  by  whom 
while  they  live  it  is  obtained  that  they  should  be  profitable. 
But  forasmuch  as  we  discern  not  who  these  be,  it  is  meet 
to  do  them  for  all  regenerate  persons,  that  none  of  them 
may  be  passed  by  to  whom  these  benefits  may  and  ought 
to  reach.     For  better  it  is  that  these  things  shall  be  super- 


542  How  far  we  can  he  of  use  to  the  departed. 


DE 

CtJRA 

PRO 


fluously  done  to  them  whom  they  neither  hinder  nor  help, 

than    lacking    to    them  whom   they  help.     Move   diligently 

MOR-   however  doth  each  man  these  things  for  his  own  near  and 

TUIS.     J  ^  .  1         .  , 

dear  Iriends,  in  order  that  they  may  be  likewise  done  unto 

him  by  his.     But  as  for  the  burying  of  the  body,  whatever  is 
bestowed  on  that,   is  no  aid  of  salvation,  but  an  office  of 

Eph.  5,  humanity,  according  to  that  aiFection  by  which  wo  man  ever 

•  gerat  hateth  his  oivn flesh.  Whence  it  is  fitting  that  he  take'  what 
care  he  is  able  for  the  flesh  of  his  neighbour,  when  he  is 

2gerebatgone  that  bare*  it.  And  if  they  do  these  things  who  believe 
not  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  how  much  more  are 
they  beholden  to  do  the  same  who  do  believe ;  that  so,  an 
oflSce  of  this  kind  bestowed  upon  a  body,  dead  but  yet  to 
rise  again  and  to  remain  to  eternity,  may  also  be  in  some 
sort  a  testimony  of  the  same  faith  ?  But,  that  a  person  is 
buried  at  the  memorials  of  the  Martyrs,  this,  I  think,  so 
far  profits  the  departed,  that  while  commending  him  also 
to  the  Martyrs'  patronage,  the  affection  of  supplication  on 
his  behalf  is  increased. 

23.  Here,  to  the  things  ihou  hast  thought  meet  to  inquire 
of  me,  thou  hast  such  reply  as  1  have  been  able  to  render : 
which  if  it  be  more  than  enough  prolix,  thou  must  excuse 
this,  for  it  was  done  through  love  of  holding  longer  talk  with 
thee.  For  this  book,  then,  how  thy  charity  shall  receive  it, 
let  me,  I  pray  thee,  know  by  a  second  letter  :  though  doubtless 
it  will  be  more  welcome  for  its  bearer's  sake,  to  wit  our 
brother  and  fellow-presbyter  Candidianus,  whom,  having 
been  by  thy  letter  made  acquainted  with  him,  I  have 
welcomed  with  all  my  heart,  and  am  loath  to  let  him  depart. 
For  greatly  in  the  charity  of  Christ  hath  he  by  his  presence 
consoled  us,  and,  to  say  truth,  it  was  at  his  instance  that  I 
have  done  thy  bidding.  For  with  so  great  businesses  is  my 
heart  distraught,  that  had  not  he  by  ever  and  anon  putting 
me  in  mind  not  suffered  me  to  forget  it,  assuredly  to  thy 
questioning  reply  of  mine  had  not  been  forthcoming. 


S.    AUGUSTINE 


ON 


PATIENCE 


1.  That  virtue  of  the  mind  which  is  called  Patience,  is  so     de 
great  a  gift  of  God,  that  even  in  Him  who  bestoweth  the  same  entia. 
upon  us,  that,  whereby  He  waiteth  for  evil  men  that  they      [^ 
may  amend,  is  set  forth  by  the  name  of  Patience,  [or  long- 
suffering.]     So,  albeit  in  God  there  can  be  no  suffering  \ '  pati 
and  *  patience'  hath  its  name  '  a  patiendo,''  from  suffering, 
yet  a  patient  God  we  not  only  faithfully  believe,  but  also 
wholesomely  confess.    But  the  patience  of  God,  of  what  kind 
and  how  great  it  is,  His,  Whom  we  say  to  be  impassible  ^,  ^  nihil 
yet  not  impatient,  nay  even  most  patient,  in  words  to  unfold  entem 
this  who  can  be  able  ?    Ineffable  is  therefore  that  patience, 
as  is  His  jealousy,  as  His  wrath,  and  whatever  there  is  like 
to  these.    For  if  we  conceive  of  these  as  they  be  in  us,  in  Him 
are  there  none.     We,  namely,  can  feel  none  of  these  without 

»  Erasmus  infers  from  the  style  and  testimony,  who  mentions  both  this  piece 

language  of  this  piece,  that   it  is  not  and  that '  On  Continence' in  his  Epistle 

S.  Augustine's,  putting  it  in  the  same  to  Darius,  231.  n.  7.     That  it  is  not 

category  with  the  treatises  '  On  Con-  named  in  the  Retractations  is  account- 

tinence,'   '  On  substance  of  Charity,'  ed  for  by  the  circumstance  that  it  ap- 

'  On  Faith  of  things  invisible.'     The  pears  to  hare  been  delivered  as  a  ser- 

Benedictine  editors   acknowledge  that  mon,  see  chap.  1.  and  3.  and  Augustine 

it  has  peculiarities  of  style  which  are  did  not  live  to   fulfil  his  intention  of 

calculated  to  move  suspicion;  (especially  composing  a  further  book  of  retracta- 

the  studied   assonances    and   rhyming  tions   on    review   of  his    popular   dis- 

endings,    e.   g.   "  cautior  fuit  iste  in  courses  and  letters.  Ep.  224.  n.  2.      In 

doloribus  quam  ille   in  nemoribus  .  .  .  point  of  matter  and  doctrine  this  trea- 

consensit  ille  oblectamentis,  non  cessit  tise  has  nothing  contrary  to  or  not  in 

ille  tormentis.''  chap.  12.)  yet  they  feel  harmony  with    S.   Augustine's   known 

themselves  bound   to  retain  it  among  doctrine  and  sentiments, 
the  genuine  wo»-ks  by  Augustine's  own 


544       Patience  of  God.      What  Patience  is  in  man. 

DE     molestation:  but  be  it  far  from  us  to  surmise  that  the  impas- 
BNTiA.  siWe  nature  of  God  is  liable  to  any  molestation.     But  like  as 
» livore  He  is  jealous  without  any  darkening  of  spirit',  wroth  without 
any  perturbation,  pitiful  without  any  pain,  repenteth  Him  with- 
out any  wrongness  in  Him  to  be  set  right;   so  is  He  patient 
without  ought  of  passion.       Now   therefore    as   concerning 
human   patience,   which   we   are  able  to   conceive  and  be- 
holden to  have,  of  what  sort  it  is,  I  will,  as  God  granteth 
and  the  brevity  of  the  present  discourse  alloweth,  essay  to 
set  forth. 
ii.  2.  The  patience  of  man,  which  is  right  and  laudable  and 

worthy  of  the  name  of  virtue,  is  understood  to  be  that  by 
which  we  tolerate   evil   things  with  an  even  mind,  that  we 
may  not  with  a  mind  uneven  desert   good   things,  through 
which   we   may  arrive  at  better.     Wherefore  the  impatient, 
while  they  will  not  suffer  ills,  effect  not  a  deliverance  from 
ills,  but  only  the    suffering    of  heavier   ills.     Whereas    the 
patient  who  choose  rather  by  not  committing  to  bear,  than 
by   not  bearing  to   commit,  evil,  both   make    lighter  what 
through  patience  they  suffer,  and  also  escape  worse  ills  in 
which  through  impatience  they  would  be  sunk.     But  those 
good  things  which  are  great  and  eternal  they  lose  not,  while 
to  the  evils  which  be  temporal  and  brief  they  yield  not : 
Rom.  8,  because  tlte  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy 
to  he  compared,  as  the  Apostle  says,  icith  the  future  glory 
2CoT.4,that  shall  he  rerealed  in  us.     And  again  he  says,  This  our 
temporal  and  light  tribulation  doth  in  inconceivahle  manner 
work  for  us  an  eternal  iveight  of  glory. 
iii.         3.  Look  we  then,  beloved,  what  hardships  in  labours  and 
sorrows  men  endure,  for  things  which  they  viciously  love, 
and   by  how  much   they  think  to   be   made  by  them  more 
happy,  by  so  much  more  unhappily  covet.     How  much  for 
false  riches,  how  much  for  vain  honours,  how  much  for  afi'ec- 
tions  of  games  and  shows,  is  of  exceeding  peril  and  trouble 
most  patiently  borne  !     We  see  men  hankering  after  money, 
glory,    lasciviousness,    how,  that  they   may   arrive    at    their 
desires,  and  having  gotten  not  lose  them,  they  endure  sun, 
rain,  icy  cold,  waves,  and  most  stormy  tempests,  the  rough- 
nesses and  uncertainties  of  wars,  the  strokes  of  huge  blows, 
and  dreadful  wounds,  not  of  inev^itable  necessity  but  of  cul- 


Endurance  practised  for  vain  or  evil  purposes.      545 
pable  will.     But  these  madnesses  are  thought,  in  a  manner,     db 


PATI- 
ENTIA. 


permitted.  Thus  avarice,  ambition,  luxury,  and  the  delights 
of  all  sorts  of  games  and  shows,  unless  for  them  some  wicked  iv. 
deed  be  committed  or  outrage  which  is  prohibited  by  human 
laws,  are  accounted  to  pertain  to  innocence :  nay  moreover, 
the  man  who  without  wrong  to  any  shall,  whether  for  getting 
or  increasing  of  money,  whether  for  obtaining  or  keeping  of 
honours,  whether  in  contending  in  the  match,  or  in  hunting, 
or  in  exhibiting  with  applause  some  theatrical  spectacle, 
have  bonie  great  labours  and  pains,  it  is  not  enough  that 
through  popular  vanity  he  is  checked  by  no  reproofs,  but  he 
is  moreover  extolled  with  praises  :  Because,  as  it  is  written,  Ps.10,3. 
the  sinner  is  praised  in  the  desires  of  his  soul.  For  the  force 
of  desires  makes  endurance  of  labours  and  pains :  and  no 
man  save  for  that  which  he  enjoyeth,  freely  takes  on  him  to 
bear  that  which  annoyeth.  But  these  lusts,  as  I  said,  for 
the  fulfilling  of  which  they  which  are  on  fire  with  them 
most  patiently  endure  much  hardship  and  bitterness,  are 
accounted  to  be  permitted,  and  allowed  by  laws. 

4.  Nay  more;  for  is  it  not  so  that  even  for  open  wicked-      v. 
nesses,  not  to  punish  but  to  perpetrate  them,  men  put  up 
with    many   most    grievous   troubles  ?     Do    not    authors    of 
secular  letters  tell  of  a  certain  right  noble  parricide  of  hisSallust. 
country,  that  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  all  these  he  was  able  tOe.  5. 
endure,  and  his  body  was  patient  of  lack  of  food  and  warmth 
and  sleep   to   a  degree    surpassing   belief?    Why   speak  of 
highway  robbers,  all   of  whom    while    they  lie  in  wait  for 
travellers  endure  whole  nights  without  sleep,  and  that  they 
may  catch,  as  they  pass  by,  men  who  have  no  thought  of 
harm,  will,  no  matter  how  foul   the  weather,  plant  in  one 
spot  their  mind  and  body,  which  are  full  of  thoughts  of  harm? 
Nay  it  is  said  that  some  of  them  are  wont  to  torture  one 
another  by  turns,  to  that  degree  that  this  practice  and  train- 
ing against  pains  is  not  a  whit  short  of  pains.     For,  not  so 
much  perchance   are  they  excruciated  by  the  Judge,  that 
through  smart  of  pain  the  truth  may  be  got  at,  as  they  are 
by    their   own    comrades,    that    thi-ough    patience    of    pain 
truth    may    not   be    betrayed.      And   yet   in    all    these   the 
patience  is  rather   to   be   wondered   at  than  praised :    nay 
neither  wondered  at  nor  praised,  seeing  it  is  no  patience;  but 

N  n 


546  That  is  Patience  which  is  for  good,  8;  for  the  souVs  health. 

DE     we  iniist  wonder  at  the  hardness,  deny  the  patience:    for 
^^^^l  there  is  nothing  in  this  rightly  to  be  praised,  nothing  use- 
fully  to  be  imitated  ;  and  thou  wilt  rightly  judge  the  mind  to 
be  all  the  more  worthy  of  greater  punishment,  the  more  it 
yields  up  to  vices  the  instruments  of  virtues.     Patience   is 
companion    of  wisdom,   not    handmaid    of    concupiscence : 
patience  is  the  friend  of  a  good  conscience,  not  the  foe  of 
innocence. 
vi.         5.  When  therefore  thou  shalt  see  any  man  suffer  ought 
patiently,  do  not  straightway  praise  it  as  patience ;  for  this  is 
only  shewn  by  the  cause  of  suffering.     When  it  is  a  good 
cause,  then  is  it  true  patience :  when  that  is  not  polluted  by 
lust,  then  is  this   distinguished  from  falsity.     But  when  that 
is  placed  in  crime,  then  is  this  much  misplaced  in  name. 
For  not  just  as  all  who  know  are  partakers  of  knowledge, 
just  so  are  all  who  suffer  partakers  of  patience:    but  they 
which  rightly  use  the  suffering,  these  in  verity  of  patience 
are  praised,  these  with  the  prize  of  patience  are  crowned. 
vii.         6.  But  yet,   seeing  that  for  lusts'  sake,  or   even  wicked- 
nesses, seeing,  in  a  word,  that  for  this  temporal  life  and  weal 
men  do  wonderfully  bear  the  brunt  of  many  horrible  suffer- 
ings, they  much  admonish  us  how  great  things  ought  to  be 
borne  for  the  sake  of  a  good  life,  that  it  may  also  hereafter 
be  eternal  life,  and  without  any  bound  of  time,  without  waste 
or  loss  of  any  advantage,  in  true  felicity  secure.     The  Lord 
Luke2l,saith,  In  your  patience  ye  shall  possess  your  souls:   He  saith 
^  ■         not,  your  farms,  your  praises,  your  luxuries  ;  but,  your  souls. 
If  then  the   soul   endures   so   great   sufferings   that  it  may 
possess  that  whereby  it  may  be  lost,  how  great  ought  it  to 
bear  that  it  may  not  be  lost.?     And  then,  to  mention  a  thing 
not  culpable,  if  it  bear  so  great  sufferings  for  saving  of  the 
flesh  under  the  hands  of  chirurgeons  cutting  or  burning  the 
same,  how  great  ought  it  to  bear  for  saving  of  itself  under 
the  fury  of  any  soever  enemies  ?    Seeing  that  leeches,  that 
the  body  may  not  die,  do  by  pains  consult  for  the  body's 
good;  but  enemies  by  threatening  the  body  with  pains  and 
death,  would  urge  us  on  to  the  slaying  of  soul  and  body  in 
hell. 

7.  Though  indeed  the  welfare  even  of  the  body  is  then 
more    providently    consulted    for,    if  its    temporal   life    and 


The  body  truly  saved  by  it.     Patience  in  Mind.      547 

welfare  be  disregarded  for  righteousness'  sake,  and  its  pain      de 
or    death    most   patiently  for   righteousness'   sake    endured,  entia. 
Since  it  is  of  the  body's  redemption  which  is  to  be  in  the 
end,  that  the  Apostle  speaks,  where  he  says,  Even  v:e  our-  Rom.  8, 
selves  groan  within  ourselves,  ivaiting  the  adoption  of  sons,  ^3— 25. 
the  redemption  of  our  body.     Then  he  subjoins,  For  in  hope 
are  we  saved.    But  hope  ivhich  is  seen  is  not  hope:  for  lohat 
a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  also  hope  for?    But  if  ivhat  toe  see 
not  we  hope  for,  ive  do  by  patience  wait  for  it.    When  there-    ^•iii. 
fore  any  ills  do  torture  us  indeed,  yet  not  extort  from  us  ill 
works,  not  only  is  the  soul  possessed  through  patience ;  but 
even  when   through  patience  the  body  itself  for  a  time  is 
afBicted    or   lost,  it  is  unto    eternal    stability  and  salvation 
resumed,  and  hath  through  grief  and    death    an  inviolable 
health   and   happy  immortality  laid  up  for  itself.     Whence 
the    Lord   Jesus    exhorting  His    Martyrs  to  patience,  hath 
promised  of  the  very  body  a  future  perfect  entireness,  without 
loss,  I  say  not  of  any  limb,  but  of  a  single  hair.    Verily  I  say  Luke2i, 
unto  you,  saith  He,  a  hair  of  your  head  shall  not  perish. 
That  so,  because,  as  the  Apostle  says,  no  man  ever  hated  his  Eph.  5, 
own  flesh,  a  faithful  man   may  more   by  patience  than  by     ' 
impatience  take  vigilant  care  for  the  state  of  his  flesh,  and 
find  amends  for  its  present  losses,  how  great  soever  they 
may  be,  in  the  inestimable  gain  of  future  incorruption. 

8.  But  although  patience  be  a  virtue  of  the  mind,  yet 
pai'tly  the  mind  exercises  it  in  the  mind  itself,  partly  in  the 
body.  In  itself  it  exercises  patience,  when,  the  body  remain- 
ing unhurt  and  untouched,  the  mind  is  goaded  by  any 
adversities  or  filthinesses  of  things  or  words,  to  do  or  to  say 
something  that  is  not  expedient  or  not  becoming,  and 
patiently  bears  all  evils  that  it  may  not  itself  commit  any 
evil  in  work  or  word.  By  this  patience  we  bear,  even  while  ix. 
we  be  sound  in  body,  that  in  the  midst  of  the  offences  of  this 
world  our  blessedness  is  deferred:  of  which  is  said  what 
I  cited  a  little  before.  If  what  we  see  not  we  hope  for,  ice  do'^  Sam. 
by  patience  wait  for  it.  By  this  patience,  holy  David  bore  12]  ~~ 
the  revilings  of  a  railer,  and,  when  he  might  easily  have 
avenged  himself,  not  only  did  it  not,  but  even  refrained 
another  who  was  vexed  and  moved  for  him  ;  and  more  ])ut 
forth  his  kingly  power   by  prohibiting  than    by  exercising 

N  n  2 


548  Bearing  tvith  the  wicked.    Patience  tinder  persecution, 

DE     vengeance.     Nor  at  that  time  was  his   body  afflicted  with 
ENTiI  any  disease  or  wound,  but  there  was  an  acknowledging  of  a 
time  of  humility,  and  a  bearing  of  the  will  of  God,  for  the 
sake  of  which    there  was  a  drinking    of  the    bitterness    of 
contumely  with  most  patient  mind.     This  patience  the  Lord 
tanght,  when,  the  servants  being  moved  at  the   mixing  in 
of  the  tares  and  wishing  to  gather  them  up,  He  said  that  the 
Mat.13,  householder  answered,  Leave  both  to  grow  until  the  harvest. 
That,  namely,  must  be  in  patience  put  up  with,  which  must 
not  be  in  haste  put  away.     Of  this  patience  Himself  afforded 
and  shewed  an  example,  when,  before  the  passion  of  His 
Johni2,  Body,  He    so   bore  with    His  disciple  Judas,  that  ere  He 
'    '    'pointed  him  out  as  the  traitor,  He  endured  him  as  a  thief  j 
and  before  experience  of  bonds  and  cross  and  death,  did,  to 
Mat.26,  those  lips  so  full  of  guile,  not  deny  the  kiss  of  peace.     All 
^^*        these,  and  whatever  else    there    be,  which    it  were  tedious 
to  rehearse,  belong  to  that  manner  of  patience,  by  which  the 
mind  doth,  not  its  own  sins  but  any  evils  soever  from  with- 
out, patiently  endure  in  itself,  while  the  body  revnains  alto- 
X.     gather,  unhurt.     Cut  the  other  manner  of  patience  is  that  by 
which   the    same    mind    bears  any  troubles  and  grievances 
whatsoever  in  the  sufferings  of  the  body ;  not  as  do  foolish 
or  wicked  men  for  the  sake  of  getting  vain  things  or  perpe- 
Mat.  5,  trating  crimes;  but  as  is  defined  by  the  Lord, /or  righteous- 
ness'' sake.      In    both   kinds,  the  holy  Martyrs   contended. 
For  both  with  scornful  reproofs  of  the  ungodly  were  they 
filled,  where,  the  body  remaining  intact,  the  mind  hath  its 
own  (as  it  were)  blows  and  wounds,  and  bears  these  unbroken : 
and  in  their   bodies    they  were  bound,  imprisoned,  vexed 
with    hunger    and   thirst,   tortured,    gashed,    torn    asunder, 
burned,   butchered  ;    and  with    piety  immovable  submitted 
unto  God  their  mind,  while  they  were  suffering  in  the  flesh 
all  that  exquisite  cruelty  could  devise  in  its  mind. 

9.  It  is  indeed  a  greater  fight  of  patience,  when  it  is  not  a 
visible  enemy  that  by  persecution  and  rage  would  urge  us 
into  crime,  which  enemy  may  openly  and  in  broad  day  be  by 
not  consenting  overcome  ;  but  the  devil  himself,  (he  who 
doth  likewise  by  means  of  the  children  of  infidelity,  as  by  his 
vessels,  persecute  the  children  of  light,)  doth  by  himself 
hiddenly  attack  us,  by  his  rage  putting  us  on  to  do  or  say 


Patience  like  JoVs,  under  Saia/i's  temptations.      549 

something  against  God.  As  such  had  holy  Job  experience  de 
of  him,  by  both  temptations  vexed,  but  in  both  througli  e^tiI. 
stedfast  strength  of  patience  and  arms  of  piety  uuconquered.  ^i. 
For  first,  his  body  being  left  unhurt,  he  lost  all  that  he  had, 
in  order  that  the  mind,  before  excruciation  of  the  flesh, 
might  through  withdrawal  of  the  things  which  men  are  wont 
to  prize  highly,  be  broken,  and  he  might  say  something 
against  God  upon  loss  of  the  things  for  the  sake  of  which  he 
was  thought  to  worship  Him.  He  was  smitten  also  with 
sudden  bereavement  of  all  his  sons,  so  that  whom  he  had 
begotten  one  by  one  he  should  lose  all  at  once,  as  though 
their  numerousness  had  been  not  for  the  adorning  of  his 
felicity,  but  for  the  increasing  of  his  calamity.  But  where, 
having  endured  these  things,  he  remained  immovable  in  his 
God,  he  cleaved  to  His  will.  Whom  it  was  not  possible  to 
lose  but  by  his  own  will;  and  in  place  of  the  things  he  had 
lost  he  held  Him  who  took  them  away,  in  Whom  he  should 
find  what  should  never  be  lost.  For  He  that  took  them  away 
was  not  that  enemy  who  had  will  of  hurting,  but  He  who 
had  given  to  that  enemy  the  power  of  hurting.  The  enemy  xii. 
next  attacked  also  the  body,  and  now  not  those  things  which 
were  in  the  man  from  without,  but  the  man  himself,  in  what- 
ever part  he  could,  he  smote.  From  the  head  to  the  feet 
were  burning  pains,  were  crawling  worms,  were  running 
sores ;  still  in  the  rotting  body  the  mind  remained  entire, 
and  horrid  as  were  the  tortures  of  the  consuming  flesh,  with 
inviolate  piety  and  uncorrupted  patience  it  endured  them  all. 
There  stood  the  wife,  and  instead  of  giving  her  husband  any 
help,  was  suggesting  blasphemy  against  God.  For  we  are 
not  to  think  that  the  devil,  in  leaving  her  when  he  took  away 
the  sons,  went  to  work  as  one  unskilled  in  mischief:  rather, 
how  necessary  she  was  to  the  tempter,  he  had  already  learned 
in  Eve.  But  now  he  had  not  found  a  second  Adam  whom 
he  might  take  by  means  of  a  womaii.  More  cautious  was  Job 
in  his  hours  of  sadness,  than  Adam  in  his  bowers  of  gladness, 
the  one  was  overcome  in  the  midst  of  pleasant  things,  the 
other  overcame  in  the  midst  of  pains ;  the  one  consented  to 
that  which  seemed  delightsome,  this  other  quailed  not  in 
torments  most  aff"rightsome.  There  stood  his  friends  too,  not 
to  console  him  in  his  evils,  but  to  suspect  enl  in  him.     For 


550  Even  Job's  Wife  dared  not  suggest  suicide. 

DE  while  he  suffered  so  great  sorrows,  they  believed  Inm  not 
ENTiA.i"i>ocent,  nor  did  their  tongue  forbear  to  say  that  which  his 
conscience  had  not  to  say  ;  that  so  amid  ruthless  tortures  of 
the  body,  his  mind  also  might  be  beaten  with  truthless 
reproaches.  But  he,  bearing  in  his  flesh  his  own  pains, 
in  his  heart  others'  errors,  reproved  his  wife  for  her  folly, 
taught   his   friends    wisdom,    prest-i-ved    patience    in    each 

and  all. 
xiii.         10.    To  this  man  let  them   look  who  put  themselves  to 
Dona-    death  when  they  are  souglit  for  to  have  life  put  upon  them ; 
*'^*'^'      and  by  bereaving  themselves  of  the  present,  deny  and  refuse 
also  that  which  is  to  come.     Why,  if  people  were  driving 
them  to  deny  Christ  or  to  do  any  thing  contrary  to  righteous- 
ness, like  true  Martyrs,  they  ought  rather  to  bear  all  patiently 
than  to  dare  death  impatiently.     K  it  could  be  right  to  do 
this  for  the  sake  of  running  away  from  evils,  holy  Job  would 
have  killed  himself,  that  buing  in  so  great  evils,  in  his  estate, 
in  his  sons,  in  his  limbs,  through  the  devil's  cruelty,  he  might 
escape  them  all.     But  he  did  it  not.     Far  be  it  from  him,  a 
wise  man,  to  commit  upon  himself  what  not  even  that  unwise 
woman  suggested.     And  if  she  had  suggested  it,  she  would 
with  good  reason  here  also  have  had  that  answer  which  she 
Job  2,    had  when  suggesting  blasphemy ;    Thou  hast  spoken  as  one 
^^'        of  the  foolish  women.     If  we  have  received  good  at  the  hand 
of  the  Lord,  shall  we  not  bear  evil?     Seeing  even  he  also 
would  have  lost  patience,  if  either  by  blasphemy  as  she  had 
suggested,  or   by  killing  himself  which  not  even    she    had 
dared   to   speak  of,  he  should  die,  and  be  among  them  of 
Ecclus.  whom  it  is  written,  Woe  unto  them  that  have  lost  patience  I 
'     '     and  rather  increase  than  escape  ]jains,  if  after  the  death  of 
his  body  he  should  be  hurried  ofl'  to  punishment  either  of 
blasphemers,  or  of  murderers,  or  of  them  which  are  worse 
even  than  parricides.     For  if  a  parricide  be  on  that  account 
more  wicked  than  any  homicide,  because  he  kills  not  merely 
a  man  but  a  near  relative ;  and  among  parricides  too,  the 
nearer  the  person  killed,  the  greater  criminal  he  is  judged  to 
be:  without  doubt  worse  still  is  he  who  kills  himself,  because 
there  is  none  nearer  to  a  man  than  himself     What  then  do 
these  miserable  persons  mean,  who,  though  both  here  they 
have  inflicted  pain  upon  themselves,  and  hereafter  not  only 


Precepts  of  Patience  from  Holy  Scripture.  551 

for  Iheir  impiety  towards  God  but  for  the  very  cruelty  which      de 
they  have  exercised  upon  themselves  v.ill  deservedly  suffer  entfa. 
pains  of  His  inflicting,  do  yet  seek  moreover  the  glories  of 
Martyrs  ?  since,  even  if  for  the  true  testimony  of  Christ  they 
suffered  persecution,  and  killed  themselves,  that  they  might 
not   suffer    any  thing    from    their   persecutors,  it  would   be 
rightly   said   to   them,    Woe   unto    them    ichich    have    lost 
patience!     For  how  hath  patience  her  just  reward,  if  even 
an  impatient  suffering  receives  the  crown  ?  or  how  shall  that 
man  be  judged  innocent,  to  whom  is  said,  Thou  shalt  /ore  Mat.  19, 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself,  if  he  commit  murder  upon  himself 
which  he  is  forbidden  to  commit  upon  his  neighbour  ? 

11.  Let  then  the  Saints    hear   from    holy  Scripture    the    xiv. 
precepts   of   patience:    3Iy  son,  xvhen  thou  contest  to  ^AeEcclus. 
service  of  God,  stand  thou  in  righteousness  and  fear,  and  ' 
prepare  thy  soidfor  temptation  :  bring  thine  heart  low,  and 
bear  up;  that  in  the  last  end  thy  life  may  increase.     All 

that  shall  come  upon  thee  receive  thou,  and  in  pain  bear  up, 
and  in  thy  humility  have  patience.  For  in  the  fire  gold  and 
silver  is  proved,  but  acceptable  men  in  the  furnace  of  humi-  reeepti- 

biles 

liation.  And  in  another  place  Ave  read  :  3Iy  son,  faint  not  Prov.  3 
thou  in  the  discipline  of  the  Lord,  neither  be  wearied  when^^-  '2* 
thou  art  chidden  of  Him.  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He 
chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  ivhom  He  receiveth. 
What  is  here  set  down,  son  rvhom  He  receiveth,  the  same  in 
the  above-mentioned  testimony  is,  acceptable  men.  For 
this  is  just,  that  we  who  from  our  first  felicity  of  Paradise  for 
contumacious  appetence  of  things  to  enjoy  were  dismissed, 
through  humble  patience  of  things  that  annoy  may  be  re- 
ceived back:  driven  away  for  doing  evil,  brought  back  by 
sufferhig  evil :  there  against  righteousness  doing  ill,  here  for 
righteousness'  sake  patient  of  ills. 

12.  But  concerning  true  patience,  worthy  of  the  name  of    xv. 
this  virtue,  whence  it  is  to  be  had,  must  now  be  enquired. 

For  there  are  some  who  attribute  it  to  the  strength  of  the  Pelagi- 
human   will,  not  which   it  hath    by  Divine  assistance,  but 
which  it  hath  of  free-will.     Now  this  error  is  a  proud  one : 
for  it  is  the  error  of  them  which  abound,  of  whom  it  is  said 
in  the  Psalm,  A  scornfid  reproof  to  them  which  abound,  arid Ps.  123, 
a  despising  to  the  proud.    It  is  not  therefore  that  pjatience  of^^.  9, 

18. 


552  Patience  of  proud  free-ivill  not  genuine. 

DE     the  2JOor  which  perisheth  not  for  ever.   For  these  poor  receive 
ENTiA.^^  from  that  Rich  One,  to  Whom  is  said,  My  Qod  art  Thoti, 
Ps.xQj'i.  because  my  goods  Thou  ncedest  not:  of  Whom  is  every  good 
^-^^^^^^' gift.)  and  every  perfect  gift ;  to  Whom  crieth  the  needy  and 
Ps.  71,  the  poor,  and  in  asking,  seeking,  knocking,  saith,  My  God., 
deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  the  sinner,  and  from  the  hand 
of  the  lawless  and  unjust:  because  Thou  art  my  patience, 
O  Lord,  my  hope  from  my  youth  up.      But  these  which 
abound,  and  disdain   to    be  in  want  before  God,  lest  they 
receive  of  Him  true  patience,  they  which  glory  in  their  own 
Ps.14,6.  false  patience,  seek  to  confound  the  counsel  of  the  pjoor, 
because  the  Lord  is  his  hope.     Nor  do  they  regard,  seeing 
they  are  men,  and  attribute  so  much  to  their  own,  that  is,  to 
the    human  will,  that  they  run  into  that  which  is  written, 
Jer.  17,  Cursed  is  every  one  ivho  putteth  his  hope  in  man.     Whence 
even  if  it  chance  them  that  they  do  bear  up  under  any  hard- 
ships or  difficulties,  either  that  they  may  not  displease  men, 
or  that  they  may  not  suffer  worse,  or  in  self-pleasing  and  love 
of  their  own  presumption,  do  with  most  proud  will  bear  up 
under  these  same,  it  is  meet  that  concerning  patience  this  be 
said  unto  them,  which  concerning  wisdom  the  blessed  Apostle 
James    Jamcs  saith,   This   wisdom  cometh  not  from  above,  but  is 

3    15 

'  '  earthly,  animal,  devilish.  For  why  may  there  not  be  a  false 
patience  of  the  proud,  as  there  is  a  false  wisdom  of  the 
proud  ?  But  from  Whom  cometh  true  wisdom,  from  Him 
cometh  also  true  patience.     For  to  Him  singeth  that  poor  in 

Ps.62,5.  spirit,  TJnlo  God  is  my  soul  subjected,  because  from  Him  is 
my  patience. 
xvi.        13.  But  they  answer  and  speak,  saying,  '  If  the  will  of  man 

liberi      without  any  aid  of  God  by  strength  of  free  choice  bears  so 

ar  itni  ^^^^y^y  gnevous  and  horrible  distresses,  whether  in  mind  or 
body,  that  it  may  enjoy  the  delight  of  this  mortal  life  and  of 
sins,  why  may  it  not  be  that  in  the  same  manner  the  self-same 
will  of  man  by  the  same  strength  of  free-choice,  not  there- 
unto looking  to  be  aided  of  God,  but  unto  itself  by  natural 
possibility  sufficing,  doth,  in  all  of  labour  or  sorrow  that  is 
]3ut  upon  it,  for  righteousness  and  eternal  life's  sake  most 
patiently  sustain  the  same  ?  Or  is  it  so,  say  they,  that  the 
will  of  the  unjust  is  sufficient,  without  aid  of  God,  for  them, 
yea  even  to   exercise  themselves  in  undergoing  torture  for 


Harduessfrom  ivorldlylitstyPatienccfrom  God^sffift  o/Love.bbS 

iniquity,  and  before  they  be  tortured  by  others;  sufficient  the  de 
will  of  them  which  love  the  respiting  of  this  life  that,  without  ^^^l^ 
aid  of  God,  they  should  in  the  midst  of  most  atrocious  and 
protracted  torments  persevere  in  a  lie,  lest  confessing  their 
misdeeds  they  be  ordered  to  be  put  to  death ;  and  not 
sufficient  the  will  of  the  just,  unless  strength  be  put  into 
them  from  above,  that  whatever  be  their  pains,  they  should, 
either  for  beauty's  sake  of  very  righteousness  or  for  love 
of  eternal  life,  bear  the  same  ?' 

14.  They  which  say  these  things,  do  not  understand  that    xvii. 
as   well  each   one  of  the   wicked   is   in    that   measure   for 
endurance  of  any  ills  more  hard,  in  what  measure  the  lust 
of  the  world  is  mightier  in  him  ;  as  also  that  each  one  of 
the  just  is  in  that  measure  for  endurance  of  any  ills  more 
brave,  in  what  measure  in  him  the  love  of  God  is  mightier. 
But  lust  of  the  world  hath  its  beginning  from  choice  of  the 
will,  its  progress   from   enjoyableness  of  pleasure,  its  con- 
firmation from  the  chain  of  custom,  whereas  the  love  of  GodUom.  5, 
is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  not  verily  from  ourselves,  but   " 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  given  unto  us.     And  therefore 
from  Him  cometh  the  patience  of  the  just,  by  Whom  is  shed 
abroad  their  love   (of  Him).     Which  love  (or  charity)  the 
Apostle    praising    and    setting    off,    among   its    other    good 
qualities,  saith,  that  it   beareth  all  tilings.     Charity,  saith  i  Cor. 
he,  is  magnanimous^.     And  a  little  after  he  &a,\t\i,  en dureth  i  ^^l' 
all  things.    The  greater  then  is  in  saints  the  charity  (or  love)  nanima. 
of  God,  the  more  do  they  endure  all  things  for  Him  whom 
they  love,  and  the  greater  in  sinners  the  lust  of  the  world, 
the  more  do  they  endure  all  things  for  that  which  they  lust 
after.    And  consequently  from  that  same  source  cometh  true 
patience  of  the  righteous,  from  which  there  is  in  them  the 
love  of  God ;  and  from  that  same  source  the  false  patience 
of  the  unrighteous,  from  which  is  in  them  the  lust  of  the 
world.     With  regard  to  which  the  Apostle  John  saith  ;  Love  iJohn2, 
not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  be  in  the  ivorld.     If 
any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him: 
because  all  that  is  in  the  world,  is  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  lust 
of  the  eyes,  and  pride  of  life;  ivhich  is  not  of  the  Father,  but'amLHio 
is  of  the  ivorld.     This  concupiscence,  then,  which  is  not  qJ*^'^"'* 
the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world,  in  what  measure  it  shall  in 


554  Love  of  God  cannot  be  without  His  Spirit. 

DE  any  man  be  more  vehement  and  ardent,  in  that  measure 
^j^jj2.  becometh  each  more  patient  of  all  troubles  and  sorrows  for 
that  which  he  lusteth  after.  Therefore,  as  we  said  above, 
this  is  not  the  patience  which  descendeth  from  above,  but 
the  patience  of  the  godly  is  from  above,  coming  down  from 
the  Father  of  lights.  And  so  that  is  earthly,  this  heavenly ; 
'deifica.  that  animal,  this  spiritual ;  that  devilish,  this  Godhke '. 
Because  concupiscence,  whereof  it  cometh  that  persons 
sinning  suffer  all  things  stubbornly,  is  of  the  world  ;  but 
charity,  whereof  cometh  that  persons  living  aright  suffer  all 
things  bravely,  is  of  God.  And  therefore  to  that  false 
patience  it  is  possible  that,  without  aid  of  God,  the  human 
will  may  sufBce ;  harder,  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  eager  of 
lust,  and  bearing  ills  with  the  more  endurance  the  worse 
itself  becometh :  while  to  this,  which  is  true  patience,  the 
human  will,  unless  aided  and  inflamed  iiom  above,  doth  not 
suffice,  for  the  very  reason  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  fire 
thereof ;  by  Whom  unless  it  be  kindled  to  love  that  im- 
passible Good,  it  is  not  able  to  bear  the  ill  which  it 
suffereth. 
xviii.  15.  For,  as  the  Divine  utterances  testify,  God  is  love,  and 
4  2g'  he  that  dwel/eth  in  love  duelleth  in  God,  and  God  dwellelli 
in  him.  Whoso  therefore  contends  that  love  of  God  may  be 
had  without  aid  of  God,  what  else  does  he  contend,  but  that 
God  may  be  had  without  God  ?  Now  what  Christian  would 
say  this,  which  no  madman  would  venture  to  say  ?  There- 
fore in  the  Apostle,  true,  pious,  faithful  patience,  saith 
Rom.  8, exultingly,  and  by  the  mouth  of  the  Saints;  Who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  CJtrist'i  shall  tribulation ,  or 
distress,  or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or 
sword?  As  it  is  written,  For  Thy  sake  ive  are  killed  all  the 
day  lony ;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter. 
Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us:  not  through  ourselves,  but, 
through  Him  that  loved  us.  And  then  he  goes  on  and 
adds;  For  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  tilings  present, 
nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.    This  is  that  love  of  God 


What  is  of  man  is  of  the  uorld.    Election  is  of  grace.    555 

which  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which      de 
is  given   unto  us.     But  the  concupiscence  of  the  bad,  l)y  /ntia. 
reason  of  which  there  is  in  them  a  false  patience,  is  not  ofi  jolm 
the  Father,  as  saith  the  Apostle  John,  but  is  of  the  world.       ^'  ^^' 

16.  Here  some  man  shall  say;  '  If  the  concupiscence  of  xix. 
the  bad,  whereby  it  comes  that  they  bear  all  evils  for  that 
which  they  lust  after,  be  of  the  world,  how  is  it  said  to  be 

of  their  will  ?'  As  if,  truly,  they  were  not  themselves  also  of 
the  world,  when  they  love  the  world,  forsaking  Him  by  Whom 
the  world  was  made.     For  they  serve  the  creature  more  than  l^iom.  i, 

.  25 

the  Creator,  IVho  is  blessed  for  ever.  Whether  then  by  the 
word  '  world,'  the  Apostle  John  signifies  lovers  of  the  world, 
the  will,  as  it  is  of  themselves,  is  therefore  of  the  world :  or 
whether  under  the  name  of  the  world  he  comprises  heaven 
and  earth,  and  all  that  is  therein,  that  is  the  creature 
universally,  it  is  plain  that  the  will  of  the  creature,  not 
being  that  of  the  Creator,  is  of  the  world.  For  which  cause  to 
such  the  Lord  saith.  Ye  are  from  beneath,  I  am  from  above  :^^^^^' 
ye  are  of  this  world,  I  am  not  of  this  world.  And  to  the 
Apostles  He  saitli,  //  ye  were  of  the  tcorld,  the  world  would 
love  his  own.  But  lest  they  should  arrogate  more  unto 
themselves  than  their  measure  craved,  and  when  He  said 
that  they  were  not  of  the  world,  should  imagine  this  to  be 
of  nature,  not  of  grace,  therefore  He  saith.  But  because  ye 
are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world, 
therefore  the  world  hateth  you.  It  follows,  that  they  once 
were  of  the  world:  for,  that  they  might  not  be  of  the  world, 
they  were  chosen  out  of  the  world. 

17.  Now  this   election   the  Apostle  demonstrating  to  be,    xx. 
not  of  merits  going  before  in  good  works,  but  election  of 
grace,  saith  thus :  And  in  this  time  a  remnant  by  election  Rom. 
of  grace  is  saved.     But  if  by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of    ^   '   ' 
works,  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.     This  is  election 

of  grace ;  that  is,  election  in  which  through  the  grace  of 
God  men  are  elected  :  this,  I  say,  is  election  of  grace 
which  goes  before  all  good  merits  of  men.  For  if  it  be 
to  any  good  merits  that  it  is  given,  then  is  it  no  more 
gratuitously  given,  but  is  paid  as  a  debt,  and  consequently 
is  not  truly  called  grace ;  where  reward,  as  the  same 
Apostle    saith,    is    not    imputed    as    grace,   but    as    debt.  Rom.  4, 

4. 


556        Good-will  earning  more  grace  comes  of  grace. 

OE     Whereas  if,  that  it  may  be  true  grace,  that  is,  gratuitous,  it 
ENTiA.^"^  nothing  in  man  to  which  it  is  due  of  merit,  (which  thing 
Ps.~56^7.is  well  understood  in  that  saying,  Thou  wilt  save  them  for 
nothing^,)   then    assuredly  itself   gives   the    merits,  not   to 
merits  is  given.      Consequently  it  goes   before  even    faith, 
Habak.  from  which  it  is  that  all  good  works  begin.     For  the  just, 
'   ■      as  is  written,  shall    live   hy  faith.      But,  moreover,   grace 
not   only  assists   the  just,  but   also  justifies   the   ungodly. 
And  therefore  even  when  it  does  aid  the  just  and  seems  to 
be  rendered  to  his  merits,  not  even  then  does  it  cease  to  be 
grace,  because  that  which  it  aids  it  did  itself  bestow.     With 
a  view  therefore  to   this    grace,  which    precedes    all    good 
merits  of  man,  not  only  was  Christ  put  to   death   by  the 
Rom.  b^VLn^oAXy,  h\xt  died  for  the  ungodly.     And  ere  that  He  died. 
He  elected  the  Apostles,  not  of  course  then  just,  but  to  be 
justified :  to  whom  He  saith,  /  Jiave  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world.     For  to  whom  He  said,  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,- and 
then,  lest  they  should  account  themselves  never  to  have  been 
of  the  world,  presently  added,  But  I  have  chosen  you  out  of 
the  world;  assuredly  that  they  should  not  be  of  the  world 
was  by  His  own   election   of  them   conferred   upon   them. 
Wherefore,  if  it  had  been  through  their  own  righteousness, 
not  through  His  grace,  that  they  were  elected,  they  would 
not  have  been  chosen  out  of  the  world,  because  they  would 
already  not  be  of  the  world  if  already  they  were  just.     And 
again,  if  the  reason  Avhy  they  were  elected  was,  that  they 
were  already  just,  they  had  already  first  chosen  the  Lord. 
For  who  can  be  righteous  but  by  choosing  righteousness  ? 
Rom.     But  the  end  of  the  law  is  Christ,  for  righteousness  to  every 
I  Cor  1  ^'^^  ^^^'  believeth.      Who  is  made  unto  us  wisdom  of  God, 
30.31.   and    righteousness,   and    sanctificalion,   and    redemption: 
that,  as  it  is  written,  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in 
the  Lord.     He  then  is  Himself  our  righteousness. 
xxi.        18.  Whence  also  the  just  of  old,  before  the  Incarnation  of 
the  Word,  in  this  faith  of  Christ,  and  in  this  true  righteous- 
ness, (which  thing  Christ  is  unto  us,)  were  justified;  believing 
Eph.  2,  this  to  come  which  we  believe  come:  and  they  themselves  by 

8   9.  .  J  J 

grace  were  saved  through  faith,  not  of  themselves,  but  by  the 

B  Psalm  Ivi.  7.  Lat.  and  LXX.  u<rij  fou  finfftvoi  cujus  avrovs.     But  Heb.  and 
E.  V.  '  shall  they  escape  by  iniquity ;" 


Mysterious  love  of  God  to  man  he/ore  conversion.     557 

gift  of  God,  not  of  works,  lest  haply  they  should  be  lifted  up.      de 
For  their  i^ood  works  did  not  come  before  God's  mercy,  but   ^^"" 
followed  it.     For  to  them  was  it  said,  and  by  them  written, 
long  ere  Christ  was  come  in  the  flesh,  /  will  have  mercij  on  Ex.  33, 
tcJiom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  I  will  shew  compassion  on  ^^'^^  ^ 
whom  I  will  have  compassion.     From  which  words  of  God  is.  16. 
the  Apostle  Paul  should  so  long  after  say ;  //  is  not  there- 
fore of  him  that  tvillcth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth.,  but  of 
God  that  sheweth  mercy.     It  is  also  their  own  voice,  long 
ere  Christ  was  come  in  the  flesh.  My  God,  His  mercy  shall  Ps.  59, 
prevent  me.     How  indeed   could   they  be   aliens  from  the     ' 
faith   of  Christ,  by    whose    charity    even    Christ    was   fore- 
announced  unto  us ;  without  the  faith  of  Whom,  not  any  of 
mortals  either  hath  been,  or  is,  or  ever  shall  be  able  to  be, 
righteous?     If  then,  being  already  just,  the  Apostles  were 
elected  by  Christ,  they  would  have  first  chosen  Him,  that 
just  men  might  be  chosen,  because  without  Him  they  could 
not  be  just,     liut  it  was  not  so:  as  Himself  saith  to  them, 
Not  ye  have  chosen  Me,  hut  I  have  chosen  you.     Of  which 
the  Apostle  John  speaks,  Not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  i  Jobn 

XT     1         J  4,  10. 

He  loved  us. 

19.  Since  the  case  is  so,  what  is  man,  while  in  this  life  he  xxii. 
uses  his  own  proper  will,  ere  he  choose  and  love  God,  but 
unrighteous  and  ungodly  '^.      What,  I  say,  is  man,  a  creature 
going  astray  from  the  Creator,  unless  his  Creator  be  mindful  Pa.  s,  4. 
of  him,  and    choose'    him   freely,  and   love^    him    freely  .f' '  yljgere 
Because  he  is   himself  not  able  to  choose  or  love,  unless       ^ 
being   first   chosen    and    loved    he    be    healed,  because  by 
choosing  blindness  he  perceiveth  not,  and  by  loving  laziness 

is  soon  wearied.  But  perchance  some  man  may  say:  In 
what  manner  is  it  that  God  first  chooses  and  loves  unjust 
men,  that  He  may  justify  them,  when  it  is  written,  T/ioii  Ps.  5,5^ 
/latest,  Lord,  all  that  work  iniquity  ?  In  what  way,  think 
we,  but  in  a  wonderful  and  ineffable  manner  ?  And  yet  even 
we  are  able  to  conceive,  that  the  good  Physician  both  hates 
and  loves  the  sick  man  :  hates  him,  because  he  is  sick ; 
loves  him,  that  he  may  drive  away  his  sickness. 

20.  Let  thus  much  have  been  said  with  regard  to  charity,  xxiii. 
without  which  in  us  there  cannot  be  true  patience,  because 

in  good  men  it  is  the  love  of  God  which  endure th  all  things, 


558    Worldly  endurance  may  be  nith  or  without  Satan's  aid. 

DE  as  in  bad  men  the  lust  of  the  world.  But  this  love  is  in  us 
ENTiA.^y  *^i^  Holy  Spirit  which  was  given  us.  Whence,  of  Whom 
Cometh  in  us  love,  of  Him  cometh  patience.  But  the  lust  of 
the  world,  vt'hen  it  patiently  bears  the  burdens  of  any  manner 
of  calamity,  boasts  of  the  strength  of  its  own  will,  like  as  of 
the  stupor  of  disease,  not  robustness  of  health.  This  boasting 
is  insane  :  it  is  not  the  language  of  patience,  but  of  dotage. 
A  will  like  this  in  that  degree  seems  more  patient  of  bitter 
ills,  in  which  it  is  more  greedy  of  temporal  good  things, 
because  more  empty  of  eternal, 
xxiv.  21.  But  if  it  be  goaded  on  and  inflamed  with  deceitful 
visions  and  unclean  incentives  by  the  devilish  spirit,  as- 
sociated and  conspiring  therewith  in  malignant  agreement, 
this  spirit  makes  the  will  of  the  man  either  frantic  with  error, 
or  burning  with  appetite  of  some  worldly  delight ;  and  hence, 
it  seems  to  shew  a  marvellous  endurance  of  intolerable  evils: 
but  yet  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  an  evil  will  without 
instigation  of  another  and  unclean  spirit,  like  as  a  good  will 
without  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  cannot  exist.  For  that  there 
may  be  an  evil  will  even  without  any  spirit  either  seducing  or 
inciting,  is  sufficiently  clear  in  the  instance  of  the  devil 
himself,  who  is  found  to  have  become  a  devil,  not  througli 
some  other  devil,  but  of  his  own  proper  will.  An  evil  will 
therefore,  whether  it  be  hurried  on  by  lust,  whether  called 
back  by  fear,  whether  expanded  by  gladness,  whether  con- 
tracted by  sadness,  and  in  all  these  perturbations  of  mind 
enduring  and  making  light  of  whatever  are  to  others,  or  at 
another  time,  more  grievous,  this  evil  will  may,  without 
another  spirit  to  goad  it  on,  seduce  itself,  and  in  lapsing  by 
defection  from  the  higher  to  the  lower,  the  more  pleasant  it 
shall  account  that  thing  to  be  which  it  seeks  to  get  or  fears 
to  lose,  or  rejoices  to  have  gotten,  or  grieves  to  have  lost,  the 
more  tolerably  for  its  sake  bear  what  is  less  for  it  to  suffer 
than  that  is  to  be  enjoyed.  For  whatever  that  thing  be,  it  is 
of  the  creature,  of  which  one  knows  the  pleasure.  Because 
in  some  sort,  the  creature  loved  approaches  itself  to  the 
creature  loving  in  fond  contact  and  connection,  to  the  giving 
experience  of  its  sweetness. 
XXV.  22.  But  the  pleasure  of  the  Creator,  of  which  is  written, 
Ps.36,9.  And  from  the  river  of  Thy  pleasure  wilt  Thou  give  them  to 


Patience  is  His  gift  Who  gives  Charity.  559 

(lri)ih\  is  of  far  other  kind,  for  it  is  not,  like  lis,  a  creature,      di 

PAT 
ENTIA. 


Unless  then  its  love  be  given  to  us  from  thence,  there  is  no    ^^'^^' 


xxvi. 


source  whence  it  may  be  in  us.  And  consequently,  a  good 
will,  by  which  we  love  God,  cannot  be  in  man,  save  in  whom 
God  also  worketh  to  Avill.     This  good  will  therefore,  that  is,  Phil.  2, 

"I  o 

a   will    faithfully    subjected    to    God,  a  will    set  on  fire  by  '"' 
sanctity  of  that  ardour  which  is  above,  a  will  which  loves 
God  and  his  neighbour   for  God's  sake ;    whether  through 
love,  of  which  the  Apostle  Peter  makes  answer,  Lord,  Thou  3o\m2i, 
knowest  that  I  love  Thee ;    whether  through  fear,  of  which 
says  the  Apostle  Paul,  In  fear  and  trembling  work  out  your  Phil.  2, 
own  salvation ;  whether  through  joy,  of  which  he  says.  In  jiq^, 
hope   rejoicing,   in    tribulation  patient;    whether    through  ^ -5  ^ 2. 
sorrow,    with    which    he    says    he    had    great    grief    for    his  ^om.  9, 
brethren;    in  whatever  way  it  endui'c  what   bitterness  and"' 
hardships  soever,  it  is  the  love  of  God  which  endureth  all  1  (-'o''. 

.  13    7. 

things,  and  which  is  not  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  but  by  Ro'm.'s, 
the  Holy  Spirit  given  unto  us.     Whereof  piety   makes  no' 
manner  of  doubt,  but,  as  the  charity  of  them   which  holily 
love,  so  the  j^atience   of  then  which  piously  endure,  is  the 
gift  of  God.     For  it  cannot   be  that  the  divine   Scripture 
deceiveth  or  is  deceived,  which  not  onl}'  in  the  Old  Books 
hath  testimonies  of  this  thing,  when  it  is  said  unto  God,  3Iy  Ps.7i,5. 
Patience  art  Thou,  and,  From  Him  is  my  patience  ;    and  5"       ' 
where  another  prophet   saith,  that  we  receive  the  spirit  ofis.11,2. 
fortitude;  but  also  in  the  Apostolic  writings  we  read,  Because 'P^'^^-  ^ 
unto  you  is  given  on  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on 
Him,  but  to  suffer  for  Him.     Therefore  let  not  that  make 
the  mind  to  be  as  of  its  own  merit  uplifted,  wherewith  he  is 
told  that  he  is  of  Another's  mercy  gifted. 

23.  But  if  moreover  any  not  having  charity,  which  per- 
taineth  to  the  unit}'  of  spirit  and  the  bond  of  peace  whereby 
the  Catholic  Church  is  gathered  and  knit  togethei',  being- 
involved  in  any  schism,  doth,  that  he  may  not  deny  Christ, 
sutler  tribulations,  straits,  hunger,  nakedness,  persecution, 
perils,  prisons,  bonds,  torments,  sword,  or  flames,  or  wild 
beasts,  or  the  very  cross,  through  fear  of  hell  and  everlasting 
fire  ;  in  no  wise  is  all  this  to  be  blamed,  nay  rather  this  also 
is  a  patience  meet  to  be  praised.  Tor  we  cannot  say  that  it 
would  have  been  better  for  him  that  by  denying  Christ  he 


560  Even  patience  for  fear  ofGod,wUhoul  love,  a  gift  of  His, 

DE     should  suffer  none  of  these  things,  which  he  did  suffer  by 
ENTiA.  confessing  Him  :    but  we  must  gccount  that  it  will  perhaps 
be  more  tolerable  for  him  in  the  judgment,  than  if  by  denying 
Christ  he  should  avoid  all  those  things :    so  that  what  the 
1  Cor.    Apostle  saith,  If  I  shall  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  but  have 
'    ■    not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  nothing,  should  be  understood  to 
profit  nothing  for  obtaining  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  bat  not 
for  having  more  tolerable  punishment  to  undergo  in  the  last 
judgment, 
xxvii.      24.    But   it   may  well   be    asked,   whether   this   patience 
Prof,  of  likewise  be  the  gift  of  God,  or  to  be  attributed  to  strength  of 
Believ-  \)^q  humau  will,  by  which  patience,  one  who  is  separated 
inf.' p.'    from  the  Church  doth,  not  for  the  error  wliich  separated  him 
^'^'       but   for    the  truth  of  the  Sacrament   or  Word  which  hath 
remained  with  him,  for  fear  of  pains    eternal    suffer   pains 
temporal.     For  we  must  take  heed  lest  haply,  if  we  affirm 
that  patience  to  be  the  gift  of  God,  they  in  whom  it  is  should 
be  thouglit  to  belong  also  to  the  kingdom  of  God  ;    but  if  we 
deny  it  to  be  the  gift  of  God,  we  should  be  compelled  to 
allow  that  without  aid  and  gift  of  God  there  can  be  in  the 
will   of  man  somewhat  of  good.     Because  it  is  not  to  be 
denied  that  it  is  a  good  thing  that  a  man  believe  he  shall 
undergo  pain  of  eternal  punishment  if  he  sliall  deny  Christ, 
and  for  that  faith  endure  and  make  light  of  any  manner  of 
punishment  of  man's  inflicting. 

25.  So  then,  as  we  are  not  to  deny  that  this  is  the  gift  of 

God,  we  are  thus  to  understand  that  there  be  some  gifts  of 

Gal.  4,   God  possessed  by  the  sons  of  that  Jerusalem  which  is  above, 

xxviii  ^^^^  free,  and  mother  of  us  all,  (for  these  are  in  some  sort  the 

hereditary  possessions  in  which  we  are   heirs  of  God  and 

Joint-heirs   with    Christ:)   but   some    other   which   may  be 

received  even  by  the  sons  of  concubines  to  whom   carnal 

Jews  and  schismatics  or  heretics  are  compared.     For  though 

Gal.  4,  it  be  written,  Cast  out  the  bondmaid  and  her  son,  for  the  son 

Gen.2i  Of  the  boiidmaid  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son  Isaac :     and 

IP-     ,  though  God  said  to  Abraham,  In   Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be 

Gen.  21,  ^  .  i       i       i  •  , 

12.  and  called:    which    the  Apostle    hath  so  interpreted  as  to  say, 
Rom.  9,  7%f^^  {g^  ^f^Qi  tfiQy  xiohich  be  sons  of  the  flesh,  these  be  the  sons 

of  God ;  but  the  sons  of  the  promise  are  counted  for  the  seed ; 
that  we  might  understand  the  seed  of  Abraham  in  regard  of 


Patience  tJtrouffh  love  is  of  God's  own  Children.      501 
Christ  to  pertain  by  reason  of  Christ  to  the  sons  of  God,     de 

PATI 
ENTIA. 


who    are   Christ's    body   and   members,  that    is  to   say,  the 


Church  of  God,  one,  true,  very-begotten,  catholic,  holding  the 

godly  faith ;    not  the  faith  which  works  through  elation  or 

fear,  but  which  worketh  by  love ;  neverlheless,  even  the  sonsGal.5,6. 

of  the  concubines,  when  Abraham  sent  them  away  from  his 

son  Isaac,  he  did  not  omit  to  bestow  upon  them  some  gifts, 

that  they  might  not  be  left  in  every  way  empty,  but  not  that 

they    should   be    held    as    heirs.       For    so    we    read  :     ^«Q?Gen'25, 

5.  6. 

Abraham  gave  all  his  estate  unto  Isaac ;  and  to  the  sons  of 
his  concubines  gave  Abraham  gifts,  and  sent  them  away 
from  his  son  Isaac.  If  then  we  be  sons  of  Jerusalem  the 
free,  let  us  understand  that  other  be  the  gifts  of  them  which 
are  put  out  of  the  inheritance,  other  the  gifts  of  them  which 
be  heirs.     For  these  be  the  heirs,  to  whom  is  said,  Ye  have  Rom.  8, 

1  R 

not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  ye 
have  received  the  spirit  of  adoption  of  sons,  whereby  we  cry, 
Abba,  Father. 

26.  Cry  we  therefore  with  the  spirit  of  charity,  and  until 
we  come  to  the  inheritance  in  which  we  are  alway  to  remain, 
let  us  be,  through  love  which  becometh  the  free-born,  not 
through  fear  which  becometh  bondmen,  patient  of  suffering. 
Cry  we,  so  long  as  we  are  poor,  until  we  be  with  that 
inheritance  made  rich.  Seeing  how  great  earnest  thereof  we 
have  received,  in  that  Christ  to  make  us  rich  made  Himself 
poor;  Who  being  exalted  unto  the  riches  which  are  above, 
there  was  sent  One  Who  should  breathe  into  our  hearts  holy 
longings,  the  Holy  Spirit.  Of  these  poor,  as  yet  believing, 
not  yet  beholding  ;  as  yet  hoping,  not  yet  enjoying  ;  as  yet 
sighing  in  desire,  not  yet  reigning  in  felicity ;  as  yet  hungering 
and  thirsting,  not  yet  satisfied:  of  these  poor,  then,  ?/?ePs.9,i8. 
patience  shall  not  perish  for  ever :  not  that  there  will  be 
patience  there  also,  where  ought  to  endure  shall  not  be ;  but 
tvill  not  perish,  meaning  that  it  will  not  be  unfruitful.  But 
its  fruit  it  will  have  for  ever,  therefore  it  shall  not  perish  for 
ever.  For  he  who  labours  in  vain,  when  his  hope  fails  for 
which  he  laboured,  says  with  good  cause,  '  I  have  lost  so 
much  labour :'  but  he  who  comes  to  the  promise  of  his 
labour  says,  congratulating  himself,  I  Tiave  not  lost  my 
labour.     Labour  then  is  said  not  to  perish  (or  be  lost),  not 

o  o 


PATI 
ENTIA 


562        Patience  '^  perishes  tiof  in  respect  of  its  fruit. 

DE  because  it  lasts  perpetually,  but  because  it  is  not  spent  in 
vain.  So  also  the  patience  of  the  poor  of  Christ  (who  yet  are 
to  be  made  rich  as  heirs  of  Christ)  shall  not  perish  for  ever : 
not  because  there  also  we  shall  be  commanded  patiently  to 
bear,  but  because  for  that  which  we  have  here  patiently 
borne,  we  shall  enjoy  eternal  bliss.  He  will  put  no  end  to 
everlasting  felicity,  Who  giveth  temporal  patience  unto  the 
will  :  because  both  the  one  and  the  other  is  of  Him 
bestowed  as  a  gift  upon  charity,  Whose  gift  that  charity 
is  also. 


S.     AUGUSTINE 


ON 


THE    CREED 


A   SERMON  TO  THE   CATECHUMENS. 


1.  Receive,  my  children,  the    Rule    of  Faith,    which   is     de 
called  the  Symbol  (or  Creed').     And  when  ye  have  received  g^^J 
it,  write  it  in  your  heart,  and  be  daily  saying  it  to  yourselves;      [] 
before  ye  sleep,  before  ye  go  forth,  arm  you  with  your  Creed. '  Sym- 
The  Creed  no  man  writes  so  as  it  may  be  able  to  be  read : 

but  for  rehearsal    of  it,   lest  haply  forgetfulness   obliterate 
what  care  hath  delivered,  let  your  memory  be  your  record- 
roll^:  what  ye  are  about  to  hear,  that  are  ye  to  believe  ;  and  2  codex 
what  ye  shall  have  believed,  that  are  about  to  give  back  with 
your  tongue.     For  the  Apostle  says,  With  ihe  heart  man  Rom. 
helieveih  unto  righteousness,  and  uith  the  mouth  confession  ^^'  ^^• 
is  made  unto  salvation.     For  this  is  the  Creed  which  ye  are 
to  rehearse  and  to  repeat  in  answer. 

These  words  which  ye  have  heard  are  in  the  Divine 
Scriptm-es  scattered  up  and  down  :  but  thence  gathered  and 
reduced  into  one,  that  the  memory  of  slow  persons  might 
not  be  distressed  ;  that  every  person  may  be  able  to  say, 
able  to  hold,  what  he  believes.  For  have  ye  now  merely 
heard  that  God  is  Almighty  ?  But  ye  begin  to  have  Him  for 
your  Father,  when  ye  have  been  born  by  the  Church  as  your 
Mother. 

2.  Of  this,  then,  ye  have  now  received,  have  meditated, 
and  having  meditated  have  held,  that   ye  should  say,  "  I 

o  o  2 


654     God  Almighly  can  not  do  evil.     Creation  and  Fall. 
»E     believe  in   God  the  Father  Ahnighty."     God  is  Ahnighty, 


SYM- 
BOLO 


and  yet,  though  Ahnighty,  He  cannot  die,  cannot  be  deceived, 
2  Tim.  cannot  lie;    and,  as  the  Apostle  says,  cannot  deny  Himself. 
^'  ^^'     How  many  things  that  He  cannot  do,  and  yet  is  Almighty  ! 
yea  therefore  is  Almighty,  because  He  cannot  do  these  things. 
For  if  He  could  die,  He  were  not  Almighty  ;    if  to  lie,  if  to 
be  deceived,  if  to  do  unjustly,  were  possible  for  Him,  He 
•    were  not  Almighty  :  because  if  this  were  in  Him,  He  should 
not  be  worthy  to  be  Almighty.     To  our  Almighty  Father,  it 
is  quite  impossible  to   sin.     He  does  whatsoever  He  will : 
that  is  Omnipotence.     He  does  whatsoever  He  rightly  will, 
whatsoever  He  justly  will :    but  whatsoever  is  evil  to  do.  He 
wills  not.     There  is  no  resisting  one  who  is  Almighty,  that 
He  should  not  do  what  He  will.     It  was  He  Who  made 
heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them  is,  invisible 
and    visible.       Invisible    such    as    are    in    heaven,    thrones, 
dominions,  principalities,  powers,  archangels,  angels :    all,  if 
we  shall  live  aright,  our  fellow-citizens.    He  made  in  heaven 
the  things  visible  ;    the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars.     With  its 
terrestrial  animals  He  adorned  the  earth,  filled  the  air  with 
things  that  fly,  the  land  with  them  that  walk  and  creep,  the 
sea  with  them  that  swim :  all  He  filled  with  their  own  proper 
creatures.     He  made    also    man    after  His  own  image  and 
likeness,   in    the    mind  :    for  in  that  is  the  image  of  God. 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  mind  cannot  be  comprehended 
even  by  itself,  because  in  it  Ts  the  image  of  God.     To  this 
end  were  we  made,  that  over  the  other  creatures  we  should 
bear  rule  :    but  through  sin  in  the  first  man  we  fell,  and  are 
all  come  into  an  inheritance  of  death.     We  were  brought 
low,  became  mortal,  were  filled  with  fears,  with  errors  :    this 
Gen.ch.by  desert  of  sin  :    with  which  desert  and  guilt  is  every  man 
born.     This  is  the  reason  why,  as  ye  have  seen  to-day,  as  ye 
know,  even  little    children  undergo  exsufilation,  exorcism ; 
to  drive  away  from  them  the  power  of  the  devil  their  enemy, 
wdiich  deceived  man  that  it  might  possess  mankind.     It  is 
not   then    the    creature    of  God   that    in  infants   undergoes 
exorcism  or  exsuflSation :    but  he  under  whom  are  all  that 
1  prin-    are    born   with    sin ;    for  he  is  the   first'  of  sinners.     And 
ceps       |-^j.  j]^jg  cause   by  reason  of  one   who  fell  and  brought  all 
into   death,  there  was  sent  One  without  sin.  Who   should 


The  Only  Begotten  is  That  Which  the  Father  is.     56^ 

bring  unto  life,  by  delivering  them  from  sin,  all  that  believe      ad 
on  Him.  '  '^^'^^- 

CHU- 

3.  For  this  reason  we  believe  also  in  His  Son,  that  is  to  menos. 
say,  God  the  Father  Almighty's,  "  His  Only  Son,  our  Lord."     "• 
When  thou  hearest  of  the  Only  Son   of  God,  acknowledge 

Him  God.  For  it  could  not  be  that  God's  Only  Son  should 
not  be  God.  What  He  is,  the  same  did  He  beget,  though 
He  is  not  that  Person  Whom  He  begot.  If  He  be  truly 
Son,  He  is  that  which  the  Father  is ;  if  He  be  not  that 
which  the  Father  is.  He  is  not  truly  Son.  Observe  mortal 
and  earthly  creatures :  what  each  is,  that  it  engendereth. 
Man  begets  not  an  ox,  sheep  begets  not  dog,  nor  dog  sheep. 
Whatever  it  be  that  begetteth,  that  which  it  is,  it  begelteth. 
Hold  ye  therefore  boldly,  firmly,  faithfully,  that  the  Begotten 
of  God  tlic  Father  is  what  Himself  is,  Almighty.  These 
mortal  creatures  engender  by  corruption.  Does  God  so 
beget  ?  He  that  is  begotten  mortal  generates  that  which 
himself  is ;  the  Immortal  generates  what  He  is  :  corruptible 
begets  corruptible,  Incorruptible  begets  Incorruptible  :  the 
comiptible  begets  corruptibly.  Incorruptible,  Incorruptibly : 
yea,  so  begetteth  what  Itself  is,  that  One  begeis  One,  and 
therefore  Only.  Ye  know,  that  when  I  pronounced  to  you 
the  Creed,  so  I  said,  and  so  ye  are  bounden  to  believe ;  that 
we  "  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  and  in  Jesus 
Christ  His  Only  Son."  Here  too,  when  thou  believest  that 
He  is  the  Only,  believe  Him  Almighty :  for  it  is  not  to  be 
thought  that  God  the  Father  does  what  He  will,  and  God 
the  Son  does  not  what  He  will.  One  Will  of  Father  and  Son, 
because  one  Nature.  For  it  is  impossible  for  the  will  of  the 
Son  to  be  any  whit  parted  from  the  Father's  will.  God  and 
God ;  both  one  God :  Almighty  and  Almighty ;  both  One 
Almighty. 

4.  We  do  not  bring  in  two  Gods  as  some  do,  who  say, 
'  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son,  but  greater  God  the 
Father  and  lesser  God  the  Son.'  They  both  are  what .'' 
Two  Gods  ?  Thou  blushest  to  speak  it,  blush  to  believe  it. 
Lord  God  the  Father,  thou  sayest,  and  Lord  God  the  Son : 

and  the  Son  Himself  saith.  No  man.  can  serve  two  Lords.Ma.tt.6, 
In  His  family  shall  we   be  in   such   wise,  that,  like  as  in  ^' 
a  great  house  where  there  is  the  father  of  a  family  and  he 


566  How  Tito  Persons  are  One  Qod. 

DE     hath  a  son,  so  we  should  say,  the  greater  Lord,  the  lesser 
pqJ^j^   Lord  ?    Shrink  from  such  a  thought.     If  ye  make  to  your- 
^  selves  such-like  in  3'our  heart,  ye  set  up  idols  in  the  '  one 
soul.'      Utterly   repel    it.       First  believe,   then    understand. 
Now  to  whom  God  gives  that  when  he  has  believed  he  soon 
understands ;  that  is  God's  gift,  not  human  frailness.     Still, 
if  ye  do  not  yet  understand,  believe :  One  God  the  Father, 
God  Christ  the  Son  of  God.     Both  are  what?     One  God. 
And  how  are  both  said  to  be  One  God  ?     How  ?    Dost  thou 
Acts  4,  marvel  ?    In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  There  was,  it  says,  in 
the  believers,  one  soul  and  one  heart.      There  were  many 
souls,  faith' had   made   them  one.      So  many  thousands  of 
souls  were  there ;  they  loved  each  other,  and  many  are  one : 
they  loved  God  in  the  fire  of  charity,  and  from  being  many 
they  are  come  to  the  oneness  of  beauty.     If  all  those  many 
•chad-  souls  the  dearness  of  love*  made  one  soul,  what  must  be  the 
dearness  of  love  in  God,  where  is  no  diversity,  but  entire 
equality  !    If  on  earth  and  among  men  there  could  be  so 
great  charity  as  of  so  many  souls  to  make  one  soul,  where 
Father   from    Son,   Son    from    Father,   hath   been    ever   in- 
separable, could  They  both  be  other  than  One  God  ?    Only, 
those  souls  might  be  called  both  many  souls  and  one  soul ; 
but  God,  in  Whom  is  ineffable  and  highest  conjunction,  may 
be  called  One  God,  not  two  Gods. 

5.  The  Father  doeth  what  He  will,  and  what  He  will 
doeth  the  Son.  Do  not  imagine  an  Almighty  Father  and  a 
not  Almighty  Son  :  it  is  error,  blot  it  out  within  you,  let  it 
not  cleave  iia  your  memory,  let  it  not  be  drunk  into  your 
faith,  and  if  haply  any  of  you  shall  have  drunk  it  in,  let  him 
vomit  it  up.  Almighty  is  the  Father,  Almiglity  the  Son.  If 
Almighty  begat  not  Almighty,  He  begat  not  very  Son.  For 
what  say  we,  brethren,  if  the  Father  being  greater  begat  a 
Son  less  than  He  ?  What  said  I,  begat  ?  Man  engenders, 
being  greater,  a  son  being  less:  it  is  true:  but  that  is 
because  the  one  gi'ows  old,  the  other  grows  up,  and  by  very 
growing  attains  to  the  form  of  his  father.  The  Son  of  God, 
if  He  groweth  not  because  neither  can  God  wax  old,  was 
begotten  perfect.  And  being  begotten  perfect,  if  He  groweth 
not,  and  remained  not  less.  He  is  equal.  For  that  ye  may 
know  Almighty   begotten  of  Almighty,  hear  Him  Who  is 


Christ  how  horn  as  Man,  what  He  suffered,  and  when.  567 

Truth.     That  which   of  Itself  Truth   saith,   is  true.     What     ad 
saith  Truth  ?   What  saith  the  Son,  Who  is  Truth  ?    What-  "J^hu." 
soever  things  the  Father  doeth,  these  also  the  Son  likewise  menos. 
doeth.     The  Son  is  Ahnighty,  in  doing  all  things  that  HeJ^^'''^^' 
willeth  to  do.     For  if  the  Father  doeth  some  things  which 
the  Son  doeth  not,  the  Son  said  falsely,  Whatsoever  things 
the  Father  doeth,  these  also  the  Son  doeth  likewise.     But 
because  the  Son  spake  truly,  believe  it :    Whatsoever  things 
the  Father  doeth,  these  also  the  Son  doeth  likeivise,  and  ye 
have  believed  in  the  Son  that  He  is  Almighty.    Which  word 
although  ye  said  not  in  the  Creed,  yet  this  is  it  that  ye 
expressed  when  ye  believed  in  the  Only  Son,  Himself  God. 
Hath  the  Father  aught  that  the  Son  hath  not?     This  Arian 
heretic   blasphemers  say,  not  I.     But  what  say  I  ?     If  the 
Father  hath  aught  that  the  Son  hath  not,  the  Son  lieth  in 
saying,  All  things  thai  the  Father  hath,  are  Mine.     Many  Johnie, 
and  innumerable  are  the  testimonies  by  which  it  is  proved 
that  the  Son  is  Very  Son  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  Father 
God  hath  His  Very-begotten  Son  God,  and  Father  and  Son 
is  One  God. 

6.  But  this  Only  Son  of  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  let  us  hi- 
see  what  He  did  for  us,  what  He  suffered  for  us.  "  Born  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  the  Virgin  Mary."  He,  so  great  God, 
equal  with  the  Father,  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  born  lowly,  that  thereby  He  might  heal  the 
proud.  Man  exalted  himself  and  fell;  God  humbled  Himself 
and  raised  him  up.  Christ's  lowliness,  what  is  it?  God  hath 
stretched  out  an  hand  to  man  laid  low.  We  fell.  He 
descended :  we  lay  low.  He  stooped.  Let  us  lay  hold  and 
rise,  that  we  fall  not  into  punishment.     So  then  His  stooping 

to  us  is  this,  "  Born  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  the  Virgin 
Mary."  His  very  Nativity  too  as  man,  it  is  lowly,  and  it  is 
lofty.  Whence  lowly  ?  That  as  man  He  was  born  of  men. 
Whence  lofty?  That  He  was  born  of  a  virgin.  A  virgin  con- 
ceived, a  virgin  bore,  and  after  the  birth  was  a  virgin  still. 

7.  What  next  ?  "  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate."  He  was 
iu  office  as  governor  and  was  the  judge,  this  same  Pontius 
Pilate,  what  time  as  Christ  suffered.  In  the  name  of  the 
judge  there  is  a  mark  of  the  times,  when  He  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate :  when  He  suffered,  "  was  crucified,  dead, 
and  buried."     Who  ?  what  ?  for  whom  ?    Who  ?    God's  Only 


568       Nature  shews  coeval  </e?ieratio7i,  not  coeternal. 
DE     Son,  onv  Lord.     What?    Crucified,  dead,  and  buried.     For 


SYM- 
BOLO 


whom?  for  ungodly  and  sinners.  Great  condescension, 
Ps.  116  great  grace  I  WJiai  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  that 
^^'        He  hath,  bestowed  on  me  ? 

8.   He  was   begotten  before  all  times,  before  all  Avorlds. 
'  Begotten  before.'     Before  what.  He  in  Whom  is  no  before  ? 
Do  not  in  the  least  imagine  any  time  before  that  Nativity  of 
Clii"ist  whereby   He   was  begotten   of  the   Father ;    of  that 
Nativity    I    am    speaking    by    which    He    is    Son    of   God 
Almighty,    His    Only    Son    oar    Lord ;    of  that   am    I    first 
speaking.     Do  not  imagine  in  this  Nativity  a  beginning  of 
time ;    do   not  imagine  any  space  of  eternity  in  which  the 
Father  was  and  the  Son  was  not.     Since  when  the  Father 
was,  since  then  the  Son.     And  what  is  that)  '  since,'  where 
is  no  beginning  ?     Therefore  ever  Father  without  beginning, 
ever  Son  without  beginning.     And  how,  thou  wilt  say,  was 
He  begotten,  if  He  have  no  beginning?     Of  eternal,  co- 
eternal.     At  no  time  was  the  Father,  and  the  Son  not,  and 
yet  Son  of  Father  was  begotten.     Whence  is  any  manner  of 
similitude  to  be  liad  ?  We  are  among  things  of  earth,  we  are 
in  the  visible  creature.     Let  the  earth  give  me  a  similitude : 
it  gives  none.     Let  the  element  of  the  waters  give  me  some 
similitude :  it  hath  not  whereof  to  give.      Some  animal  give 
me  a  similitude :  neither  can  this  do  it.      An  animal  indeed 
engenders,  both  what  engenders   and  what  is  engendered : 
but  first  is  the  father,  and  then  is  born  the  son.     Let  us  find 
the  coeval  and  imagine  it  coeternal.     If  we  shall  be  able  to 
find  a  father  coeval  with  his  son,  and  son  coeval  vvith  his 
father,  let  us  believe  God  tlie  Father  coeval  with  His  Son, 
and  God  the  Son  coeternal  vvith  His  Father.     On  earth  we 
can  find  some  coeval,  we  cannot  find  any  coeternal.     Let  us 
Mnteu-  stretch'  the  coeval  and  imagine  it  coeternal.     Some  one,  it 
damus.  may  be,  will  put  you  on  the  stretch  -,  by  saying,  '  When  is  it 
possible  for  a  father  to  be  found  coeval  with  his  son,  or  son 
coeval  with  his  father?     That  the  father  may  beget  he  goes 
before  in  age;  that  the  son  may  be  begotten,  he  conies  after 
in  age :  but  this  father  coeval  vvith  son,  or  son  with  father, 
how  can  it  be?'     Imagine  to  yourselves  fire  as  father,  its 
shining  as  son ;   see,  we  have  found  the  coevals.     From  the 
instant  that  the  fire  begins  to  be,  that  instant  it  begets  the 
shining:  neither  fire  before  shining,  nor  shining  after  fire. 


-  inten 
tos 


Human  Birth  of  Christ,  His  Death  and  Resurrection.  569 

And  if  we  ask,  which  begets  which  ?  the  fire  the  shining,  or      ad 
the  shining  the  fire  ?     Tmmediately  ye  conceive  by  natural    p^^^." 
sense,  by  the  innate  wit  of  your  minds  ye  all  cry  out,  The  menos. 
fire  the  shining,  not  the  shining  the  fire.     Lo,  here  you  have 
a  father  beginning ;  lo,  a  son  at  the  same  time,  neither  going 
before  nor  coming  after.    Lo,  here  then  is  a  father  beginning, 
lo,  a  son  at  the  same  time  beginning.     If  I  have  shewn  you 
a  father  beginning,  and  a  son  at  the  same  time  beginning, 
believe  the  Father  not  beginning,  and  with  Him  the  Son  not 
beginning  either  ;  the  one  eternal,  the  other  coeternal.     If 
ye  get  on  with  your  learning,  ye  understand  :  take  pains  to 
get  on.     The  being  born,  ye  have ;  but  also  the  growing,  ye 
ought  to  have;  because  no  man  begins  with  being  perfect. 
As  for  the  Son  of  God,  indeed,  He  could  be  born  perfect, 
because  He  was  begotten  without  time,  coeternal  with  the 
Father,  long  before  all  things,  not  in  age,  but  in   eternity. 
He  then  was  begotten  coeternal,  of  which   generation  the 
Prophet  said.  His  generation  who  shall  declare?  begotten  of  Is.  53,8. 
the  Father  without  time,  He  was  born  of  the  Virgin  in  the 
fidness  of  times.    This  nativity  had  times  going  before  it.    In 
opportunity  of  time,  when   He  would,  when   He  knew,  then 
was  He  born :  for  He  was  not  born  without  His  will.     None 
of  us  is  born  because  he  will,  and  none  of  us  dies  when  he 
will:    He,  vvhen  He  would,  was  born;  when  He  would,  He 
died:  how  He  would.  He  was  born  of  a  Virgin:  how  He  would, 
He  died ;  on  the  cross.  Whatever  He  would,  He  did :  because  '  ut  la- 
He  was  in  such  wise  Man  that,  unseen*,. He  was  God  ;  Godpg\jg_ 
assuming,  Man  assumed  ^i  One  Christ,  God  and  Man.  -sus- 

,    ceptor 

9.  Of  His  cross  what  shall  I  speak,  what  say?  Thissuscep- 
extremest  kind  of  death  He  chose,  that  not  any  kind  of  death  *"^- 
might  make  His  Martyrs  afraid.  The  doctrine  He  shewed 
in  His  life  as  Man,  the  example  of  patience  He  demonstrated 
in  His  Cross.  There,  you  have  the  work,  that  He  was  cru- 
cified; example  of  the  work,  the  Cross;  reward  of  the  work, 
ResuiTection.  He  shewed  us  in  the  Cross  what  we  ought  to 
endure,  He  shewed  in  the  Resurrection  what  we  have  to  hope. 
Just  like  a  consummate  task-master  in  the  matches  of  the 
arena.  He  said.  Do,  and  bear ;  do  the  work  and  receive  the 
prize;  strive  in  the  match  and  thou  shalt  be  crowned.  What 
is  the  work }    Obedience.     What  the  prize  ?    Resurrection 


570     Job's  Children  doubled,  in  that  the  first  remained. 

DE     without  death.     Why  did  I  add,  '  without  death?'    Because 
Lazarus  rose,  and  died ;   Christ  rose  again,  dieth  no  more^ 


SYM- 
BOLO 

Rom. 6,  death  will  no  longer  have  dominion  over  Him. 

%'  10.  Scripture  saith,  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  Job, 

James  '  '  J  i  .'  ' 

5, 11.    and  have  seen  the  end  of  the  I.ord.     When  we  read  what 

great  trials  Job  endured,  it  makes  one  shudder,  it  makes  one 

shrink,  it  makes  one  quake.     And  what  did  he  receive.?    The 

double  of  what  he  had  lost.     Let  not  a  man  therefore  with 

an  eye  to  temporal  rewards  be  willing  to  have  patience,  and 

say  to  himself,  '  Let  me  endure  loss,  God  will  give  rae  back 

sons  twice  as  many ;  Job  received  double  of  all,  and  begat 

as  many  sons  as  he  had  buried.'      Then  is  this  not   the 

double  ?  Yes,  precisely  the  double,  because  the  former  sons 

still  lived.     Let  none  say,  '  Let  me  bear  evils,  and  God  will 

repay  me  as  He  repaid  Job :'    that   it   be   now  no    longer 

patience  but  avarice.     For  if  it  was  not  patience  which  that 

Saint  had,  nor  a  brave  enduring  of  all  that  came  upon  him; 

the  testimony  which  the  Lord  gave,  whence  should  he  have 

it?    Hast  thou  observed,  saith    the  Lord,  my  servant  Job? 

For  there  is  not  like  him  any  on  the  earth,  a  man  without 

^q\ierela.jiiult^,  a  true  worshipper  of  God.     What  a  testimony,  ray 

brethren,  did  this  holy  man  deserve  of  the  Lord  !     And  yet 

him  a  bad  woman  sought  by  her  persuasion  to  deceive,  she 

too  representing  that  serpent,  who,  like  as  in  Paradise   he 

deceived  the  man  whom  God  first  made,  so  likewise  here  by 

suggesting  blasphemy  thought  to  be  able  to  deceive  a  man 

who  pleased  God.     What  things  he  suffered,  my  brethren  ! 

Who  can  have  so  much  to  .suffer  in  his  estate,  his  house,  his 

sons,  his  flesh,  yea  in  his  very  wife  who  was  left  to  be  his 

tempter!     But  even  her  who  was  left,  the  devil  would  have 

taken  away  long  ago,  but  that  he  kept  her  to  be  his  helper : 

because  by  Eve  he  had  mastered  the  first  man,  therefore  had 

he  kept  an  Eve.     What  things,  then,  he  suffered  !    He  lost 

all  that  he  had;    his   house    fell;    would  tliat   were  all!    it 

crushed  his  sons  also.     And,  to  see   that  patience  had  great 

joV)  1     place  in  him,  hear  what  he  answered ;   The  Lord  gave,  the 

21-         Lord  hath  taken  aicay;  as  it  pleased  the   Lord,  so  hath  it 

s  Lat.     been  done^ ;  blessed  be  the   name  of  the  Jjord.     He   hath 

^^      taken  what  He  gave,  is  He  lost  Who  gave  ?     He  hath  taken 

what  He  gave.     As  if  he  should  say,  He  hath  taken  away 


His  submission  was  not/or  hope  0/ receiving  again.    571 

all,  let  Him  take  all,  send  me  away  naked,  and  let  me  keep      ad 
Him.     Wluit  shall  I  lack  if  I  have  God?  or  what  is  the  good    ^^^, 
of  all  else  to  me,  if  I  have  not  God?    Then  it  came  to  hisMENos. 
flesh,  he  was  stricken  with  a  wound  from  head  to  foot;  he 
was  one  running  sore,   one  mass  of  crawling  worms:    and 
shewed  himself  immovable   in  his   God,  stood  fixed.     The 
woman    wanted,   devil's   helper    as    she   was   not   husband's 
comforter,  to  put  him  up  to  blaspheme  God.     How  long,  said  Job2,9. 
she,  dost  thou  suffer  so  and  so:  speak  some  word  against  the 
Lord^,  and  die.     So  then,  because  he  had  been  brought  low, '  Lat. 
he  was  to  be  exalted.     And  this  the  Lord  did,  in  order  to  ^xx. 
shew  it  to  men ;  as  for  His  servant,  He  kept  greater  things 
for  him  in  heaven.     So  then  Job  who  was  brought  low,  He 
exalted;  the  devil  who  was  lifted  up.  He  brought  low:  for 
He  putteth  down  one  and  setteth  up  another.     But  let  not  Ps.75,7. 
any  man,  my  beloved  brethren,  when  he  suffers  any  such- 
like tribulations,  look  for  a  I'eward  here :  for  instance,  if  he 
suffer  any  losses,  let  him  not  peradventure  say.   The  Lord 
gave,  the  Lord  hath  taken  auay ;  as  it  pleased  the  Lord,  so 
is  it  done:   blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord;  only  with  the 
mind  to  receive  twice  as  much  again.     Let  patience  praise 
God,  not  avarice.     If  what  thou  hast  lost  thou  seekest  to 
receive  back  twofold,  and  therefore  praisest  God,   it  is  of 
covetousness  thou  praisest,  not  of  love.     Do  not  imagine  this 
to  be  the  example  of  that  holy  man;  thou  deceivest  thyself. 
Wlien  Job  was  enduring  all,  he  was  not  hoping  for  to  have 
twice  as  much  again.     Both  in  his  first  confession  when  he 
bore  up  under  his  losses,  and  bore  out  to  the  grave  the  dead 
bodies   of  his    sons,   and  in  the   second  when  he  was  now 
suffering  torments  of  sores  in  his  flesli,  ye  may  observe  what 
I  am  saying.     Of  his  former  confession  the  words  rmi  thus: 
The  Lj)rd  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  awaij:  as  it  pleased  joh  1, 
the  Lord,  so  is  it  done :   blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.     ' 
He  might  have  said,  '  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away ;  He  that  took  away  can  once  more  give ;  can 
bring  back  more  than  He  took.'     He  said  not  this,  but.  As  it 
pleased  the  L^ord,  said  he,  so  is  it  done:  because  it  pleases 
Him,  let  it  please  me  :  let  not  that  which  hath  pleased  the 
good  Lord  misplease  His  submissive  sei'vant;  what  pleased 
the  Physician,  not  misplease  the  sick  man.     Hear  his  other 


bl^  Examples  of  ^  the  Patience  of Job^  andHhe  Endof the  Lord.'' 

DE      confession:   Tltou  hast  spoken,  said  he  to  his  wife,  like  one  of 
BOLo  the  foolish  ivomen.     If  we  have  received  good  at  the  hand  of 

Job  2     ^^'^  Lord.,  why  shall  we  not  bear  evil  ?    He   did  not  add, 

^^-  what,  if  he  had  said  it,  would  have  been  true,  '  The  Lord  is 
able  both  to  bring  back  my  flesh  into  its  foi'mer  condition,  and 
that  which  He  hath  taken  away  from  us,  to  make  manifold 
more:'  lest  he  should  seem  to  have  endured  in  hope  of  this. 
This  was  not  what  he  said,  not  what  he  hoped.  But,  that  we 
might  be  taught,  did  the  Lord  that  for  him,  not  hoping  for  it, 
by  which  we  should  be  taught,  that  God  was  with  him : 
because  if  He  had  not  also  restored  to  him  those  things, 
there  was  the  crown  indeed,  but  hidden,  and  we  could  not 
see  it.  And  therefore  what  says  the  divine  Scripture  in 
exhorting  to  patience  and  hope  of  things  future,  not  reward 
of  things  present .''  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  Job.,  and 
have  .seen  the  end  of  the  Lord.  Why  is  it,  the  patience  of 
Job,  and  not,  Ye  have  seen  the  end  of  Job  himself?  Thou 
wouldest  open  thy  mouth  for  the  '  twice  as  much;'  wouldest 
say, '  Thanks  be  to  God ;  let  me  bear  up :  I  receive  twdee  as 
much  again,  like  Job.'  Patience  of  Job,  end  of  the  I^ord. 
The  patience  of  Job  we  know,  and  the  end  of  the  Lord  we 

Ps.22,i.know,  What  end  of  the  Lord  }  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
Thou  forsaken  Me?  They  are  the  words  of  the  Lord  hanging 
on  the  cross.  He  did  as  it  were  leave  Him  for  present 
felicity,  not  leave  Him  for  eternal  immortality.  In  this  is  the 
end  of  the  Lord.  The  Jews  hold  Him,  the  Jews  insult,  the 
Jews  bind  Him,  crown  Him  with  thorns,  dishonour  Him  with 
spitting,  scourge  Him,  overwhelm  Him  with  revilings,  hang 
Him  upon  the  tree,  pierce  Him  with  a  spear,  last  of  all 
bury  Him.  He  was  as  it  were  left :  but  by  whom  }  By  those 
insulting  ones.  Therefore  thou  shall  but  to  this  end  have 
patience,  that  thou  mayest  rise  again  and  not  die,  that  is, 

Eom.  6,  never  die,  even  as  Christ.     For  so  we  read,  Christ  rising 

from  the  dead  henceforth  dieth  not". 

iv.         11.  "He  ascended  into  heaven:"  believe.     "He  sitteth 

at   the    right   hand   of  the  Father :"    believe.      By   sitting, 

understand  dwelling :  as  [in  Latin]   we  say  of  any  person, 

'  In  that  country  he  dwelt  [sedit)  three  years.'    The  Scripture 

"^  The  Article  of  the  descent  into  Hell  appears  not  to  have  been  included  in 
this  Creed. 


Christ's  Session  at  God's  right  hand,  coming  to  Judgment.  673 

also  has  that  expression,  that  such  an  one  dwelt  {sedisse)  in      ad 
a  city  for  such  a  time.     Not  meaning  that  he  sat,  and  never   ^^^^ 
rose  up  ?     On  this  account  the  dwellings  of  men  are  called  me^os. 
seats  {sedesy.     Where  people  are  seated  (in  this  sense),  arcg  33°^'' 
they  always    sitting?      Is  there    no    rising,  no  walking,  no  LXX. 
lying  down  ?    And  yet  they  are  called  seats  (sedes).     In  this 
way,  then,  believe  an  inhabiting  of  Christ  on  the  right  hand 
of  God  the  Father :  He  is  there.    And  let  not  your  heart  say 
to  you.  What  is  He  doing?     Do  not  want  to  seek  what  is  not 
permitted    to   find :    He  is  there  ;    it  suffices  you.     He  is 
blessed,  and  from  blessedness  which  is  called  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father,  of  very  blessedness  the  name  is,  right  hand  of 
the  Father.     For  if  we  shall  take  it  carnally,  then  because 
He  sittelh  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  the  Father  will 
be  on  His  left  hand.     Is  it  consistent  with  piety  so  to  put 
Them   together,  the   Son   on  the  riglit,  the  Father  on  the 
left  ?     There  it  is  all  right-hand,  because  no  misery  is  there. 
12.  "  Thence  He  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead." 
The  quick,  who  shall  be  alive  and  remain ;   the  dead,  who 
shall  have  gone  before.     It  may  also  be  understood  thus  : 
The  living,  the  just;  the  dead,  the  unjust.     For  He  judges 
both,  rendering  unto  each  his  own.     To  the  just  He  will  say 
in  the  judgment.  Come.,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  receive  f/ieMat.ss, 
kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. 
For  this  prepare  yourselves,  for  these  things  hope,  for  this 
live,  and  so  live,  for  this  believe,  for  this  be  baptized,  that  it 
may  be  said  to  you,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father.,  receive 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.     To  them  on  the  left  hand,  what?      Go  info  ei^er- ^,^^'^^' 

41 . 

lasting  jire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  Thus 
will  they  be  judged  by  Christ,  the  quick  and  the  dead.  We 
have  spoken  of  Christ's  first  nativity,  which  is  without  time  ; 
spoken  of  the  other  in  the  fulness  of  time,  Christ's  nativity  of 
the  Virgin  ;  spoken  of  the  passion  of  Christ ;  spoken  of  the 
coming  of  Christ  to  judgment.  The  whole  is  spoken,  that 
was  to  be  spoken  of  Christ,  God's  Only  Son,  our  Lord.  But 
not  yet  is  the  Trinity  perfect. 

13.  It  follows  in  the  Creed,  "And  in  the  Holy  Ghost."     ^• 
This   Trinity,   one    God,    one   nature,    one    substance,    one 

i  Cf.  Serm.  214.  n.  8.  Ben. 


574        The  Holy  Ghost  is  God,  and  Alan  His  Temple. 

DE     pouer ;  highest  equality,  no  division,  no  diversity,  perpetual 
BOLo   dearness  of  love  ^     Would  ye  know  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  He 

'  cha-    is  God  ?      Be  baptized,  and  ye  will  be  His  temple.      The 

"cor.6  Apostle  says,  Know  ye  ?iof  that  your  bodies  are  the  temple 

19-  within  yon  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Whom  ye  have  of  God? 
A  temple  is  for  God  :  tluis  also  Solomon,  king  and  prophet, 
was  bidden  to  build  a  temple  for  God.  If  he  had  built 
a  temple  for  the  sun  or  moon  or  some  star  or  some  angel, 
would  not  God  condemn  him }  Because  therefore  he  built 
a  temple  for  God,  he  shewed  that  he  worshipped  God. 
And  of  what  did  he  build  ?  Of  wood  and  stone,  because 
God  deigned  to  make  unto  Himself  by  His  servant  an  house 
on  earth,  where  He  might  be  asked,  where  He  might  be  had 

Acts  7,  in  mind.  Of  which  blessed  Stephen  says,  Solomon  built 
Him  an  house ;  howheit  the  Most  High  dwelleih  not  in 
temples  made  by  hand.  If  then  our  bodies  are  the  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  what  manner  of  God  is  it  that  built  a  temple 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  But  it  was  God.  For  if  our  bodies  be 
a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  same  built  this  temple  for 
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  built  our  bodies.    Listen  to  the  Apostle 

1  Cor-  saying,  God  hath  tempered  the  body,  giving  unto  that  which 
lacked  the  greater  honour;  when  he  was  speaking  of  the 
different  members  that  there  should  be  no  schisms  in  the 
body.  God  created  our  body.  The  grass,  God  created;  our 
body  Who  created  ?  How  do  we  prove  that  the  grass  is 
God's  creating.?     He  that  clothes,  the  same  creates.     Read 

Mat.  6,  the  Gospel,  If  then  the  grass  of  the  field,  saith  it,  ivhich 
to-day  is,  and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  God  so 
clotheth.     He,  then,  creates  Who  clothes.    And  the  Apostle: 

q«°'^Qo^'  "^f^oufool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it 
die ;  and  that  ivhich  thou  sanest,  thou  sowest  not  that  body 
that  shall  be,  but  a  bare  grain,  as  perchance  of  nheat,  or  of 
some  other  corn;  but  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  He  would, 
and  to  each  one  of  seeds  its  proper  body.  If  then  it  be  God 
that  builds  our  bodies,  God  that  builds  our  members,  and 
our  bodies  are  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  doubt  not  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  God.  And  do  not  add  as  it  were  a  third 
God  ;  because  Father  and  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  is  One  God. 
So  believe  ye. 
VI.         14.  It  follows  after  commendation  of  the  Trinity,  "  The 


Forgiveness  of  all  sins,  hoivever  great,  in  Baptism.     575 

Holy  Church."     God  is  pointed  out,  and  His  temple.     For      ad 
the  temple  of  God  is  holi/,  says  the  Apost\e,  tvliich  {temple)   chu-' 
are  ye.     This   same   is  the  holy  Church,  the  one  Church,  menos. 
the  true  Church,  the  catholic  Church,  fighting  against  allJi"°'"-^» 
heresies :  fight,  it  can  :  be  fought  down,  it  cannot.     As  for 
heresies,  they  went  all  out  of  it,  like  as  unprofitable  branches 
pruned  from  the  vine  :  but  itself  abideth  in  its  root,  in  its 
Vine,  in  its  charity.      The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail^^^-'^^j 
against  it. 

15.  "  Forgiveness  of  sins."  Ye  have  [this  article  of]  the  vii. 
Creed  perfectly  in  you  when  ye  receive  Baptism.  Let  none 
say,  '  I  have  done  this  or  that  sin :  perchance  that  is  not 
forgiven  me.'  What  hast  thou  done  ?  How  great  a  sin  hast 
thou  done  .?  Name  any  heinous  thing  thou  hast  committed, 
heavy,  horrible,  which  thou  shudderest  even  to  think  of: 
have  done  what  thou  wilt :  hast  thou  killed  Christ .?    There 

is  not  than  that  deed  any  worse,  because  also  than  Christ 
there  is  nothing  better.     What  a  dreadful  thing  is  it  to  kill 
Christ !     Yet   the  Jews    killed  Him,  and  many  afterwards 
believed  on  Him  and  drank  His  blood :  they  are  forgiven 
the  sin  which  they  committed.     When  ye  have  been  bap- 
tized, hold  fast  a  good  life  in  the  commandments  of  God, 
that  ye  may  guard  your  Baptism  even  unto  the  end.     I  do 
not  tell  you  that  ye  will  live  here  without  sin ;    but  they 
are  venial,  without  which   this  life   is   not.      For  the   sake 
of  all  sins  was  Baptism  provided '  ;  for  the  sake  of  light  sins,  i  inven- 
without  which  we  cannot  be,  was  prayer  provided  ^     What*'^^ 
hath  the  Prayer  .?     Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  also  forgive  Mat.  6, 
our  debtors.     Once  for  all  we   have  washing  in  Baptism,     ' 
every  day  we  have  washing  in  prayer.     Only,  do  not  commit 
those  things  for  which  ye  must  needs  be   sepai'ated  from 
Christ's  body  :  which  be  far  from  you  !     For  those  whom  ve 
have  seen  doing  penance^,  have  committed  heinous  things,^' agere 
either  adulteries  or  some  enormous  crimes :  for  these  they  l^l 
do  penance.     Because  if  theirs  had  been  light  sins,  to  blot 
out  these  daily  prayer  would  suffice. 

16.  In  three  ways  then  are  sins  remitted  in  the  Church  ;    viii, 
by  Baptism,  by  prayer,  by  the  greater  humility  of  penance  : 
yet  God  doth  not  remit  sins  but  to  the  baptized.     Tlie  very 
sins  which  He  remits  first.  He  remits  not  but  to  the  baptized. 


lam 


SYM 
BOLO 


GATE 
CHIT 


racte 
rem 


576  After  Forgiveness  in  right  of  Baptism.     Resurrection. 

DE     When  ?  when  they  are  baptized.     The  sins  which  are  after 

remitted  upon  prayer,  npon  penance,  to  whom  He  remits,  it 

AD     is  to  the  baptized  that  He  remitteth.     For  how  can  they  say, 

^~"    Our  Father,  who  are  not  yet  born  sons?     The  Catechumens, 

MENOs-  so  long  as  they  be  such,  have  upon  them  all  their  sins. 
If  Catechumens,  how  much  more  Pagans  \  how  much  more 
heretics?  But  to  heretics  we  do  not  change  their  baptism. 
Why?    because   they  have    baptism   in   the  same  way   as  a 

1  '  cha- deserter  has  the  soldier's  mark*:  just  so  these  also  have 
Baptism ;  they  have  it,  but  to  be  condemned  thereby,  not 
crowned.  And  yet  if  the  deserter  himself,  being  amended, 
begin  to  do  duty  as  a  soldier,  does  any  man  dare  to  change 
his  mark  ? 

17.  We  believe  also  "  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,"  which 
went  before  in  Christ:  that  the  body  too  may  have  hope 
of  that  which  went  before  in  its  Head.  The  Head  of  the 
Church,  Christ:  the  Church,  the  body  of  Christ.  Our  Head 
is  risen,  ascended  into  heaven :  where  the  Head,  there  also 
the  members.  In  what  way  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  ? 
Lest  any  should  chance  to  think  it  like  as  Lazarus's  resur- 
rection, that  thou  mayest  know  it  to  be  not  so,  it  is  added, 
"  Into  life  everlasting.""  God  regenerate  you!  God  preserve 
and  keep  you  !  God  bring  you  safe  unto  Himself,  Who  is 
the  Life  Everlasting.     Amen. 


IX. 


S.    AUGUSTINE 


ON 


THE    PROFIT    OF    BELIEVING. 


Retract,  i.  cap.  14.  Moreover  now  at  Hippo  Regius  as  Presbyter  1  wrote  a 
book  on  the  Profit  of  Believing,  to  a  friend  of  mine  wbo  had  been  taken 
in  by  the  Manichees,and  whom  I  knew  to  be  still  held  in  that  error,  and 
to  deride  the  Catholic  school  of  Faith,  in  that  men  were  bid  believe,  but 
not  taught  what  was  truth  by  a  most  certain  method.  In  this  book  I 
said,  &c.  *••**.  This  book  begins  thus,  '  Si  mihi  Honorate,  uniini 
atque  idem  videretur  esse.'' 

St.  Augustine  enumerates  his  book  on  the  Profit  of  Believing  first  amongst 
those  he  wrote  as  Presbyter,  to  which  order  he  was  raised  at  Hippo  about 
the  beginning  of  the  year  391.  The  person  for  whom  he  wrote  had  been 
led  into  error  by  himself,  and  appears  to  have  been  recovered  from  it,  at 
least  if  he  is  the  same  who  wrote  to  St.  Augustine  from  Carthage  about 
412,  proposing  several  questions,  and  to  whom  St.  Augustine  wrote  his 
140th  Epistle.  Cassiodorus  calls  him  a  Presbyter,  though  at  that  time 
he  was  not  baptized.  In  Ep.  83,  St.  Augustine  speaks  of  the  death  of 
another  Honoratus,  a  Presbyter.  Towards  the  end  of  his  life  he  also 
wrote  his  228th  Epistle  to  a  Bishop  of  Thabenna  of  the  same  name.  Ben. 
The  remarks  in  the  Retractations  are  given  in  notes  to  the  passages 
where  they  occur. 


1.  If,  Honoratus,  a  heretic,  and  a  man  trusting  heretics     de 
seemed  to  me  one  and  the  same,  I  should  judge  it  my  duty  to   xate 
remain  silent  both  in  tongue  and  pen  in  this  matter.     But    ^'^^- 

^  ^  DENDI. 


now,  whereas  there  is  a  very  great  difference  betv/een  these 
two  :  forasmuch  as  he,  in  my  opinion,  is  an  heretic,  who,  for 
the  sake  of  some  tempoi'al  advantage,  and  chiefly  for  the  sake 
of  his  own  glor}-  and  preeminence,  either  gives  birth  to,  or 

pp 


578  False  rule  of  sense.    Manichees  set  aside  all  authority. 

^'^'-     follows,  false  and  new  opinions  ;  but  he,  who  trusts  men  of 
tj  riLi-    ,.,.,.  ,        . 

TATE  this  kind,  IS  a  man  deceived  by  a  certain  imagination   of 

DENni  ^^'"'^^  ^"^  piety.  This  being  the  case,  I  have  not  thought  it 
my  duly  to  be  silent  towards  you,  as  to  my  opinions  on  the 
finding  and  retaining  of  truth  :  with  great  love  of  which,  as 
you  know,  we  have  burned  from  our  very  earliest  youth  : 
but  it  is  a  thing  far  removed  from  the  minds  of  vain  men, 
who,  having  too  far  advanced  and  fallen  into  these  corporeal 
things,  think  that  there  is  nothing  else  than  what  they  per- 
ceive by  those  five  well-known  reporters  of  the  body  ;    and 

•  plagas^vhat  impressions'  and  images  they  have  received  from  these, 
they  carry  over  with  themselves,  even  when  they  essay  to 
withdraw  from  the  senses  ;  and  by  the  deadly  and  most 
deceitful  rule  of  these  think  that  they  measure  most  rightly 
the  unspeakable  recesses  of  truth.  Nothing  is  more  easy, 
my  dearest  friend,  than  for  one  not  only  to  say,  but  also  to 
think,  that  he  hath  found  out  the  truth  ;  but  how  difliciilt  it 
is  in  reality,  you  will  perceive,  I  trust,  from  this  letter  of 
mine.  And  that  this  may  profit  you,  or  at  any  rate  may  in 
no  way  harm  you,  and  also  all,  into  whose  hands  it  shall 
chance  to  come,  I  have   both    prayed,  and   do   pray,  unto 

'si  God  ;  and  I  hope  that  it  will  be  so,  forasmuch  as^  I  am  fully 
conscious  that  T  have  undertaken  to  write  it,  in  a  pious  and 
friendly  spirit,  not  as  aiming  at  vain  reputation,  or  trifling 
display. 

2.  It  is  then  my  purpose  to  prove  to  you,  if  I  can,  that  the 
Manichees  profanely  and  rashly  inveigh  against  those,  who, 
following  the  authority  of  the  Catholic  Faith,  before  that 
they  are  able  gaze  upon  that  Truth,  which  the  pure  mind 
beholds,  arc  by  believing  forearmed,  and  prepared  for  God 
Who  is  about  to  give  them  light.  For  you  know,  Honoratus, 
that  for  no  other  reason  we  fell  in  with  such  men,  than 
because  they  used  to  say,  that,  apart  from  all  terror  of 
authority,  by  pure  and  simple  reason,  they  would  lead  within 
to  God,  and  set  free  from  all  error  those  who  were  willing  to 
be  their  hearers.  For  what  else  constrained  me,  during 
nearly  nine  years,  spurning  the  religion  which  had  been  set  in 
me  from  a  child  by  my  parents,  to  be  a  follower  and  diligent 
hearer  of  those  men%  save  that  they  said  that  we  are  alarmed 

»  Confess.  1.  i,  c.  11.  1.  v.  c.  14. 


Their  pretence  of  giving  rational  proof  in  all  cases.      579 

by    superstition,  and   are    commanded  to  have  faith   before     de 
reason,   but   that  ihey  urge  no    one  to  have  faith,  without    xate 
having  first  discussed  and  made  clear  the  truth  ?  Who  would    ^^^e- 

not  be  enticed  by  such  promises,  especially  the  mind  of  a 

voung  man  desirous  of  the  truth,  and  further  a  proud  and 
talkative  mind  bv  discussions  of  certain  learned  men  in  the 
school  ?    such  as  they  then  found  me,  disdainful  forsooth  as 
of  old  wives'  fables,  and  desirous  to  grasp  and  drink  in,  what 
they  promised,  the  open  and  pure  Truth  ?    But  what  reason, 
on  the  other  hand,  recalled  me,  not  to  be  altogether  joined 
to  them,  so  that  I  continued  in  that  rank  u  hich  tiiey  call  of 
Heai-ers,  so  that  I  resigned  not  the  ho})e  and  business  of  this 
world  ;  save  that  I  noticed  that  they  also  are  rather  eloquent 
and  full  in  refutation  of  others,  than  abide  firm  and  sure  in 
proof  of  what  is   their  own.     But   of  myself  what  shall  1 
say,  who  was  already  a  Catholic  Christian  ?  teats  which  now, 
after   very  long  thirst,  I   almost  exhausted    and  dry,   have 
returned  to  with  all  greediness,  and  with  deeper  weeping  and 
groaning  have  shaken   together  and  wrung   them  out  more 
deeply,  that  so  there  might  flow  what  might  be  enough  to 
refresh  me  affected  as  I  was,  and  to  bring  back  hope  of  life 
and  safety.     What  then  shall  I  say  of  myself?     You,  not  yet 
a  Christian,  who,  through  encouragement  from  me,  execrating 
them  greatly  as  you  did,  were  hardly  led  to  believe  that  you 
ought  to  listen  to  them  and  make  trial  of  them,  by  what  else, 
I  pray  you,  were  you  delighted,  call  to  mind,  I  entreat  you, 
save  by  a  certain  great  presumption  and  promise  of  reasons? 
But  because  they  disputed  long  and  much  with  very  great 
copiousness  and   vehemence   concerning  the   errors   of  un- 
learned men,  a  thing  which  I  learned  too  late  at  length  to  be 
most  easy  for  anj'  moderately  educated  man  ;  if  even  of  their 
own  they  implanted  in  us  any  tiling,  we  thought  that  we 
were  obliged  to  retain  it,  insomuch  as  there  fell  not  in  our 
way  other  things,  wherein  to  acquiesce.     So  they  did  in  our 
case  what  crafty  fowlers  are  wont  to  do,  who  set  branches 
smeared  with  bu'd-lime  beside  water  to  deceive  thirsty  birds. 
For  they  fill  up  and  cover  any  how  the  other  waters  which 
are  around,  or  fright  them  from  them  by  alarming  devices, 
that  they  may  fall  into  their  snares,  not  through  choice,  but 
want. 

r  p  2 


580   St.  Augustine  was  not  '  in  the  Light^  tvhen  a  Manichee. 
DE         3.  But  why  do  T  not  make  answer  to  myself,  that  these 


UTILI- 
TATE 


fan-  and  clever  similies,  and  charges  of  this  nature  may  be 
CRE-   poured  forth  against  all  who  are  teachers  of  any  thing  by 

DENDI.  T  -,11  n         ■  ^  1       ti 

any  adversary,  with  abundance  or   wit  and   sarcasm  r     But 

T  thought  that  I  ought  to  insert  something  of  this  kind  in 
mv  letter,  in  order  to  admonish    them   to    give    over  such 

'  Cicero  proceedings ;     so    that,    as    he^    says,    apart  from    trifles    of 
common    j^laces,    matter   may    contend  with   matter,  cause 
with  cause,  reason  Avith  reason.     Wherefore  let  them  give 
over  that  saying,  which  they  have  in  their  mouths  as  though 
of  necessity,  when  any  one,  who  hath  been  for  some  long 
time  a  hearer,  hath  left    them  ;  "  The  Light   hath  made  a 
passage  through  him."     For  you  see,  you  who  are  my  chief 
care,  (for  I  am  not  over  anxious  about  them,)  how  empty 
this  is,  and  most  easy  for  any  one  to  find  fault  with.     Tiiere- 
fore  I  leave  this  for  your  own  wisdom  to  consider.     For  I 
have  no  fear  that  you  will  think  me  possessed  by  indwelling 
Light,  when  1  was  entangled  in  the  life  of  this  world,  having 
a  darkened  hope,  of  beauty  of  wife,  of  pom]5  of  riches,  of 
emptiness  of  honours,  and  of  all  other  hurtful  and  deadly 
pleasures.     P^or  all  these,  as  is  not  unknoAvn  to  you,  I  ceased 
not    to  desire  and  hope  for,  at  the  time  when  I  was  their 
attentive  hearer.     And  I  do  not   lay  this  to  the  charge  of 
their  teaching  ;    for  I  also  confess  that  they  also  carefully 
advise  to  shun  these.     But  now  to  say  that  I  am  deserted 
by  liglit,  when  I  have  turned  myself  I'rom  all  these  shadows 
of  things,  and  have  determined  to  be  content  witli  that  diet 
merely  which  is  necessary  for  health  of  body  ;    but  that  I 
was  enlightem  d  and  shining,  at  a  time  Avhen  I  loved  these 
things,   and    was    wrapped    up    in    them,  is    the    part   of  a 
man,    to    use    the    mildest   expression,  wanting   in    a    keen 
insight  into  matters,  on  which  he  loves  to  speak  at  length. 
But,  if  you  please,  let  us  come  to  the  cause  in  hand, 
ii.  4.  For  you  well  know  that  the  Manichees  move  the  un- 

learned by  finding  fault  A^itli  the  Catholic  Faith,  and  chiefly 
by  rending  in  pieces  and  tearing  the  Old  Testament :  and 

2  quate-  they  are  utterly  ignorant,  how  far  these  things  are  to  be  taken, 
""*         and  how  drawn  out  they  descend  with  ])rofit  into  the  veins 

3  vagi-    and  marrows  of  souls  as    yet  as  it  were  but  able  to  cry^. 
entium    p^^^^   because  there    are  in  tliem    certain  things  which  are 


Defence  of  Old  Testament  not  easily  made  popular.     581 

some  slis-ht  offence  to  minds  ignorant  and  careless  of  °^ 
themselves,  (and  there  are  very  many  such,)  they  admit  tate 
of  being  accused  in  a  popular  way  :  but  defended  in  a  J^J^^fj^^ 
popular  way  they  cannot  be,  by  any  great  nnmber  of 
pel  sons,  by  reason  of  the  mysteries  that  are  contained  in 
them.  But  the  ie\\\  Avho  know  how  to  do  this,  do  not 
love  public  and  much  talked  of  controversies  and  dis-  ^^^!j 
piites :  and  on  this  account  are  very  little  known,  save 
to  such  as  are  most  earnest  in  seeking  them  out.  Con- 
cerning then  this  rashness  of  the  Manichees,  whereby  they 
tind  fault  with  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Catholic  Faith, 
listen,  I  entreat  you,  to  the  considerations  which  move  me. 
But  1  desire  and  hope  that  you  will  receive  them  in  the 
same  spirit  in  which  I  say  them.  For  God,  unto  Whom 
are  known  the  secrets  of  my  conscience,  knows,  that  in  this 
discourse  1  am  doing  nothing  of  evil  craft ;  but,  as  1  think 
it  should  be  received,  for  the  sake  of  proving  the  truth, 
for  which  one  thing  we  have  now  long  ago  delermined 
to  live  ;  and  with  incredible  anxiety,  lest  it  may  have 
been  most  easy  for  me  to  err  with  you,  but  most  dif- 
ficult, to  use  no  harder  term,  to  hold  the  right  way  with 
you.  But  I  venture^  to  anticipate  that,  in  this  hope,  ^praj 
wherein  I  hope  that  you  will  hold  with  us  the  way  of 
wisdom.  He  will  not  fail  me,  unto  Whom  I  have  been 
consecrated;  Whom  day  and  night  I  endeavour  to  gaze 
upon  :  and  since,  by  reason  of  my  sins,  and  by  reason  of 
past  habit,  having  the  eye  of  the  mind  wounded  by  strokes 
of  feeble  opinions,  I  know  that  I  am  without  strength,  1 
often  entreat  with  tears,  and  as,  after  long  blindness  and 
darkness  the  eyes  being  hardly  opened,  and  as  yet,  by 
frequent  throbbing  and  turning  away,  refusing  the  light 
which  yet  they  long  after ;  specially  if  one  endeavour  to 
shew  to  them  the  very  sun  ;  so  it  has  now  befallen  me, 
who  do  not  deny  that  there  is  a  certain  unspeakable  and 
singular  good  of  the  soul,  which  the  mind  sees;  and  who 
with  tears  and  groaning  confess  that  1  am  not  yet  worthy  of 
it.  He  will  not  then  fail  me,  if  I  feign  nothing,  if  I  am  led 
by  duty,  if  I  love  truth,  if  I  esteem  friendship,  if  I  fear  much 
lest  you  be  deceived. 
5.  All  that  Scripture  therefore,  which  is  called  the  Old  Testa-     iii 


sumo 


582    Exposition  hy  Historij,  Mliology,  Analogy,  Allegory. 

DE     ment,  is  handed  down  four-fold  to  ihem  who  desire  to  know 

"tate'  i^'  according  to  history,  according  to  oetiology,  according  to 

CRE-   analogy,  according  to  allegory.     Do  not  think  me  silly  for 

DFNDI 


using  Greek  words.     In  the  first  ]ilace,  because  I  have  so 
received,  nor  do  1  dare  to  make  known  to  you  otherwise  than 
I  have  received.     ISext  you  yourself  perceive,  that  we  have 
not  in  use  terms  for  such  things:  and  had  I  translated  and 
made  such,    I    should  have  been   indeed  more  silly :   but, 
were  I  to  use  circumlocution,  I  should  be  less  iree  in  treating: 
this  only  1  pray  you  to  believe,  that  in  whatever  way  I  err, 
J  am  not  inflated  or  swoIUmi  in  any  thing  that  I  do.     Thus 
O'or  example)  it  is  handed  down  according  to  history,  when 
there  is  taught  what  hath  been  written,  or  what  hath  been 
done;    what   not    done,  hut  only  written  as  though  it  had 
been  done.     According  to  aetiology,  when  it  is  shewn  for  what 
cause    any   thing   hath    been    done    or    said.     According  to 
analogy,  when  it  is  shewn  that  the  two  Testaments,  the  Old 
and  the  New,  are  not  contrary  the  one  to  the  other.    Accord- 
ing to  allegory,  when  it  is  taught  that  certain  things  which 
have  been  written  are  not  to  be  taken  in  the  letter,  but  are  to 
be  understood  in  a  figure. 

Q.  All  these  ways  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Apostles 
used.     For  when  it  had  been  objected  that  His  disciples  had 
plucked  the  ears  of  corn  on  the  sabbath-day,  the  instance 
Mat.  12  vvas  taken  from  history;   Have  ye  not  read,  saith  He,  what 
'■^-  ^'       David  did  tvhen  he  was:  an  hitngred,  and  they  that  icere  with 
liim;  how  he  entered,  into  the  house  of  God,  and  did  eat  the 
shewhread,  ii'hich  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  eat,  neither /or 
them  that  were  with  him,  hat  only  for  the  priests'?     But  the 
instance  pertains   to   aetiology,   that,  when   Christ  had    for- 
bidden a  wife  to  be  put  away,  save  for  the  cause  of  forni- 
cation, and  they,  who  asked  Him,  had  alleged  that  Moses  had 
granted  permission  after  a  writing  of  divorcement  had  been 
Mat.  19,  given.  This,  saith  He,  Moses  did  because  of  the  hardness  of 
^'  your  heart.     For  here   a  reason  was  given,  why  that  had 

been  well  allowed  by  Moses  for  a  time ;  that  this  command 
of  Christ  might  seem  to  shew  that  now  the  times  were  other. 
But  it  were  long  to  explain  the  changes  of  those  times,  and 
their  order  arranged  and  settled  by  a  certain  marvellous 
appointment  of  Divine  Providence. 


Manichees  inconsisleiU  in  dealing  icith  Holy  Scripture*    583 

7.  And  farther,  analogy,  whereby  the  agreement  of  bolli     de 
Testaments  is  plainly  seen,  why  shall  1  say  that  all  have  ""t^' 
made  use  of,  to  whose  authority  they  yield;  whereas  it  is  in    cre- 

DENDI. 


their  power  to  consider  with  themselves,  how  niany  things 
they  ai'e  wont  to  say  have  been  inserted  in  the  divine  Scrip- 
tures   by    certain,    [    know   not    who,   corrupters    of  truth  ? 
Which  speech  of  theirs  I  always  thought  to  be  most  weak, 
even  at  the  time  that  1  was  their  hearer:    nor  I  alone,  but 
you  also,  (for  I  well  remember,)  and  all  of  us,  who  essayed  to 
exercise  a  little  more  care  in  forming  a  judgment  than  the 
crowd  of  hearers.     But    now,  after  that  many  things  have 
been  expounded  and  made  clear  to  me,  which  used  chiefly 
to  move  me:  those,  I  mean,  whei'ein  their  discourse  fur  the 
most  part  boasts  itself,  and  expatiates  the  more  freely,  the 
more  safely  it  can  do  so  as  having  no  opponent;  it  seems  to 
me  that  there  is  no  assertion  of  theirs  more  shameless,  or  (to 
use  a  milder  phrase)  more  careless  and  weak,  than  that  the 
divine  Scriptures  have  been  corrupted;  whereas  there  are  no 
copies  in  existence,  in  a  matter  of  so  recent  date,  whereby 
they  can  prove  it.     For  were  they  to  assert,  that  they  thought 
not  that  they  ought  thoroughly  to  receive  them,  because  they 
had  been  written  by  persons,  who  they  thought  had  not  written 
the  truth;   an}'  how  their  refusal'  would  be  more  right,  or '  tergi- 
their  eiTor  more  natural-.     For  this  is  what  they  have  doneof^*^'" 
in  the  case  of  the  Book  which  is  inscribed  the  Acts  of  thenior 
Appstles.     And  this  device  of  theirs,  when  I  consider  with 
myself,  T  cannot  enough  wonder  at.     For  it  is  not  the  want 
of  wisdom  in  the  men  that  I  complain  of  in  this  matter,  but 
the  want  of  ordinary  understanding''.      For  that  book  hath ^  cor 
so  great  matters,  which  are  like  what  they  receive,  that  itj|^*pg'* 
seems  to  me  great  folly  to   refuse  to  receive  this  book  also, 
and  if  any  thing  offend  them  there  to  call  it  false  and  inserted. 
Or,  if  such  language  is  shameless,  as  it  is,  why  in  the  Epistles 
of  Paul,  why  in  the  fovu-  books  of  the  Gospel,  do  they  think 
that  they  *  are  of  any  avail,  in  which  I  am  not  sure  but  that '  ea 
there  are  in  proportion  many  more  things,  than  could  be  in 
that  book,  which  they  will  have  believed  to  have  been  inter- 
polated by  falsifiers.     But  forsooth  this  is  what  I  believe  to 
be  the  case,  and  I  ask  of  you  to  consider  it  with  me  with  as 
calm  and  serene  a  judgment  as  possible.      For  you  know 


584    Ma/lichees  deny  tlie  Ads.    Allegory  used  by  our  Lord. 

DE     that,  essaying  to  bring  the  person  of  their  founder  Manichgeus 

^"te"  ^^^^^  ^^^®  number  of  the  Apostles,   they  say  that  the   Holy 

cHK-    Spirit,   Whom    the   Lord    promised    His    disciples   that  He 

'would  send,  hath  come  to  us  through  him.     Therefore,  were 


Acts  2, 

2.  3.  4.  they  to  receive  those  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  in  which  the  comnig 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  plainly  set  forth,  they  could  not  find 
how  to  say  that  it  was  interpolated.  For  they  will  have  it 
that  there  were  some,  I  know  not  who,  falsifiers  of  the  divine 
Books  before  the  times  of  Manichaius  himself;  and  that  they 
were  falsified  by  persons  Avho  wished  to  combine  the  Law  of 
the  Jews  with  the  Gospel.  But  this  they  cannot  say  concern- 
ing the  Holy  Spirit,  unless  haply  they  assert  that  those 
persons  divined,  and  set  in  their  books  what  should  be 
brought  forward  against  Manich'ceus,  who  should  at  some 
I'uture  time  arise,  and  say  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been  sent 
through  him.  But  concerning  the  Holy  Spirit  we  will  speak 
somewhat  more  plainly  in  another  place.  Now  let  us  return 
to  my  purpose. 

8.   For    that   both    history    of    the    Old    Testament,    and 

aetiology,  and  analogy  are  found  in  the  New  Testament,  has 

been,  as  I  think,  sufficiently  proved:  it  remains  to  shew  this 

of  allegory.      Our  Redeemer  Himself  in    the    Gospel   uses 

Mat.  12,  allegory  out  of  the  Old  Testament.     This  generation^  saith  He, 

^^'     '  seeketh  a  sign,  and  there  shall  not  be  given  it  save  the  sign 

of  Jonas  the  prophet.     For  as  Jonas  icas  three  days  and 

three  nights  in  the  ■whale''s  belly,  so  also  shall  the  Son  of 

Man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth. 

For  why  should  I  speak  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  in  his  first 

Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  shews  that  even  the  very  history 

of  the  Exodus  was  an  allegory  of  the  future  Christian  People. 

1  Cor.    But  I  ivoidd  not  that  ye  should  be  ignorant,  brethren,  how 

Jj'  ^~  that  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud,  and  all  passed 

through  the  sea,  and  were  all  baptized  into  3Ioses,  in  the 

cloud,  and  in  the  sea,  and  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual 

meat,  and  did  all  drink  the  .same  spiritual  drink  ;  for  they 

drank   of  the    spiritual    Rock   that  followed    with   them; 

and  that  Rock  was  Christ.      But  in  the  more  part  of  them 

God  xvas  not  well  pleased:  for  they  were  overthrown  in  the 

wilderness.     But  these  things  were  figures  of  us^,  that  ice  be 

^  figurce  nostra  ritrot  h(^uv  Gr.  in  Jig ur a  facta  sunt  nostri,    Vulg. 


The  Law  a  slavish  state,  hut  as  such  good/or  some.     585 

)iol  lustful  of  evil  things,  as  they  also  lusted.     Neither  let  us  de 

worship   idols,  as  certain  of  them;    as  it  is  written,   The  ^^^e 

people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up  to  play,  ^re- 


Neithcr  let  us  commit  fornication,  as  certain  of  them  com- 
mitted, and  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand  men. 
Neither  let  us  tempt  Christ,  as  certain  of  them  tempted,  and 
perished  of  serpents.     Neither  murmur  we,  as  certain  of 
them  murmured,  and  perished  of  the  destroyer.     But  all 
these  things  happened  unto  them  in  a  figure.     But  they  were''"''*' 
ivritten  for  our  admonition,  upon   whom  the  ends  of  the 
xcorld  have  come.     There  is  also  in  the  Apostle  a  certain 
allegory,  which  indeed  greatly  relates  to  the  cause  in  hand, 
for  this  reason  that   they  themselves  are  wont  to  bring  it 
forAvard,  and  make  a  display  of  it  in  disputing.    For  the  same 
Paul  says  to  the  Galatians,  For  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  Gal.  4, 
had  two  sons,  one  of  a  bond-maid,  and  one  of  a  free  woman. 
But  he  who  was  of  the  bond-maid  ivas  bom  after  the  jiesh  : 
but  he  who  was  of  the  free  woman,  hy  promise:  which  things 
were  spoken  by  way  of  allegory.     For   these  are  the  two  «'*-^»»/ 
Testaments,  one  of  Mount  Sina  gendering  unto  bondage ,  (^.i^tt  Gx. 
which   is   Agar:  for  Sina   is   a   mount  in  Arabia,  which 
bordereth^  upon  that  Jerusalem  ichich  now  is,  and  is   in^confims 
bondage  ivith  her  children.     But  that  Jerusalem  which  is 
above  is  free,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all. 

9.  Here  therefore  these  men  too  evil,  while  they  essay  to 
make  void   the  Law,  force  us  to  approve  these  Scriptures. 
For  they  mark  what  is  said,  that  they  who  are  under  the  Law 
are  in  bondage,  and  they  keep  flying  above  the  rest  that  last 
saying,  Ye  are  made  empty  of  Christ,  as  many  of  you  as  ^re^'^^^^' 
justified  in  the  Law;  ye  have  fallen  from  Grace.     We  grant  Gal.  6, 
that  all  these  things  are  true,  and  we  say  that  the  Law  is  not 
necessary,  save  for  them  unto  whom  bondage  is  yet  profit- 
able:   and  that   the    Law  was    on    this    account   profitably 
enacted,  in  that  men,  who  could  not  be  recalled  from  sins 
by  reason,  needed  to  be  restrained  by  such  a  Law,  that  is  to 
say,  by  the  threats  and  terrors  of  those  punishments  which 
can  be  seen  by  fools :  from  which  when  the  Grace  of  Christ  sets 
us  free,  it  condemns  not  that  Law,  but  invites  us  at  length  to 
yield  obedience  to  its  love,  not  to  be  slaves  to  the  fear  of 
the  Law.    Itself  is  Grace,  that  is  free  gift,  which  they  uuder- 


benefi- 
ciu  tn 


586       The  Old  Testament  not  done  aicay,  but  unveiled. 

DE     stand  not  to  have  come  to  them  from  God,  who  still  desire 
^'^"'^"  to  be  mider  the  bonds  of  the  Law.     Whom  Paul  deservedly 

TATE  _  _  •' 

cRE-   rebukes  as  unbelievers,  because  they  do  not  believe  that  now 
°^^°^'  through  our  Lord  Jesus  they  have  been  set  free  from  that 
bondage,  under  which  they  were  placed  for  a  certain  time 
by  the  most  just  appointment  of  God.     Hence  is  that  saying 
Gal.  3,  of  the  same  Apostle,  For  the  Law  uas  our  schoolmaster  in 
^^'  "*^    Christ.     He  therefore  gave  to  men  a  schoolmaster  to  fear, 
Who  after  gave  a  Master  to  love.     And  yet  in  these  precepts 
and   commands  of  the   Law,  which  now  it  is  not    allowed 
Christians  to  use,  such  as  either  the   Sabbath,  or  Circum- 
cision, or  Sacrifices,  and  if  there  be  any  thing  of  this  kind, 
so  great  mysteries  are  contained,  as  that  every  pious  person 
may  understand,  there   is  nothing   more    deadly   than    that 
whatever  is  there  be  understood  to  the  letter,  that  is,  to  the 
ad  ver-  word:  and  nothing  more  healthful  than  that  it  be  unveiled  in 
2 Cor  3  *^^6  Spirit.     Hence   it  is:    The  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit 
G.  quickeneth  ^     Hence  it  is.  That  same  veil  remaineth  in  the 

reading  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  veil  is  not  taken  away ; 
since  it  is  made  void  in  Christ'^.  For  there  is  made  void  in 
Christ,  not  the  Old  Testament,  but  its  veil :  that  so  through 
Christ  that  may  be  understood,  and,  as  it  Avere,  laid  bare, 
which  without  Christ  is  obscure  and  covered.  Forasmuch  as 
2  Cor. 3,  the  same  Apostle  straightway  adds,  But  when  thou  shall  have 
jiassed  over  to  Christ,  the  veil  shall  bo  taken  away.  For  he 
saith  not,  the  Law  shall  be  taken  away,  or,  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. Not  therefore  through  the  Grace  of  the  liOrd,  as 
though  useless  things  were  there  hidden,  have  they  been 
taken  away;  but  rather  the  covering  whereby  useful  things 
were  covered.  In  this  manner  all  they  are  dealt  with,  who 
earnestly  and  piously,  not  disorderly  and  shamelessly,  seek 
the  sense  of  those  Scriptin;es,  and  they  are  carefully  shewn 
both  the  order  of  events,  and  the  causes  of  deeds  and  words, 
and  so  great  agreement  of  the  Old  Testament  with  the  New, 
apex      that  there  is  left  no  jot  that  agrees  not;  and  so  great  secrets 

<=  vid.  Eetr.  1.  i.  c.  14.  n.  1.     "In  suitably,  in  tlic  book  entitled  Z>e  S/;/i7V?< 

this  book  I  said,  '  in  which  &c.'  but  I  et   Literd,    though    this    sense   too    is 

have  otherwise  explaiiied  those  words  not  to  be  utterly  rejected." 

of  the   Apostle  Paul,  and  as  fur  as  I  "^  2    Cor.   3,    14.   quoniam,    ort   Gr. 

can  see,  or  rather  as  is  apparent  from  "  which  veil,"  Eng.  T. 
the  plain  state  of  the  case,  much  more 


Three  ways  of  mistaking  in  reading.  587 

of  figures,  that  all  tlie  things  that  are  drawn  forth  by  inter-     de 

UTII  I- 

pretatioii  force  them  to  confess  that  they  are  wretched,  who  tate 
will  to  condemn  these  before  they  learn  them.  cre- 

10.    But,  passing  over  m  the  mean  while  the  depth  ot  ~- 

knowledge,  to  deal  with  you  as  I  think  I  ought  to  deal  with 
my  intimate  friend  ;  that  is,  as  I  have  myself  power,  not  as 
I  have  wondered  at  the  power  of  very  learned  men ;  there  are 
three  kinds  of  error,  whereby  men  err,  when  they  read  anything. 
I  will  speak  of  them  one  by  one.  The  fust  kind  is,  wherein  that 
which  is  false  is  thought  true,  whereas  the  writer  thought  other- 
wise. A  second  kind,  although  not  so  extensive,  yet  not  less 
liurtfnl,when  that,which  is  false, is  thought  true,  yet  the  thought 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  writer.  A  third  kind,  when  from  the 
wiiting  of  another  some  truth  is  understood,  whereas  the 
writer  understood  it  not.  In  which  kind  there  is  no  little 
profit,  rather,  if  you  consider  carefully,  the  whole  entire  fruit 
of  reading.  An  instance  of  the  first  kind  is,  as  if  any  one, 
for  example,  should  say  and  believe  that  Rliadamanthus 
hears  and  judges  the  causes  of  the  dead  in  the  realms  below,  Virg. 
because  he  hath  so  read  in  the  strain  of  Maro.  For  this  onesggll'' 
errs  in  two  ways :  both  in  that  he  believes  a  thing  not  to  be  ^69. 
believed,  and  also  in  that  he,  whom  he  reads,  is  not  to  be 
thought  to  have  believed  it.  The  second  kind  may  be  thus 
noticed :  if  one,  because  Lucretius  writes  that  the  soul  is 
formed  of  atoms,  and  that  after  death  it  is  dissolved  into  the 
same  atoms  and  perishes,  were  to  think  this  to  be  true  and 
what  he  ought  to  believe.  For  this  one  also  is  not  less 
wretched,  if,  in  a  matter  of  so  great  moment,  he  hath  per- 
suaded himself  of  that  which  is  false,  as  certain  ;  although 
Lucretius,  by  whose  books  he  hath  been  deceived,  lield  this 
opinion.  For  what  doth  it  profit  this  one  to  be  assured 
of  the  meaning  of  the  author,  whereas  he  hath  chosen  him  to 
himself  not  so  as  through  him  to  escape  error,  but  so  as  with 
him  to  err.  An  instance  suited  to  the  third  kind  is,  if  one, 
after  having  read  in  the  books  of  Epicurus  some  place 
wherein  he  praises  continence,  were  to  assert  that  he  had 
made  the  chief  good  to  consist  in  virtue,  and  that  therefore 
he  is  not  to  be  blamed.  For  how  is  this  man  injiu'ed  by  the 
error  of  Epicurus,  what  though  Epicurus  believe  that  bodily 
pleasure   is  the  chief  good  of  man  :    whereas   he   hath  not 


588        Liltle  harm  in  taking  a  douhlful  meaning  icell. 

DE  surrendered  up  himself  to  so  base  and  hurtful  an  opinion, 
TATE  ^^^cl  is  pleased  with  Epicurus  for  no  other  reason,  than  that 
CRE-    i^g  thinks  him  not  to  have  held  sentiments  ^yhich  ought  not 

DENDI.  , 

j^^~  to  be  holden.  This  error  is  not  only  natural  to  man,  but 
nus  often  also  most  worthy  of  a  man.  For  what,  if  word  were 
brought  to  me,  concerning  some  one  whom  I  loved,  that, 
when  now  he  was  of  bearded  age,  he  had  said,  in  the  hearing  of 
many,  that  he  was  so  pleased  with  boyhood  and  childhood, 
as  even  to  swear  that  he  wished  to  live  after  the  same  fashion, 
and  that  that  was  so  proved  to  me,  as  that  I  should  be  shame- 
less to  deny  it :  I  should  not,  should  I,  seem  worthy  of 
blame,  if  I  thought  that,  in  saying  this,  he  wished  to  shew, 
that  he  was  pleased  with  the  innocence,  and  with  the 
temper  of  mind  alien  from  those  desires  in  which  the  race  of 
man  is  wrapped  up,  and  from  this  circumstance  should  love 
him  yet  more  and  more,  than  I  used  to  love  him  before ; 
although  perhaps  he  had  been  foolish  enough  to  love  in  the 
age  of  children  a  certain  freedom  in  play  and  food,  and  an 
idle  ease  ?  For  suppose  that  he  had  died  after  this  report 
had  reached  me,  and  that  I  had  been  unable  to  make  any 
inquiry  of  him,  so  as  for  him  to  open  his  meaning;  would 
there  be  any  one  so  shameless  as  to  be  angry  with  me, 
for  praising  the  man's  purpose  and  wish,  through  those  very 
words  which  I  had  heard  ?  What,  that  even  a  just  judge  of 
matters  would  not  hesitate  perhaps  to  praise  my  sentiment 
and  wish,  in  that  both  I  was  pleased  with  innocence,  and, 
as  man  of  man,  in  a  matter  of  doubt,  preferred  to  think  well, 
when  it  was  in  my  power  also  to  think  ill  ? 
V-  11.  And,  this  being  so,  hear  also  just  so  many  conditions 

and  differences  of  the  same  Scriptures.  For  it  must  be  that 
just  so  many  meet  us.  For  either  any  one  hath  written 
profitably,  and  is  not  profitably  understood  by  some  one  : 
or  both  take  place  unprofitably  :  or  the  reader  understands 
profitably,  whereas  he,  who  is  read,  hath  written  contrariwise. 
Of  these  the  first  I  blame  not,  the  last  T  regard  not.  For 
neither  can  I  blame  the  man,  who  without  any  fault  of  liis 
own  hath  been  ill  understood;  nor  can  I  be  distressed  at  any 
one  being  read,  who  hath  failed  to  see  the  truth,  when  I  see 
that  the  readers  are  no  way  injured.  There  is  then  one  kind 
most  approved,  and  as  it  were    most  cleansed,  when  both 


The  Old  Tefttament  to  be  defended  in  the  ChurcWs  sense.    589 


the  things  written  are  well,  and  are  taken  in  a  good  sense  by     dr 

UTIL 
TATE 
CRE- 
DENDT. 


the  readers.     And  yet  that  also,  is  still  iurther  divided  into  ^'^'^^" 
two  :  for  it  doth  not  altogether  shut  out  error.     For  it  gene-  ^^^^^ 
rally  comes  to  pass,  that,  when  a  writer  hath  held  a  good 
sense, the  reader  also  holds  a  good  sense;  still  other  than  he, 
and   often    better,   often   worse,   yet   profitably.     But  when 
both  we  hold  the  same  sense  as  he  whom  we  read,  and  that 
is  eA-ery  way  suited  to  right  conduct  of  life,  there  is  the  fullest 
possible  measure  of  truth,  and  there  is  no  place  opened  for 
error  from  any  other  quarter.     And  this  kind  is  altogether 
very  rare,  when  what  we  read  is  matter  of  extreme  obscurity: 
nor   can    it,  in    my  opinion,    be    clearly    known,    but    only 
believed.     For  by  what  proofs  shall  I  so  gather  the  will  of  a  ■ 
man  who  is  absent  or  dead,  as  that  I  can  swear  to  it :   when, 
even  if  he  were  questioned  being  present,  there  might  be 
many  things,  which,  if  he  were  no  ill  man,  he  would  most 
carefully   hide  ?     But  I  think    that   it    hath    nothing  to  do 
towards  learning  the  matter  of  fact,  of  what  character  the 
writer   was ;    yet   is   he    most   fairly  believed    good,  whose 
writings  have  benefited  the  human  race  and  posterity. 

12.  Wherefore  I  would  that  they  would  tell  me,  in  what 
kind  they  place  the,  supposed,  error  of  the  Catholic  Church. 
If  in  the  first,  it  is  altogether  a  grave  charge ;  but  it  needs 
not  a  far-fetched  defence :   for  it  is  enough  to  deny  that  we  so 
understand,  as  the  persons,  who  inveigh  against  us,  suppose. 
If  in  the  second,  the  charge  is  not  less  grave  ;  but  they  shall 
be  refuted  by  the  same  saying.    If  in  the  third,  it  is  no  charge 
at  all.    Proceed,  and  next  consider  the  Scriptures  themselves. 
For  what  objection  do  they  raise  against  the  books  of  (what 
is  called)  the  Old  Testament .'      Is  it  that  they  are   good, 
but  are  understood  by  us  in  an  ill  sense  .?     But  they  them- 
selves do  not  receive  them.     Or  is  it  that  they  are  neither 
good,  nor  are  well  understood  ?     But  our  defence  above  is 
enough  to  drive  them  from  this  position.     Or  is  it  this  that 
they  will  say,  although  they  are  imderstood  by  you  in  a  good 
sense,  yet  they  are  evil  }     What  is  this  other  than  to  acquit 
living  adversaries,  with  whom  they  have  to  do,  and  to  accuse 
men   long  ago   dead,  with   whom   they  have  no    strife  ?     I 
indeed  believe  that  both  those  men  profitably  delivered  to 
memory   all  things,  and    that   they  were    great  and  divine. 


TATE 

CRE- 

DENDI 


590       Books  have  a  right  to  a  friendly  interpretation. 

DE  And  that  that  Law  was  publisbed,  and  framed  by  the  command 
and  will  of  God:  and  of" this,  although  I  have  but  very  slight 
knowledge  of  books  of  that  kind,  yet  1  can  easily  persuade 
any,  if  there  apply  to  me  a  mind  fair  and  no  way  obstinate : 
and  this  I  will  do,  when  you  shall  grant  to  me  your  ears  and 
mind  well  disposed  :  this  however  when  it  shall  be  in  my 
power :  but  now  is  it  not  enough  for  me,  however  that  matter 
may  stand,  not  to  have  been  deceived  ? 

vi.         13.  I  call  to  witness,  Ilonoratus,  my  conscience,  and  God 
Who  hath  His  dwelling  in  pure  souls,  that  I  account  nothing 
more  prudent,  chaste,  and  religious,  than  are  all  those  Scrip- 
tures, which    under  the    name   of  the  Old   Testament   the 
Catholic  Church  retains.     You  wonder  at  this,  T  am  aware. 
For  I  cannot  hide   that  v/e  were  far  otherwise  persuaded. 
But  there  is  indeed  nothing  more  fidl  of  rashness,  (which  at 
that  time,  being  boys,  we  had  in  us,)  than  in  the  case  of  each 
several  book,  to  desert  expounders,  who  profess  that  they  hold 
them,  and  that  they  can  deliver  them  to  their  scholars,  and 
to  seek  their  meaning  from  those,  who,  I  know  not  from  what 
cause  compelling,  have  proclaimed  a  most  hitter  war  against 
the  framers  and  authors  of  them.      For  who  ever  thought 
that  the   hidden   and  dark  books   of  Aristotle   were  to  be 
expounded  to  him  by  one  who  was  the  enemy  of  Aristotle  ; 
to  speak  of  these  systems  of  teaching,  wherein  a  reader  may 
perhaps  err  without  sacrilege  ?    Who,  in  fine,  willed  to  read 
or   learn    the    geometrical    writings    of  Archimedes,    imder 
Epicurus    as   a    master;    against  which   Epicurus    used    to 
argue   with    great    obstinacy,    so    far   as    I    judge,    under- 
standing them  not  at  all  ?   What  are  those  Scriptures  of  the 
law  most  plain,  against  which,  as  though  set  forth  in  public, 
these  men  make  their  attack  in  vain  and   to  no  purpose  ? 
And  they  seem  to  me  to  be  like  that  weak  woman,  whom 
these  same  men  are  wont  to  mock  at,  who  enraged  at  the 
sun  being  extolled  to  her,  and  recommended  as  an  object 
of  worship  by  a  certain  female  Manichce,  being  as  she  was 
simple-minded  and  of  a  religious  spirit,  leaped  up  in  haste, 
and  often  striking  with  her  foot  that  spot  on  which  the  sun 
through    the    window    cast    light,    began    to    cry    out,    Lo, 
I    trample    on    the    sun    and    your   God :    altogether   after 
a  foolish  and  womanish  manner;  Who  denies  it?    But  do 


Even  Virgil  is  expected  to  he  found  rigJit  on  enquiry.    591 

not  those  men  seem  to   you  to   be   such,   who,  in  matters      de 
whicli  they  understand  not,  either  wherefore,  or  altogether   tYtb" 
of  what  kind  they  are,  althoueh  like  to  matters  cast  in  the    cre- 

DENDI. 


way',  yet  to  such  as  understand  them  exact-  and  divine,  — 
rending  them  with  great  onset  of  speech  and  reproaches,  tibus. 
think  that  they  are  effecting  something,  because  the  unlearned  \^^^ 
ap)>laud    them  ?     Believe    me,  whatever  there   is    in    these 
Scriptures,  it  is  lofty  and  divine :  there  is  in  them  altogether 
truth,  and  a  system  of  teaching  most  suited  to  refresh  and 
renew  minds :    and   clearly  so   ordered  in  measure,  as  that 
there  is  no  one  but  may  draw  thence,  what  is  enough  for 
himself,  if  only   he   approach   to   draw   with   devotion   and 
piety,  as   true    religion   demands.      To   prove  this  to  you, 
needs  many  reasons   and  a  longer  discourse.     For  first  I 
must  so  treat  with  you  as  that  you  may  not  hate  the  authors 
themselves ;  next,  so  as  that  you  may  love  them  :  and  this  I 
must  treat  in  any  other  way,  rather  than  by  expounding  their 
meanings  and  words.     For  this  reason,  because  in  case  we 
hated  Virgil,  nay,  rather  in  case  we  loved  him  not,  before 
imderstanding  him,  by  the  commendation  of  our  forefathers, 
we  should  never  be  satisfied  on  those  questions  about  him 
without   number,  by   which    grammarians    are   wont    to    be 
disquieted  and  troubled ;  nor  should  we  listen  willingly  to 
one  who  solved  these  at  the  same  time  praising  him  ;  but 
should  favour  that  one  who  by  means  of  these  essayed  to 
shew  that   he   had   erred   and   doated.      But  now,  whereas 
many   essay   to   open  these,  and   each  in    a  different  way 
according  to  his  capacity,  we  applaud  these  in  preference, 
through  whose  exposition  the  poet  is  found  better,  who  is 
believed,  even  by  those  who  do   not  understand  him,  not 
only  in  nothing  to   have   offended,  but  also  to   have  sung 
nothing  but  what  was  w^orthy  of  praise.     So  that  in  some 
minute  question,  we  are  rather  angry  with  the  master  who 
fails,  and  has  not  what   to   answer,  than  think  him  silent 
through  any  fault  in  Maro.     And  now,  if,  in  order  to  defend 
himself,   he    should  wish   to   assert  a  fault   in   so   great  an 
author,  hardly  will  his  scholars  remain  with  him,  even  after 
they  have  paid  his  fee.     How  great  matter  were  it,  that  we 
should  shew  like  good  will  towards  them,  of  whom  it  hath 
been  confirmed  by  so  long  time  of  old  that  the  Holy  Spirit 


592      True  religion  for  the  souVs  good.    State  of  enquiry. 
DE     spake  by  them?     But,  forsooth,  we  youths  of  the  greatest 

U7  JLI-  .  ' 

TATE  understanding,    and    marvellous   searchers    out   of   reasons, 

CRE-   vsrithout   havinff   at   least   unrolled    these    writings,    without 
DENDI.  .  °  .  .  °  ' 

having  sought  teachers,  without   having  somewhat   chided 

our  own  dulness,  lastly,  without  having  yielded  our  heart 
2  medio- even  in  a  measure^  to  those  who  have  willed  that  writings  of 
en  cor  e^i^-g  V\\iA  be  SO  long  read,  kept,  and  handled  through  the 
whole  world;  have  thought  that  nothing  in  them  is  to  be 
believed,  moved  by  the  speech  of  those  who  are  unfriendly 
and  hostile  to  them,  with  whom,  under  a  false  promise  of 
reason,  we  should  be  compelled  to  believe  and  cherish 
thousands  of  fables. 
vii.  14.  But  now  T  will  proceed  with  what  I  have  begun,  if  I 
can,  and  I  will  so  treat  with  you,  as  not  in  the  mean  wdiile  to 
lay  open  the  Catholic  Faith,  but,  in  order  that  they  may 
search  out  its  great  mysteries,  to  shew  to  those  who  have 
a  care  for  their  souls,  hope  of  divine  fruit,  and  of  the 
discerning  of  truth.  No  one  doubts  of  him  who  seeks  true 
religion,  either  that  he  already  believes  that  there  is  an 
immortal  soul  for  that  religion  to  profit,  or  that  he  also 
wishes  to  find  that  very  thing  in  this  same  religion.  There- 
foi'e  all  religion  is  for  the  sake  of  the  soul ;  for  howsoever  the 
nature  of  the  body  may  be,  it  causes  no  care  or  anxiety, 
especially  after  death,  to  him,  whose  soul  possesses  that 
whereby  it  is  blessed.  For  the  sake  of  the  soul,  therefore, 
either  alone  or  chiefly,  hath  true  religion,  if  there  be  any 
such,  been  appointed.  But  this  soul,  (T  will  consider  for 
what  reason,  and  I  confess  the  matter  to  be  most  obscure,) 
yet  errs,  and  is  foolish,  as  we  see,  until  it  attain  to  and 
perceive  wisdom,  and  perhaps  this  very  [wisdom]  is  true 
religion.  I  am  not,  am  I,  sending  you  to  fables .?  I  am  not, 
am  I,  forcing  you  to  believe  rashly  }  I  say  that  our  soul 
entangled  and  sunk  in  error  and  folly  seeks  the  way  of  truth, 
if  there  be  any  such.  If  this  be  not  your  case,  pardon  me, 
I  pray,  and  share  with  me  your  wisdom;  but  if  you  recognise 
in  yourself  what  I  say,  let  us,  I  entreat,  together  seek  the 
truth. 

15.  Put  the  case  that  we  have  not  as  yet  heard  a  teacher 
of  any  religion.  Lo  we  have  undertaken  a  new  matter  and 
business.     We  must  seek,  I  suppose,  them  who  profess  this 


Many  study  Rhetoric  on  receiced  principles ;  few  perfect.  593 

matter,  if  it  liave   any  existence.     Suppose   that   we  have     de 
found    different    persons    holding    different    opinions,    and  ^^'^g' 
through  their  difference  of  opinions  seeking  to  draw  persons    cre- 
each  one  to  himself:  but  that,  in  the  mean  wliile,  there  are  ^ — '■ — '- 


are 


certain  preeminent  from  being  much  spoken  of,  and  from 
having  possession  of  nearly  all  peoples.  Whether  these  hold 
the  truth,  is  a  great  question :  but  ought  we  not  to  make  full 
trial  of  them  first,  in  order  that,  so  long  as  we  err,  being 
as  we  are  men,  we  may  seem  to  err  with  the  human  race 
itself? 

16.  But  it  will  be  said,  the  truth  is  with  some  'iQW  \ 
therefore  you  already  know  what  it  is,  if  you  know  with 
whom  it  is.  Said  I  not  a  little  above,  that  we  were  in 
search  of  it  as  unlearned  men  ?  But  if  from  the  very  force 
of  truth  you  conjecture  that  few  possess  it,  but  know  not  who 
they  are ;  what  if  it  is  thus,  that  there  are  so  few  who  know 
the  truth,  as  that  they  hold  the  multitude  by  their  authority, 
whence  the  small  number  may  set  itself  free,  and,  as  it  were, 
strain  itself  forth  into  those  secrets  ?  Do  we  not  see  how  few  i  eli- 
attain  the  highest  eloquence,  whereas  through  the  whole  1" 
world  the  schools  of  rhetoricians  are  resounding  with  troops  of 
young  men  ?  What,  do  they,  as  many  as  desire  to  turn  out  good 
orators,  alarmed  at  the  multitude  of  the  unlearned,  think  that 
they  are  to  bestow  their  labour  on  the  orations  of  Csecilius, 
or  Emcius,  rather  than  those  of  Tuilius?  All  aim  at  these, 
which  are  confirmed  by  authority  of  our  forefathers.  Crowds 
of  unlearned  persons  essay  to  learn  the  same,  which  by  the 
few  learned  are  received  as  to  be  learned :  yet  very  few 
attain,  yet  fewer  practise,  the  very  fewest  possible  become 
famous.  What,  if  true  rehgion  be  some  such  thing?  What 
if  a  multitude  of  unlearned  persons  attend  the  Churches,  and 
yet  that  be  no  proof,  that  therefore  no  one  is  made  perfect 
by  these  mysteries  ?  And  yet,  if  they  who  studied  eloquence 
were  as  few  as  the  few  who  are  eloquent,  our  parents  would 
never  believe  that  we  ought  to  be  committed  to  such  masters. 
Whereas,  then,  we  have  been  called  to  these  studies  by  a 
multitude,  which  is  numerous  in  that  portion  of  it  which  is 
made  up  of  the  unlearned,  so  as  to  become  enamoured  of 
that  which  few  can  attain  unto;  why  are  we  unwilling  to 
be  in  the  same  case  in  religion,  which  perhaps  we  despise 

Q  q 


594    A  teacher  must  be  sought  to  know  what  Religion  is. 

DE     with  great  danger  to  our  soul  ?    For  if  the  truest  and  purest 

tate'  worship  of  God,  although  it  be   found  with  a  few,  be  yet 

^^^'    found  with  those,  with  whom  a  multitude,  albeit  wrapped  up 

' — " — in   lusts,   and   removed    far  from    purity   ot    understanding, 

agrees ;  (and  who  can  doubt  that  this  may  happen  ?)  I  ask, 

if  one  were  to  charge  us  with   rashness  and  folly,  that  we 

seek  not  diligently  with  them  who  teach  it,  that,  which  we 

are  oreatly  anxious  to  discover,  what  can  we  answer?    [Shall 

we  say,]  I  was  deterred  by  numbers  ?    Why  from  the  pursuit 

of  liberal  arts,  which  hardly  bring  any  profit  to  this  present 

life ;    why   from   search   after  money  ?    Why  from   attaining 

nnto  honour ;  why,  in  fine,  from  gaining  and  keeping  good 

health;    lastly,   why   from    the   very   aim    at   a    happy  life; 

whereas    all    are    engaged     in   these,  few   excel;    were  you 

deterred  by  no  numbers  ? 

17.  '  But  they  seemed  there  to  make  absurd  statements.'  On 
whose  assertion  ?  Forsooth  on  that  of  enemies,  for  whatever 
cause,  for  whatever  reason,  for  this  is  not  now  the  question, 
still  enemies.  Upon  reading,  I  found  it  so  of  myself.  Is  it 
so  ?  Without  having  received  any  instruction  in  poetry,  you 
would  not  dare  to  essay  to  read  Terentianus  Maurus  without 
a  master :  Asper,  Cornutus,  Donatus,  and  others  without 
number  are  needed,  that  any  poet  whatever  may  be  under- 
stood, whose  strains  seem  to  court  even  the  applause  of  the 
theatre  ;  do  you  in  the  case  of  those %ooks,  which,  however 
they  may  be,  yet  by  the  confession  of  well-nigh  the  whole 
human  race  are  commonly  reported  to  be  sacred  and  full  of 
divine  things,  rush  upon  them  without  a  guide,  and  dare  to 
deliver  an  opinion  on  them  without  a  teacher;  and,  if  there 
meet  you  any  matters,  which  seem  absurd,  do  not  accuse 
rather  your  own  dulness,  and  mind  decayed  by  the  cor- 
ruption of  this  world,  such  as  is  that  of  all  that  are  foolish, 
than  those  [books]  which  haply  cannot  be  understood  by  such 
persons !  You  should  seek  some  one  at  once  pious  and  learned, 
or  who  by  consent  of  many  was  said  to  be  such,  that  you  might 
be  both  bettered  by  his  advice,  and  instructed  by  his  learning. 
Was  he  not  easy  to  find  ?  He  should  be  searched  out  with 
pains.  Was  there  no  one  in  the  country  in  which  you  lived  ? 
What  cause  could  more  profitably  force  to  travel  ?  Was  he 
1  conti-  Quite  hidden,  or  did  he  not  exist  on  the  'continent?    One 

nenti        ■•■ 


Good  i/iatruclioH  in  Religion  uorlh  pai/is  and  risk.     595     , 

should  cross  the  sea.     If  across  the  sea  he  was  not  found  in     de 
any  place  near  lo  us,  you  should  proceed  even  as  far  as  those   tate' 
lands,  in  which  the  things  related  in  those  books  are  said  to    ^re- 

have  taken  place.     What,  Honoralus,  have  we   done  of  this 

kind  ?  And  yet  a  religion  perhaps  the  most  holy,  (for  as  yet 
I  am  speaking  as  though  it  were  matter  of  doubt,)  the  opinion 
whereof  hath  by  this  time  taken  possession  of  the  whole  world, 
we  wretched  boys  condemned  at  our  own  discretion  and 
sentence.  What  if  those  things  which  in  those  same  Scrip- 
tures seem  to  offend  some  unlearned  persons,  were  so  set 
there  for  this  purpose,  tlmt  when  things  were  read  of  such 
as  are  abhorrent  from  the  feeling  of  ordinary  men,  not  to 
say  of  wise  and  holy  men,  we  might  with  much  more 
earnestness  seek  the  hidden  meaning.  Perceive  you  not 
how  the  Catamite  of  the  Bucolics,  for  whom  the  rough  Virg. 
shepherd  gushed  forth  into  tears,  men  essay  to  interpret,  and  ' 

affirm  that  the  boy  Alexis,  on  whom  Plato  also  is  said  to 
have  composed  a  love  strain,  hath  some  great  meaning  or 
other,  but  escapes  the  judgment  of  the  unlearned;  whereas 
without  any  sacrilege  a  poet  however  rich  may  seem  to  have 
published  wanton  songs  ? 

18.  But  in  truth  was  there  either  decree  of  any  law,  or 
power  of  gainsayers,  or  vile  character  of  persons  consecrated, 
or  shameful  report,  or  newness  of  institution,  or  hidden 
profession,  to  recal  us  from,  and  forbid  us,  the  search? 
There  is  nothing  of  these.  All  laws  divine  and  human  allow 
us  to  seek  the  Catholic  Faith ;  but  to  hold  and  exercise  it  is 
allowed  us  at  any  rate  by  human  law,  even  if  so  long  as  we 
ai-e  in  error  there  be  a  doubt  concerning  divine  law  ;  no 
enemy  alarms  our  weakness,  (although  truth  and  the  salvation 
of  the  soul,  in  case  being  diligently  sought  it  be  not  found 
where  it  may  with  most  safety,  ought  to  be  sought  at  any 
risk)  ;  the  degrees  of  all  ranks  and  powers  most  devotedly 
minister  to  this  divine  worship  ;  the  name  of  religion  is  most 
honourable  and  most  famous.  What,  I  pray,  hinders  to 
search  out  and  discuss  with  pious  and  careful  enquiry, 
whether  there  be  here  that  which  it  must  needs  be  few  know 
and  guard  in  entire  purity,  although  the  good-will  and 
affection  of  all  nations  conspire  in  its  favour  ? 

19.  The  case  standing  thus,  suppose,  as  I  said,  that  we  are 

Q  q2 


596         Prima  facie  claims  of  the  Catholic  Church. 
DE     now  for  the  first  time  seeking  unto  what  religion  we  shall 


UTtLI- 
TATE 


deliver  up    our    souls,   for  it    to   cleanse  and  renew   them ; 
CRK-  without   doubt   we    must  begin  with  the   Catholic   Church. 


For  by  this  time  there  are  more  Christians,  than  if  the 
Jews  and  idolaters  be  added  together.  But  of  these  same 
Christians,  whereas  there  are  several  heresies,  and  all  wish 
to  appear  Catholics,  and  call  all  others  besides  themselves 
heretics,  there  is  one  Church,  as  all  allow :  if  you  consider 
the  whole  world,  more  full  filled  in  numljer  ;  but,  as  they  who 
know  affirm,  more  pure  also  in  truth  than  all  the  rest.  But  the 
question  of  truth  is  another ;  but,  what  is  enough  for  such  as 
are  in  search,  there  is  one  Catholic,  to  which  different  heresies 
give  different  names,  whereas  they  themselves  are  called  each 
by  names  of  their  own,  which  they  dare  not  deny.  From 
which  may  be  understood,  by  judgment  of  umpires  who  are 
hindered  by  no  favour,  to  which  is  to  be  assigned  the  name 
Catholic,  which  all  covet.  But,  that  no  one  may  suppose 
that  it  is  to  be  made  matter  of  over  garrulous  or  unnecessary 
discussion,  this  is  at  any  rate  one,  in  which  human  laws 
themselves  also  are  in  a  certain  way  Christian.  I  do  not 
wish  any  prejudgment  to  be  formed  from  this  fact,  but  I 
account  it  a  most  favourable  commencement  for  enquiry. 
For  we  are  not  to  fear  lest  the  true  worship  of  God,  resting 
on  no  strength  of  its  own,  seem  to  need  to  be  supported  by 
them  whom  it  ought  to  support :  but,  at  any  rate,  it  is  perfect 
happiness,  if  the  truth  may  be  there  found,  where  it  is  most 
safe  both  to  search  for  it  and  to  hold  it :  in  case  it  cannot, 
then  at  length,  at  whatever  risk,  we  must  go  and  search  some 
other  where. 
viii.  20.  Having  then  laid  down  these  principles,  Avhich,  as  I 
think,  are  so  just  that  I  ought  to  win  this  cause  before  you, 
let  who  will  be  my  adversary,  I  will  set  forth  to  you,  as  I  am 
able,  what  way  I  followed,  when  I  was  searching  after  true 
religion  in  that  spirit,  in  which  T  have  now  set  forth  that  it 
ought  to  be  sought.  For  ujjon  leaving  you  and  crossing  the 
sea,  now  delaying  and  hesitating,  what  I  ought  to  hold,  what 
to  let  go  ;  which  delay  rose  upon  me  every  day  the  more, 
from  the  time  that  I  was  a  hearer  of  that  man'',  whose  coming 
was  promised   to  us,  as   you    know,  as  if  from  heaven,  to 

^  i.  e.  Faustus.    v.  Conf.  b.  v.  §.  vi.  al.  10. 


UTILI- 
TATE 


DENDI. 


How  the  IVriter  Jiimself  became  a  Catechumen.      597 

explain  all  things  which  moved  ns,  and  found  him,  with  the     de 
exception  of  a  certain  eloquence,  such  as  the  rest ;  being  now 
settled    in   Italy,  I  reasoned    and    deliberated    greatly  with    cre 
mvself,  not  whether  I  should    continue    in    that    sect,  into 
which  1  was  sorry  that  I  had  fallen,  but  in  what  way  I  was 
to  find  the  truth,  my  sighs  through  love  of  which  are  known 
to  no   one   better  than    to    yourself.      Often   it    seemed   to 
me   that   it   could    not   be  found,  and    huge  waves  of  my 
thoughts   would    roll    toward    deciding   in    favour    of    the 
Academics.     Often  again,  with  what  power  I  had,  looking 
into  the  human  soul,  with  so  much  life,  with  so  much  in- 
telligence, with  so  much  clearness,  I  thought  that  the  truth 
lay  not  hid,  save  that  in  it  the  way  of  search  lay  hid,  and 
that    this    same    way    must   be    taken    from    some    divine 
authority.     It  remained  to  enquire  what  was  that  authority, 
where  in  so  great  dissensions  each  promised  that  he  would 
deliver  it.     Thus  there  met  me  a  wood,  out  of  which  there 
was  no  way,  Ayhich  I  was  very  loath  to  be  involved  in  :    and 
amid  these  things,  without  any  rest,  my  mind  was  agitated 
through  desire  of  finding  the  truth.     However,  I  continued 
to  unsew  myself  more   and  more   from  those  whom  now  I 
had  proposed  to  leave.     But  there  remained  nothing  else,  in 
so  great  dangers,  than  with  words  full  of  tears  and  sorrow  to 
entreat  the  Divine  Providence  to  help  me.     And  this  I  was 
content  to  do :    and  now  certain  disputations  of  the  Bishop 
of  Milan"  had  almost  moved  me  to  desire,  not  without  some 
hope,    to    enquire    into    many    things    concerning   the    Old 
Testament  itself,  which,  as  you  know,  we  used  to  view  as 
accursed,  having  been  ill  commended  to  us.     And  I  had  de- 
cided to  be  a  Catechumen  in  the  Church,  unto  which  I  had 
been  delivered  by  my  parents,  until  such   time  as  I  should 
either  find  what  I  wished,  or  should  persuade  myself  that  it 
needed  not  to  be  sought.     Therefore  had  there  been  one  who 
could  teach  me,  he  would  find  me  at  a  very  critical  moment 
most  fervently  disposed  and  very  apt  to  learn.    If  you  see  that 
you  too  have  been  long  affected  in  this  way,  therefore,  and  with 
a  like  care  for  thy  soul,  and  if  now  you  seem  to  yourself  to  have 
been  tossed  to  and  fro  enough,  and  wish  to  put  an  end  to 
labours  of  this  kind,  follow  the  pathway  of  Catholic  teaching, 

*  i.  e.  S.  Ambrose,    v.  Conf.  b.  v.  §.  xiii.  xiv,  al.  23.  24.  25. 


DENDI 

ix 


598  Heretics  distlmguinhed  by  promising  reasons  for  all  things. 

DE  which  hath  flowed  down  from  Christ  Himself  through  the 
PATE  Apostles  even  unto  us, and  will  hereafter  flow  down  to  posterity. 
CRE-  21.  This,  you  Avill  say,  is  ridiculous,  wliereas  all  profess 
to  hold  and  teach  (his :  all  heretics  make  this  profession, 
I  cannot  deny  it ;  but  so,  as  that  they  promise  to  those 
whom  they  entice,  that  they  will  give  them  a  reason  con- 
cerning matters  the  most  obscm-e  :  and  on  this  account 
chiefly  charge  the  Catholic  [Church],  that  they  who  come  to 
her  are  enjoined  to  believe ;  but  they  make  it  their  boast, 
that  they  impose  not  a  yoke  of  believing,  but  open  a  fount  of 
teaching.  You  answer,  What  could  be  said,  that  should 
])ertain  more  to  their  praise  ?  It  is  not  so.  For  this  they  do, 
without  being  endued  with  any  strength,  but  in  order  to 
conciliate  to  themselves  a  crowd  by  the  name  of  reason: 
on  the  promise  of  which  the  human  soul  naturally  is  pleased, 
and,  without  considering  its  own  strength  and  stale  of  health, 
by  seeking  the  food  of  the  sound,  which  is  ill  entrusted  save 
to  such  as  are  in  health,  rushes  upon  the  poisons  of  them 
who  deceive.  For  true  religion,  unless  those  things  be 
believed,  which  each  one  after,  if  he  shall  conduct  himself 
well  and  shall  be  worthy,  attains  unto  and  understands,  and 
altogether  without  a  certain  weighty  power  of  authority,  can 
in  no  way  be  rightly  entered  upon. 

•22.  But  }>erhaps  you  seek  to  have  some  reason  given  you 
on  this  very  point,  such  as  may  persuade  you,  that  you 
ought  not  to  be  taught  by  reason  before  faith.  Wliich 
may  easily  be  done,  if  only  you  make  yourself  a  fair  hearer. 
But,  in  order  that  it  may  be  done  suitably,  I  wish  you  as  it 
were  to  answer  m}-  questions ;  and,  first,  to  tell  me,  why  you 
think  that  one  ought  not  to  believe.  Because,  you  say, 
credulity,  from  which  men  are  called  credulous,  in  itself, 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  certain  fault :  otherwise  we  should  not 
use  to  cast  this  as  a  tenn  of  reproach.  For  if  a  suspicious 
man  is  in  fault,  in  that  he  suspects  things  not  ascertained; 
how  much  more  a  credulous  man,  who  herein  diflers  from  a 
suspicious  man,  that  the  one  allows  some  doubt,  the  other 
none,  in  matters  which  he  knows  not.  In  the  mean  while 
I  accept  tliis  opinion  and  distinction.  But  you  know  that 
we  are  not  wont  to  call  a  person  even  curious  without  some 
reproach  ;    but    we    call    him    studious    even    with    jn-aise. 


Definitions  of '  curiosity^  '  sfudioiisness,'  S^'c.  corrected.  599 

Wherefore  observe,  if  you  please,  what  seems  to  you  to  be     de 
the  diflerence  between  these  two.     This  surely,  you  answer,   t^^e" 
that,  although  both  be  led  by  great  desire  to  know,  yet  the    ci'e- 

,-.,.,  .  ,    .  ,  DENDI. 

curious  man  seeks  alter  things  that  no  way  pertain  to  him,  but 

the  studious  man,  on  the  contrary,  seeks  after  what  pertain 
to  him.     But,  because  we  deny  not  that  a  man's  wife  and 
children,  and  their  health,  pertain   unto  him ;    if  any  one, 
being  settled  abroad,  were  to  be  careful  to  ask  all  comers, 
how  his  wife  and  children    are    and    fare,  he  is  surely  led 
by  great  desire   to   know,  and   yet  we    call   not   this    man 
studious,  who  both  exceedingly  wishes  to  know,  and  that  (in) 
matters  which   very  greatly  pertain   unto   him.     Wherefore 
you  now  understand  that  the  definition  of  a  studious  person 
falters  in   this  point,  that  every  studious  person  wishes  to 
know  what  pertain  to  himself,  and  yet  not  every  one,  who 
makes  this  his  business,  is  to  be  called  studious;  but  he  who 
with  all  earnestness  seeks  those  things  which  pertain  unto 
the  liberal   culture   and   adornment   of  the   mind.      Yet  we 
rightly  call  him  one  who  studies',  especially  if  we  add  what^stu- 
he  studies*   to  hear.     For  we  may  call  him   even  studious   ^°  ^"^ 
of  his  own    (family)  if  he  love   only  his   own   (family),  we 
do  not  however,  without  some  addition,  think  him  worthy  of 
the    common    name    of  the    studious.      But    one   who    was 
desuous   to   hear   how  his   family  were   I   should  not  call 
studious    of  hearing,   unless    taking   pleasure    in    the    good 
report,  he  should  wish  to  hear  it  again  and  again  :    but  one 
who  studied,  even  if  only  once.     Now  return  to  the  curious 
person,  and  tell  me,  if  any  one  should  be  willing  to  listen  to 
some  tale,  such  as  would  no  way  profit  him,  that  is,  of  matters 
that  pertain  not  to  him:  and  that  not  in  an  offensive  way  and 
frequently,  but    very    seldom    and    with    great    moderation, 
either  at  a  feast,  or  in  some  company,  or  meeting  of  any 
kind  ;  would  he  seem  to  you  ciuious  ?     I  think  not :    but  at 
any  rate  he  would  certainly  seem  to  have  a  care  for  that 
matter,  to  which  he  was  willing  to  listen.     Wherefore  the 
definition  of  a  curious  person  also  must  be  corrected  by  the 
same  rule  as  that  of  a  studious  person.     Consider  therefore 
whether    the    former    statements    also    do    not    need    to    be 
corrected.     For  why  should  not  both  he,  who  at  some  time 
suspects  something,  be  unworthy  the  name  of  a  suspicious 


600       iVo  credulUii  in  believing  Religion  on  autJiorittj. 

DE     person ;    and  he  who  at  some  time  beheves  something,  of 

^a'te'  ^  credulous  person  ?     Thus  as  there  is  very  great  difference 

CRE-   between   one  who    studies    any  matter,  and  the   absohitely 

^studious;    and    again   between   him  who    hath  a  care   and 

the  curious ;  so  is  there  between  him  who  believes  and  the 

credulous. 

^'         23.    But   you  will  say,  consider   now  whether  we    ought 

to  believe  in  religion.     For,  allhough  we  grant  that  it  is  one 

thing  to  believe,  another  to  be  credulous,  it  does  not  follow 

that  it  is  no  fault  to  believe  in  matters  of  religion.    For  what 

if  it  be  a  fault  both  to  believe  and  to  be  credulous,  as  (it  is) 

both  to  be  drunk  and  to  be  a  drunkard  ?    Now  he  who  thinks 

this  certain,  it  seems  to  me  can  have  no  friend ;  for,  if  it  is 

base  to  believe  any  thing,  either  he  acts  basely  who  believes 

a  friend,   or  in   nothing  believing  a  friend  I  see  not  how 

he  can  call  cither  him  or  himself  a  friend.     Here  perhaps 

you  may  say,  I  grant  that  we  must   believe  something  at 

some  time  ;  now  make  plain,  how  in  the  case  of  religion  it 

be  not  base  to  believe  before  one  knows.     I  will  do  so,  if 

I  can.    Wherefore  I  ask  of  you,  which  you  esteem  the  graver 

fault,  to  deliver  religion  to  one  unworthy,  or  to  believe  what 

is  said  by  them  who  deliver  it.     If  you  understand  not  whom 

I  call  unworthy,  I  call  him,  who  approaches  with  feigned 

breast.     You  grant,  as  I  suppose,  that  it  is  more  blameable 

to  unfold  imto  such  an  one  whatever  holy  secrets  there  are, 

than  to  believe  religious  men   affirming  any  thing  on  the 

matter  of  religion  itself.     For  it  would  be  unbecoming  you 

to   make   any  other  answer.      Wherefore  now  suppose  him 

present,  who  is  about  to  deliver  to  you  a  religion,  in  what 

way  shall  you  assure  him,  that  you  approach  with  a  true 

mind,  and  that,  so   far  as  this   matter   is    concerned,  there 

is  in  you  no  fraud  or  feigning  ?     You  will   say,  your  own 

good  conscience  that  you  are  no  way  feigning,  asserting  this 

with  words  as  strong  as  you  can,  but  yet  with  words.     For 

you  cannot  lay  open  man  to  man  the  hiding  places  of  your 

soul,  so  that  you  may  be   thoroughly  known.      But   if  he 

shall  say,  Lo,  I  believe  you,  but  is  it  not  more  fair  that  you 

also  believe  me,  when,  if  I  hold  any  truth,  you  are  about  to 

receive,  I  about  to  give,  a  benefit  ?  what  will  you  answer, 

save  that  you  must  believe  ? 


Learning  hy  faith  needful  to  some,  no  harm  to  any.    601 

24.  But  you  say,  Were  it  not  better  that  you  should  give     de 
me  a  reason,  that,  wherever  that  shall  lead  me,  I  may  follow  '^"^e' 
without   any  rashness?    Perhaps  it   were:    but,  it  being  so    cre- 

great  a  matter,  that  you  are  by  reason  to  come  to  the  know- 

ledge  of  God,  do  you  think  that  all  are  qualified  to  under- 
stand the  reasons,  by  which  the  human  soul  is  led  to  know 
God,  or  many,  or  few  ?  Few  I  think,  you  say.    Do  you  believe 
that  you  are  in  the  number  of  these  }    It  is  not  for  me,  you 
say,  to  answer  this.     Therefore  you  think  it  is  for  him  to 
believe  you  in  this  also:  and  this  indeed  he  does:  only  do 
you  remember,  that  he  hath  already  twice  believed  you  saying 
things  uncertain;  that  you  are  unwilling  to  believe  him  even 
once  admonishing  you  in   a  religious  spirit.     But  suppose 
that  it  is  so,  and  that  you  approach  with  a  true  mind  to 
receive  religion,  and  that  you  are  one  of  few  men  in  such 
sense  as  to  be  able  to  take  in  the  reasons  by  which  the  Divine  vis 
Power  is  brought  into  certain  knowledge;  what?  do  you  think 
that  other  men,  who  are  not  endued  with  so  serene  a  disposi- 
tion, are  to  be  denied  religion?  or  do  you  think  that  they  are 
to  be  led  gradually  by  certain  steps  unto  those  highest  inner 
recesses  ?    You  see  clearly  which  is  the  more  religious.     For 
you  cannot  think   that  any  one  whatever  in   a  case   where 
he  desires  so  great  a  thing,  ought  by  any  means  to  be  aban- 
doned or  rejected.     But  do  you  not  think,  that,  unless  he  do 
first  believe  that  he  shall  attain  unto  that  which  he  pui-poses; 
and  do  yield   his  mind  as  a  suppliant;    and,  submitting  to 
certain  great  and  necessary  precepts,  do  by  a  certain  course 
of  life  throughly  cleanse  it,  that  he  will  not  otherwise  attain 
the  things  that  are  purely  true  ?   Certainly  you  think  so.  What, 
then,  is  the  case  of  those,  (of  whom  I  already  believe  you  to 
be  one,)  who  are  able  most  easily  to  receive  divine  secrets  by 
sure  reason,  will  it,  I  ask,  be  to  them  any  hindrance  at  all,  if 
they  so  come  as  they  who  at  the  first  believe  ?     I  think  not. 
But   yet,   you    say,   what   need    to    delay    them  ?     Because 
although  they  ^^^ll  in  no  way  harm  themselves  by  what  is 
done,  yet  they  will  harm  the  rest  by  the  precedent.     For 
there  is  hardly  one  who  has  a  just  notion  of  his  own  power: 
but  he  who  has  a  less  notion  must  be  roused  ;    he  who  has 
a  greater  notion  must  be  checked:  that  neither  the  one  be 
broken  by  despair,  nor  the  other  cairied  headlong  by  rash- 


(j02  Even  the  teacher  has  to  believe  his  pupil. 

DE  ness.  And  this  is  easily  done,  if  even  they,  who  are  able  to 
TATE-  ^J'  (that  they  be  not  alluring  the  occasion  of  any  into 
CUE-    danger,)  are  forced  for  a  short  time  to  walk  where  the  rest 

'  also  may  walk  with  safety.     This  is  the  forethought  of  true 

religion:  this  the  command  of  God:  this  what  hath  been 
handed  down  from  our  blessed  foi'efalhers,  this  what  hath 
been  preserved  even  unto  us:  to  wish  to  distrust  and  overthrow 
this,  is  nothing  else  than  to  seek  a  sacrilegious  way  unto 
true  religion.  And  whoso  do  this,  not  even  if  what  they  wish 
be  granted  to  them  are  they  able  to  arrive  at  the  point  at 
which  they  aim.  For  whatever  kind  of  excellent  genius  they 
have,  unless  God  be  present,  they  creep  on  the  ground. 
But  He  is  then  present,  if  they,  who  are  aiming  at  God, 
have  a  regard  for  their  fellow  men.  Than  which  step  there 
can  be  found  nothing  more  sure  Heavenward.  I  for  my  part 
cannot  resist  this  reasoning,  for  how  can  I  say  that  we  are  to 
believe  nothing  without  certain  knowledge?  whereas  both 
there  can  be  no  friendship  at  all,  unless  there  be  believed 
something  which  cannot  be  proved  by  some  reason,  and 
often  stewards,  wdio  are  slaves,  are  trusted  by  their  masters 
without  any  fault  on  their  part.     But  in  religion  what  can 

antis-  there  be  more  unfair  than  that  the  ministers  of  God  believe 
us  when  we  promise  an  unfeigned  mind,  and  we  are  unwilling 
to  believe  them  when  they  enjoin  us  any  thing.  Lastly, 
what  way  can  there  be  more  healthful,  than  for  a  man  to 
become  fitted  to  receive  the  truth  by  believing  those  things, 
which  have  been  appointed  by  God  to  serve  for  the  previous 
culture  and  treatment  of  the  mind?  Or,  if  you  be  already 
altogether  fitted,  rather  to  make  some  little  circuit  where  it 
is  safest  to  tread,  than  both  to  cause  yourself  danger,  and 
to  be  a  precedent  for  rashness  to  other  men  ? 
XI.  25.  Wherefore  it  now-  remains  to  consider,  in  what  manner 
we  ought  not  to  follow  these,  who  profess  that  they  will 
lead  by  reason.  For  how  we  may  without  fault  follow  those 
who  bid  us  to  believe,  hath  been  already  said :  but  unto 
these  who  make  promises  of  reason  certain  think  that  they 
come,  not  only  without  blame,  but  also  with  some  praise : 
but  it  is  not  so.  For  there  are  t^vo  (classes  of)  persons, 
praiseworthy  in  religion;  one  of  those  who  have  already  found, 
whom  also  we  must  needs  judge  most  blessed ;  another  of 


tites 


Understanding,  belief,  opinion,  distinguished.        603 
those  who  are   seeking  with  all  earnestness  and  in  the  right     de 

?  11-  •  .1         UTILI- 

way.     The  first,  therefore,  are  already  in  very  possession,  the   ^^^e 
other  on  the  way,  yet  on  that  way  whereby  they  are  most  ^^^^^^ 

sure  to  arrive  ^    There  are  three  other  kinds  of  men  altogether ■ 

to  be  disapproved  of  and  detested.     One  is  of  those  who  hold 
an  opinion,  that  is,  of  those  who  think  that  they  know  whatopiaan- 
they  know  not.     Another  is  of  those  who  are  indeed  aware 
that  they  know  not,  but  do  not  so  seek  as  to  be  able  to  find. 
A  third  is  of  those  v,ho  neither  think  that  they  know,  nor 
wish    to    seek.      There    are    also    three    things,    as   it   were 
bordering  upon  one  another,  in  the  minds  of  men  well  worth 
distinguishing ;  understanding,  belief,  opinion.     And,  if  these 
be    considered   by  themselves,  the   first   is   always  without 
fault,  the  second  sometimes  with  fault,  the  third  never  with- 
out   fault.     For    the    understanding    of  matters   great,    and 
honourable,  and    even   divine,  is    most  blessed e.     But   the 
understanding    of    things    unnecessary    is    no    injury;    but 
perhaps  the  learning  was  an  injury,  in  that  it  took  up  the 
lime  of  necessarv  matters.     But  on  the  matters  themselves 


f  cf.  Retract,  b.  i.  ch.  14.  2.    "  I  also 
said,  '  For  there  are  two  &c.'    In  these 
words  of  mine  if '  those  who  hate  already 
found,'  whom  we  have  said  to  be  '  now 
in  possession,'  are  in  such  sort  under- 
stood to  be  '  most  happy,'  as  that  they 
are  so  not  in  this  life,  but  in  that  we 
hope  for,  and   aim   at  by  the  path  of 
faith,  the  meaning  is  free  from  error: 
for  they  are  to  be  judged  to  have  found 
that   which  is  to  be  sought,  who    are 
now  there,  whither  we  by  seeking  and 
believing,  that  is  by  keeping  the  path 
of  faith,  do  seek  to  come.     But  if  they 
are  thought  to  be  or  to  have  been  such 
in  this  life,  that  seems  to  me  not  to  be 
true  :  not  that  in  this  life  no  truth  at  all 
can  be  found  that  can  be  discerned  by  the 
mind,  not  believed  on  faith  ;  but  because 
it  is  but  so  much,  what  there  is  of  it,  as 
not  to  make  men  '  most  blessed.'     For 
neither  is  that  which  the  Apostle  says, 
We  see  now  t 'trough  a  glass  in  a  riddle, 
and,  H  w  I  know  in  part,  (1  Cor.  13, 
12.)  incapable  of  being  discerned  by  the 
mind.      It   is    discerned,    clearly,    but 
does   not  yet   make   us   most  blessed. 
For  that  makes  men  most  blessed  which 
he  saith,  hut  then  face  to  face,  and, 
then  I  shall  know  even  as  I  am  known. 
They  that  have  found  this,  they  are  to 
be  said  to  stand  in  possession  of  bliss, 


to    which   leads    that    path    of    faith 
which  we  keep,  and  whither  we  desire 
to  arrive  by  believing.     But  who  are 
those  most  blessed,  who  are  already  in 
that  possession  whither  this  path  leads, 
is  a  great  question.     And  for  the  holy 
Angels  indeed,  there  is  no  question  but 
they  be  there.    But  of  holy  men  already 
departed,  whether  so  much  may  yet  be 
said  of  them  as  that  they  stand  already 
in   that   possession,  is   fairly   made  a 
question.     For  they  are  already  freed 
from  the  corruptible  body  that  weigheth 
down  the  soul,  (Wisd.  9.)  but  they  still 
wait  for  the  redemption  of  their  body, 
(Rom.  8.)  and  their  flesh  resteth  in  hope, 
nor  is  yet  glorified  in  the  incorruption 
that  is  to  come.    (Ps.  1 6.)    But  whether 
for  all  that  they  are  none  the  less  quali- 
fied to  contemplate  the  truth  with  the 
eyes  of  the  heart,  as  it  is  said,  Face  to 
face,  there  is  not  space  to  discuss  here." 
g  cf.  Retract,  b.  i.  ch.  14.  2.    "  Also 
what  I  said,  '  for  to  know  great   and 
noble    and    even    divine    things,'    we 
should  refer  to  the  same  blessedness. 
For  in  this  life  whatsoever  there  be  of 
it  known  amounts  not  to  perfect  bliss, 
because  that  part  of  it  which   remains 
unknown  is  far  more  without  all  com- 
parison." 


604     Opinion  faulty^  error  of  taking  it  for  knowledge. 

IF  that  are  injuiious,  it  is  not  the  understanding,  but  the  doing 
tIte"^"  suffering  them,  that  is  wretched.  For  not,  in  case  any 
CRE-  understand  how  an  enemy  may  be  slain  without  danger  to 

— '■ ^'himself,    is    he    guilty    from    the    mere    understanding,   not 

the  wish  ;  and,  if  the  wish  be  absent,  what  can  be  called 
more  innocent  ?  But  belief  is  then  worthy  of  blame, 
when  either  any  thing  is  believed  of  God  which  is 
unworthy  of  Him,  or  any  thing  is  over  easily  believed  of 
man.  But  in  all  other  matters  if  any  believe  aught,  pro- 
vided he  understand  that  he  knows  it  not,  there  is  no  fault. 
For  I  believe  that  very  wicked  conspirators  were  formerly 
put  to  death  by  the  virtue  of  Cicero ;  but  this  I  not  only 
know  not,  but  also  I  know  for  certain  that  I  can  by  no 
means  know.  But  opinion  is  on  two  accounts  very  base  ; 
in  that  both  he  who  hath  persuaded  himself  that  he  already 
knows,  cannot  learn  ;  provided  only  it  may  be  learnt ;  and 
in  itself  rashness  is  a  sign  of  a  mind  not  well  disposed.  For 
even  if  any  suppose  that  he  know  what  I  said  of  Cicero, 
(although  it  be  no  hindrance  to  him  from  learning,  in  that 
the  matter  itself  is  incapable  of  being  gi'asped  by  any  know- 
ledge ;)  yet,  (in  that  he  understands  not  that  there  is  a  great 
difference,  whether  any  thing  be  grasped  by  sure  reason  of 
mind,  which  we  call  understanding,  or  whether  for  practical 
purposes  it  be  entrusted  to  common  fame  or  writing,  for 
posterity  to  believe  it,)  he  assuredly  errs,  and  no  error  is 
without  what  is  base.  What  then  we  understand,  we  owe 
to  reason  ;  what  we  believe,  to  authority  ;  what  we  have  an 
opinion  on,  to  error''.  But  every  one  who  understands  also 
believes,  and  also  every  one  who  has  an  opinion  believes; 
not  eveiy  one  who  believes  understands  ;  no  one  who  has  an 
opinion  understands.     Therefore    if  these    three    things  be 

h    cf.  Retract,  b.  i.  ch.  14.  3.  "  Anrl  of  suitable   witnesses.     For  when   we 

what  I  said,  '_that  there    is    a  great  speak  strictly  we  are  said  to  know  that 

difference  whether  any  thing  be  grasped  only    which   by  the   mind's  own  firm 

by  sure  reason  of  mind,  which  we  call  reason  we  comprehend.     But  when  we 

knowing,  or  whether  for  practical  pur-  speak  in  words  more  suited  to  common 

poses  it  be  entrusted  to  common  fame  use,  as  also  Divine  Scripture  speaketh, 

or  writing,  for  posterity  to  believe  it,'  we  should  not  hesitate  to  say  we  know 

and  presently   after,  '  what   therefore  both  what  we  have  perceived  with  our 

we  know,  we  owe  to  reason  ;    what  we  bodily  senses,   and  what  we  believe  of 

believe,  to  authority  ;'    is  not  to  be  so  trustworthy  witnesses,  whilst  however 

taken  as  that  in  conversation  we  should  between    one   and    the   other   we    are 

fear  to  say  we  '  know'  what  we  believe  aware  what  difference  exists." 


Knowledge  and  belief  good,  opinion  a  bad  thing.     605 

referred    unto  the  five  kinds  of  men,  which  we   mentioned     de 
a  little  above  ;    that  is,  two  kinds  to  be  approved,  which  we    tate" 
set  first,  and  three  that  remain  faulty  ;    we  find  that  the  first    cue- 

kind,  that  of  the  blessed,  believe  the  truth  itself;    but  the ' 

second  kind,  that  of  such  as  are  earnest  after,  and  lovers  of, 
the  truth,  believe  authority.  In  which  kinds,  of  the  two,  the 
act  of  belief  is  praiseworthy.  But  in  the  first  of  the  faulty 
kinds,  that  is,  of  tho.se  who  have  an  opinion  that  they  know 
•what  they  know  not,  there  is  an  altogether  faulty  credulity. 
The  other  two  kinds  that  are  to  be  disapproved  believe 
nothing,  both  they  wdio  seek  the  truth  despairing  of  finding 
it,  and  they  who  seek  it  not  at  all.  And  this  only  in  matters 
which  pertain  unto  any  system  of  teaching.  For  in  the  other 
business  of  life,  1  am  utterly  ignorant  by  what  means  a  man 
can  believe  nothing.  Although  in  the  case  of  those  also, 
they  who  say  that  in  practical  matters  they  follow  probabilities, 
would  seem  rather  to  be  unable  to  know  than  unable  to 
believe.  For  who  believes  not  what  he  approves'?  or  how  is'  probat 
what  they  follow  probable,  if  it  be  not  approved  ?  Wherefore 
there  may  be  two  kinds  of  such  as  oppose  the  truth  :  one  of 
those  who  assail  knowledge  alone,  not  faith  ;  the  other  of 
those  Avho  condemn  both  :  and  yet  again,  I  am  ignorant 
whether  these  can  be  found  in  matters  of  human  life.  These 
things  have  been  said,  in  order  that  we  might  understand, 
that,  in  retaining  faith,  even  of  those  things  which  as  yet  we 
comprehend  not,  we  are  set  free  from  the  rashness  of  such 
as  have  an  opinion.  For  they,  who  say  that  we  are  to 
believe  nothing  but  what  we  know,  are  on  their  guard  against 
that  one  name  '  opining V  \\hich  must  be  confessed  to  be^opina- 
base  and  very  wretched,  but,  if  they  consider  carefully  that*'°°"^ 
there  is  a  very  great  difference,  whether  one  think  that  he 
knows,  or  moved  by  some  authority  believe  that  which  he 
understands  that  he  knows  not,  surely  he  will  escape  the 
charge  of  error,  and  inhumanity,  and  pride. 

26.  For  I  ask,  if  what  is  not  known  must  not  be  believed,  xii. 
in  what  way  may  children  do  service  to  their  parents,  and 
love  with  mutual  affection  those  whom  they  believe  not  to  be 
their  parents  ?  For  it  cannot,  by  any  means,  be  known  by 
reason.  But  the  authority  of  the  mother  comes  in,  that  it  be 
believed  of  the  father;    but  of  the  mother  it  is  usually  not 


606       Belief  necensary  for  life.     Men  wise  or  foolish. 

DE  the  mother  that  is  believed,  but  midwives,  nurses,  servants. 
tate"  ^°^  ^^®5  from  whom  a  son  may  be  stolen  and  another  put  in 
CRB-   Jiis  place,  may  she  not   being   deceived   deceive  ?    Yet  we 

believe,  and  beheve  without  any  doubt,  what  we  confess  we 

cannot  know.  For  who  but  must  see,  that  unless  it  be  so, 
filial  affection,  the  most  sacred  bond  of  the  human  race,  is 
violated  by  extreme  pride  of  wickedness  ?  For  what  madman 
CA^en  would  think  him  to  be  blamed  who  discharged  the 
duties  that  were  due  to  those  whom  he  believed  to  be  his 
parents,  although  they  were  not  so  ?  Who,  on  the  other  hand, 
would  not  judge  him  to  deserve  banishment,  who  failed 
to  love  those  who  were  perhaps  his  true  parents,  through 
fear  lest  he  should  love  pretended.  Many  things  may  be 
alleged,  whereby  to  shew  that  nothing  at  all  of  human  society 
remains  safe,  if  we  shall  determine  to  believe  nothing,  which 

*  tenere  we  cannot  grasp  by  full  apprehension  ^ 

percep-  27.  But  now  hear,  what  1  trust  I  shall  by  this  time  more 
easily  persuade  you  of  In  a  matter  of  religion,  that  is,  of 
the  worship  and  knowledge  of  God,  they  are  less  to  be 
followed,  who  forbid  us  to  believe,  making  most  ready 
professions  of  reason.  For  no  one  doubts  that  all  men 
are  either  fools  or  wise.  But  now  I  call  wise,  not  clever 
and  gifted  men,  but  those,  in  whom  there  is,  so  much  as 
may  be  in  man,  the  knowledge  of  man  himself  and  of  God 
most  surely  received,  and  a  life  and  manners  suitable  to  that 
knowledge;  but  all  others,  whatever  be  their  skill  or  want  of 
skill,  whatever  their  manner  of  life,  whether  to  be  approved 
or  disapproved,  I  would   account  in   the   number  of  fools. 


•  cf.  Retract,  b.  i.  ch.  14.  4.  "  Also  man  nature  admitted  of  no  middle  state 
what  I  said,  '  No  one  doubts  that  all  between  folly  and  wisdom.'  I  also  had 
men  are  either  fools  or  wise,' may  seem  infants  in  view,  whom  though  we  eon- 
contrary  to  what  is  read  in  my  third  fess  to  bear  with  them  original  sin,  j'et 
book  On  Free  Will,  (c.  24.)  '  as  though  we  cannot  properly  call  either  wise  or 
human  nature  admitted  of  no  middle  foolish,  not  as  yet  using  free  will 
state  between  folly  and  wisdom.'  But  either  well  or  ill.  But  now  I  said  that 
that  is  said  when  the  question  was  men  were  either  wise  or  foolish,  mean- 
about  the  first  man,  whether  he  was  ing  those  to  be  understood  who  are 
made  wise,  or  foolish,  or  neither :  since  already  using  reason,  by  which  they 
we  could  in  no  wise  call  him  foolish,  are  distinguished  from  cattle,  so  as  to 
who  was  made  without  fault,  since  folly  be  men  :  as  we  say,  that  '  all  men  wish 
is  a  great  fault;  and  how  we  could  call  to  be  happy.'  For  can  we  in  so  true 
him  wise,  who  was  capable  of  being  led  and  manifest  a  statement  be  in  fear  of 
astray,  did  not  appear.  So  for  shortness  being  supposed  to  mean  infants,  who 
I  thought  well  to  say,  '  as  though  hu-  have  not  yet  the  power  of  so  wishing?" 


The  foolish  happiest  ivhen  guided  by  the  wise.       607 

And,  this  being  so,  who  of  moderate  understanding  but  will     de 
clearly  see,  that  it  is  more  useful  and  more  healthful  for  fools  t"te" 
to  obey  the  precepts  of  the  wise,  than  to  live  by  their  own    ^^^' 

judgment?    For  every  thing  that  is  done,  if  it  be  not  rightly '- 

done,  is  a  sin,  nor  can  that  any  how  be  rightly  done  which 
proceeds   not   from   right  reason.     Further,  right  reason   is 
very  virtue.     But  to  whom  of  men  is  virtue  at  hand,  save  to 
the  mind  of  the  wise  ?     Therefore  the  wise  man  alone  sins 
not.      Therefore   every  fool   sins,  save  in   those   actions,  in 
which   he   hath   obeyed   a  wise   man :    for   all   such   actions 
proceed  from  right  reason,  and,  so  to  say,  the  fool  is  not 
to  be  accounted  master  of  his  own  action,  he  being,  as  it 
were,  the  instrument  and  that  which  ministers  Mo  the  wise 'minis- 
man.     Wherefore,  if  it  be  better  for  all  men  not  to  sin  than  '®""™* 
to  sin  ;  assuredly  all  fools  would  live  better,  if  they  could  be 
slaves  of  the  wise.     And,  if  no  one  doubts  that  this  is  better 
in  lesser  matters,  as  in  buying  and  selling,  and  cultivating 
the  ground,  in  taking  a  wife,  in  undertaking^  and  bringing  ^  or 'be- 
up  children,  lastly,  in  the  management  of  household  property,  f^g"j°^* 
much  more  in  religion.     For  both  human  matters  are  morepiendis. 
easy  to  distinguish  between,  than  divine ;  and  in  all  matters 
of  greater  sacredness  and  excellence,  the  greater  obedience 
and  service  we  owe  them,  the  more  wicked  and  the  more 
dangerous  is  it  to  sin.     Therefore  you  see  henceforth  ^  that  ^  Ben.  a 
nothing  else  is  left  us,  so  long  as  we  are  fools,  if  our  heart  bej(^°g  "j 
set  on  an  excellent  and  religious  life,  but  to  seek  wise  men,  modum. 
by  obeying  whom  we  may  be  enabled   both  to  lessen  the 
great  feeling  of  the  rule  of  folly,  whilst  it  is  in  us,  and  at  the 
last  to  escape  from  it. 

28.  Here  again  arises  a  very  difficidt  question.  For  in  xiii. 
what  way  shall  we  fools  be  able  to  find  a  wise  man,  whereas 
this  name,  although  hardly  any  one  dare  openly,  yet  most 
men  lay  claim  to  indirectly:  so  disagreeing  one  with  another 
in  the  very  matters,  in  the  knowledge  of  which  wisdom  con- 
sists, as  that  it  must  needs  be  that  either  none  of  them,  or  but 
some  certain  one  be  wise?  But  when  the  fool  enquires,  who 
is  that  wise  man  ?  I  do  not  at  all  see,  in  what  way  he  can 
be  distinguished  and  perceived.  For  by  no  signs  whatever 
can  one  recognise  any  thing,  unless  he  shall  have  known 
that  thing,  whereof  these  are  signs.     But  the  fool  is  ignorant 


608  Difficully  of  finding  the  'uise.''  Trusthifj  in  God  for  help. 

DE  of  wisdom.  For  not,  as,  in  the  case  of  gold  and  silver  and 
tYte"  other  things  of  that  kind,  it  is  allowed  both  to  know  them 
CRK-  when  you  see  them,  and  not  to  have  them,  thus  may  wisdom 
— ^be  seen  by  the  mind's  eye  of  him  who  hath  it  not.  For  what- 
ever things  we  come  into  contact  with  by  bodily  sense,  are  pre- 
sented to  us  from  without;  and  therefore  we  may  perceive  by 
the  eyes  what  belong  to  others,  when  we  ourselves  possess  not 
any  of  them  or  of  that  kind.  But  what  is  perceived  by  the 
understanding  is  within  in  the  mind,  and  to  have  it  is  nothing 
else  than  to  see.  But  the  fool  is  void  of  wisdom,  there- 
fore he  knows  not  wisdom.  For  he  could  not  see  it  with  the 
eyes :  but  he  cannot  see  it  and  not  have  it,  nor  have  it  and 
be  a  fool.  Therefore  he  knoweth  it  not,  and,  so  long  as  he 
k;noweth  it  not,  he  cannot  recognise  it  in  another  place.  No 
one,  so  long  as  he  is  a  fool,  can  by  most  sure  knowledge  find 
out  a  wise  man,  by  obeying  whom  he  may  be  set  free  from  so 
great  evil  of  folly. 

29.  Therefore  this  so  vast  difficulty,  since  our  enquiry  is 
about  religion,  God  alone  can  remedy  :  nor  indeed,  unless 
we  believe  both  that  He  is,  and  that  He  helps  men's  minds, 
ought  we  even  to  enquire  after  true  religion  itself.  For  what 
I  ask  do  we  with  so  great  endeavour  desire  to  search  out .'' 
What  do  we  wish  to  attain  unto  ?  Whitlicr  do  we  long  to  arrive  ? 
Is  it  at  that  vvhich  we  believe  not  exists  or  pertains  to  us? 
Nothing  is  more  perverse  than  such  a  state  of  mind.  Then, 
when  you  would  not  dare  to  ask  of  me  a  kindness,  or  at  any 
rate  would  be  shameless  in  daring,  come  you  to  demand  the 
discovery  of  religion,  when  you  think  that  God  neither  exists, 
nor,  if  He  exist,  hath  any  care  for  us  ?  What;  if  it  be  so 
great  a  matter,  as  that  it  cannot  be  found  out,  unless  it  be 
sought  carefully  and  with  all  our  might?  What,  if  the  very 
extreme  difficulty  of  discovery  be  an  exercise  for  the  mind 
of  the  inquirer,  in  order  to  receive  what  shall  be  discovered? 
For  what  more  pleasant  and  familiar  to  our  eyes  than  this 
light  ?  And  yet  men  are  unable  after  long  darkness  to  bear 
and  endure  it.  What  more  suited  to  the  body  exhausted 
by  sickness  than  meat  and  drink  ?  And  yet  we  see  that 
persons  who  are  recovering  are  restrained  and  checked,  lest 
they  dare  to  commit  themselves  to  the  fulness  of  persons  in 
health,  and  so  bring  to  pass  by  means  of  their  very  food 


Heretics  themselves  obliijed  to  nsk  for  some  belief.     609 

their  vetuin  to  that  disease  which  used  to  reject  it.     I  speak     de 
of  persons  who  are  recovering.     ^Vhat,  the  very  sick,  do  we  ^ate 
not  urge  them  to  take  something?    Wlierein  assuredly  thev    c^^e- 

"  •-  "     DENDI. 


would  not  with  so  great  discomfort  ohey  us,  if  they  believed 
not  that  they  would  recover  from  that  disease.  When  then 
will  you  give  yourself  up  to  a  search  very  full  of  pains  and 
labour?  When  will  you  have  the  heart  to  impose  upon  your- 
self so  great  care  and  trouble  as  the  matter  deserves,  when 
you  believe  not  in  the  existence  of  that  which  you  are  in 
search  of?  Rightly  therefore  hath  it  been  ordained  by  tlie 
majesty  of  the  Catholic  system  of  teaching,  that  they  who 
approach  unto  religion  be  before  all  things  persuaded  to  have 
faith. 

30.  Wherefore  that  heretic,  (inasmuch  as  our  discourse  is    xiv. 
of  those  who  \\  ish  to  be  called  Christians,)  I  ask  you,  what 
reason  he  alleges  to  me  ?    What  is  there  whereby  for  him 

to  call  me  back  from  believing,  as  if  from  rashness  ?  If  he 
bid  me  believe  nothing;  I  believe  not  that  this  very  true 
religion  hath  any  existence  in  human  affairs ;  and  what  I 
believe  not  to  exist,  I  seek  not.  But  He,  as  I  suppose,  will 
shew  it  to  me  seeking  it:  for  so  it  is  written,  He  titat  Matt.  7, 
seeketJi  shall  Jind.  Therefore  I  should  not  come  unto  him,  " 
who  forbids  me  to  believe,  unless  I  believed  something.  Is 
there  any  greater  madness,  than  that  I  should  displease  him 
by  faith  alone,  which  is  founded  on  no  knowledge,  which 
faith  alone  led  me  to  him  ? 

31.  What,  that  all  heretics  exhort  us  to. believe  in  Christ? 
Can  they  possibly  be  more  oj^posed  to  themselves  ?  And  in 
this  matter  they  are  to  be  ]:!rtssed  in  a  twofold  way.  In  the 
first  place  we  must  ask  of  them,  where  is  the  reason  which 
they  used  to  promise,  where  the  reproof  of  rashness,  where 
the  assumption  of  knowledge  ?  For,  if  it  be  disgraceful  to 
believe  any  witliout  reason,  what  do  you  wait  for,  what  are 
you  busied  about,  that  I  believe  some  one  without  reason,  in 
order  that  I  may  the  more  e-asily  be  led  by  your  reason  ? 
What,  will  your  reason  raise  any  firm  superstructure  on  the 
foundation  of  rashness?  I  speak  after  their  manner,  whom  we 
displease  by  believing.  For  I  not  only  judge  it  most  health- 
ful to  believe  before  reason,  when  you  are  not  qualified  to 
receive  reason,  and  by  the  very  act  of  faith  thoroughly  to 

R  r 


610  The  Church  our  witness  of  Christ,  and  hence  of  doctrine. 
DE     cultivate  the  mind  to  receive  the  seeds  of  truth,  but  alto- 

U  T I  li  I  - 

TATE    gether  a  thing  of  such  sort  as  that  without  it  health  cannot 

^^^-   return    to    sick    souls.     And,  in    that    this    seems    to    them 

matter  for  mockery  and  full  of  rashness,   surely  they  are 

shameless  in   making  it  their  business   that  we  believe  in 

Christ.      Next,  I  confess  that  I   have  already  believed  in 

Christ,  and  hav^  convinced  myself  that  what  He  hath  said 

is  true,  althougli   it    be   supported    by   no   reason :    is  this, 

heretic,  what  you  will  teach  me  in  the  first  place  }    Suffer 

me  to  consider  a  little  with  myself,  (since  I  have  not  seen 

Christ  Himself,  as  He  willed   to    appear    unto   men,  Who 

is  said  to  have  been  seen  by  them,  even  by  common  eyes,) 

who  they  are  that  I  have  believed  concerning  Hira,  in  order 

that  I  may  approach  you  already  furnished  beforehand  with 

such  a  faith.     I  see  that  there  are  none  that  I  have  believed, 

save  the  confirmed  opinion  and  widely  extended  report  of 

peoples  and  nations:  and  that  the  mysteries  of  the  Church 

Catholic  have  in   all  times   and  places  had    possession    of 

these   peoples.      Why   therefore    shall    I   not   of  these,   in 

preference    to    others,    enquire    with    all    care,    what    Christ 

commanded,  by  whose  authority  I  have  been  moved  already 

to  believe  that  Christ   hath   commanded   something  that  is 

profitable  ?    Are  you  likely  to  be  a  better  expounder  to  me  of 

what  He  said.  Whose  past  or  present  existence  T  should  not 

believe,  if  by  you  I  were  to  be  recommended  to  believe  thus  ? 

This  therefore  I  have  believed,  as  I  said,  trusting  to  report 

strengthened  by  numbers,  agreement,  antiquity.     But  you, 

who  are  both   so  few,  and  so  turbulent,  and  so  new,  no  one 

doubts  that  ye  bring  forward  nothing  worthy  of  authority. 

What  then  is  that  so  great  madness  ?    Believe  them,  that  you 

arc  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  learn  from  us  what  He  said. 

Why,  I  pray  you .?   For  were  they  to  fail  and  to  be  unable  to 

teach  me  any  thing;  with  much  gi-eater  ease  could  I  persuade 

myself,  that  I  am  not  to  believe  in  Christ,  than  that  I  am  to 

learn  any  thing  concerning  Him,  save  from  those  thi'ough 

whom  1  had  believed  in  Him.     O  vast  confidence,  or  rather 

absurdity !     I  teach  you  what  Christ,  in  Whom  you  believe, 

commanded.     What,  in  case  I  believed  not  in  Him  ?     You 

could  not,  could  you,  teach  me  any  thing  concerning  Him  ? 

But,  says  he,  it  behoves  you  to  believe.     You  do  not  mean, 


Holy  Scriptures  believed  on  the  ChurcWs  testimony,     611 

do  you,  that  I  am  (to  believe)  you  when  you  commend  Him     db 
to  my  faith  ?    No,  saith  he,  for  we  lead  by  reason  them  who   i  ate' 
believe   in    Him.     Why   then    should    I    believe    in    Him  ?    ^^^■' 

Because  report  hath  been  grounded.     Wiiether  is  it  through ~" 

you,  or  through  others?  Through  others,  saith  he.  Shall 
I  then  believe  them,  in  order  that  you  may  teach  me .'' 
Perhaps  I  ought  to  do  so,  were  it  not  that  they  gave  me 
this  chief  charge,  that  I  should  not  approach  you  at  all ;  for 
they  say  that  you  have  deadly  doctrines.  You  will  answer, 
They^lie.  How  then  shall  I  believe  them  concerning  Christ, 
Whom  they  have  not  seen,  (and)  not  believe  them  concern- 
ing you,  whom  they  are  unwilling  to  see?  Believe  the 
Scriptures,  saith  he.  Bui  every  writing',  if  it  be  brought '  Scrip- 
forward  new  and  unheard  of,  or  be  commended  by  few,  with  "^^ 
no  reason  to  confirm  it,  it  is  not  it  that  is  believed,  but  they 
who  bring  it  forward.  Wherefore,  for  those  Scriptures,  if 
you  are  they  who  bring  them  forward,  you  so  few  and  un- 
known, I  am  not  pleased  to  believe  them.  At  the  same 
time  also  you  are  acting  contrary  to  your  promise,  in 
enforcing  faith  rather  than  giving  a  reason.  You  will  recal 
me  again  to  numbers  and  (common)  report.  Curb,  1  pray 
you,  your  obstinacy,  and  that  untamed  lust,  I  know  not 
what,  of  spreading  your  name  :  and  advise  me  rather  to  seek 
the  chief  men  of  this  multitude,  and  to  seek  with  all  care 
and  pains  rather  to  learn  something  concerning  these  writings 
from  these  men,  but  for  whose  existence,  I  should  not  know 
that  I  had  to  learn  at  all.  But  do  you  return  into  your  dens, 
and  lay  not  any  snares  under  the  name  of  truth,  which  you 
endeavour  to  take  from  those,  to  whom  you  yourself  grant 
authority. 

32.  But  if  they  say  that  we  are  not  even  to  believe  in 
Christ,  unless  undoubted  reason  shall  be  given  us,  they  are 
not  Christians.  For  this  is  what  certain  pagans  say  against 
us,  foolishly  indeed,  yet  not  contrary  to,  or  inconsistent  with, 
themselves.  Bat  who  can  endure  that  these  profess  to 
belong  to  Christ,  who  contend  that  they  are  to  believe 
nothing,  unless  they  shall  bring  forward  to  fools  most  open 
reason  concerning  God  ?  But  we  see  that  He  Himself,  so 
far  as  that  history,  which  they  themselves  believe,  teaches, 
willed  nothing  before,  or  more  strongly  than,  that  He  should 

R  r  2 


612      Our  ImvcVs  own  ieachiny  was  by  the  way  of  Faith, 
DK     be  believed  in:  whereas  tho\',  with  whom  He  had  to  do,  were 

TJ  T 1 L I  - 

TATE  "°*  y^^  qualified  to  receive  the  secret  things  of  God.  For, 
CUE-  fQi-  what  other  purpose  are  so  great  and  so  many  miracles, 
He  Himself  also  saying,  that  they  are  done  for  no  other 
cause,  than  that  He  may  be  believed  in  ?  He  used  to  lead 
fools  by  faith,  you  lead  by  reason.  He  used  to  cry  out,  that 
He  should  be  belieTed  in,  ye  cry  out  against  it.     He  used  to 

John]  1,  praise  such  as  believe  in  Him,  ye  blame  them.  But  unless 
either  He  should  change  water  into  wine,  to  omit  other 
(miracles),  if  men  would  follow  Him,  doing  no  such,  but 
(only)   teaching ;    either  we  must  make  no  account  of  that 

JohnU,  saying,  Believe  ye  God,  believe  also  3Ie;  or  we  must  charge 
him  vv'ith  rashness,  who  willed  not  that  He  should  come  into 

Mat.  8,  his  house,  believing  that  the  disease  of  his  servant  would 

8.  9.  . 

depart  at  His  mere  command.  Therefore  He  bringing  to  us 
a  medicine  such  as  should  heal  our  utterly  corrupt  manners, 
meruit  by  miracles  procured  to  Himself  authority,  by  authority 
obtained  Himself  belief,  by  belief  drew  together  a  multitude, 
by  a  multitude  possessed  antiquity,  by  antiquity  strength- 
ened religion  :  so  that  not  only  the  utterly  foolish  novelty  of 
heretics  dealing  deceitfully,  but  also  the  inveterate  error  of 
the  nations  opposing  with  violence,  should  be  unable  on  any 
.side  to  rend  it  asunder. 
XV.  33.  Wherefore,  although  I  am  not  able  to  teach,  yet 
I  cease  not  to  advise,  that,  (whereas  many  wish  to  appear 
wise,  and  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  discern  whether  they  be 
fools,)  v/ilh  all  earnestness,  and  with  all  prayers,  and  lastly 
with  groans,  or  even,  if  so  it  may  be,  with  tears,  you  entreat 
of  God  to  set  you  free  from  the  evil  of  error  ;  if  your  heart 
be  set  on  a  hap]\y  life.  And  this  will  take  ]ilace  the  more 
easily,  if  you  obey  with  a  willing  mind  His  commands, 
which  He  hath  willed  should  be  confirmed  by  so  great 
authority  of  the  Catholic  Church.  For  whereas  the  wise 
man  is  so  joined  to  God  in  mind,  as  that  there  is  nothing  set 
between  to  separate;  for  God  is  Truth;  and  no  one  is  by 
any  means  wise,  unless  his  mind  come  into  contact  with  the 
IVuth  ;  we  cannot  deny  that  between  the  folly  of  man,  and 
the  most  pure  Truth  of  God,  the  wisdom  of  man  is  set,  as 
-omething  in  the  middle.  For  the  \\  ise  man,  so  far  as  it  is 
given  unto  him,  imitates  God  ;  but  for  a  man  who  is  a  foolj 


The  Incarnation,  how  f.1  to  bring  us  to  God,         018 

there   is  nothing  nearer  to  him,  than  a  man  who  is  wise,     de 
for  him  to  imitate  with  profit:  and  since,  as  has  been  said,  it  taie 
is  not  easy  to  nnderstand  this  one  by  reason,  it  behoved  that    ^^'^' 

DENDI. 


certain  miracles  be  brought  near  to  the  very  eyes,  which 
fools  use  with  much  greater  readiness  than  the  mind,  that, 
men  being  moved  by  autljority,  their  life  and  habits  might 
first  be  cleansed,  and  they  thus  rendered  capable  of  receiving 
reason.  Whereas,  therefore,  it  needed  both  that  man  be 
imitated,  and  that  our  hope  be  not  set  in  man,  what  could  be 
done  on  the  part  of  God  more  full  of  kindness  and  grace, 
than  that  the  very  pure,  eternal,  unchangeable  Wisdom 
of  God,  unto  W^hom  it  behoves  us  to  cleave,  should  deign 
to  take  upon  Him  (the  nature  of)  man  ?  That  not  only  He 
might  do  what  should  invite  us  to  follow  God,  but  also  might 
suffer  what  used  to  deter  us  from  following  God.  For, 
whereas  no  one  can  attain  unto  the  most  sure  and  chief 
good,  unless  he  shall  fully  and  perfectly  love  it;  which  will 
by  no  means  lake  place,  so  long  as  the  evils  of  the  body  and 
of  fortune  are  dreaded;  He  by  being  born  after  a  miraculous 
manner  and  working  caused  Himself  to  be  loved  ;  and  by 
dying  and  rising  again  shut  out  fear.  And,  further,  in  all 
other  matters,  which  it  were  long  to  go  tlii-ough.  He  shewed 
Himself  such,  as  that  we  might  perceive  unto  what  the 
clemency  of  God  could  be  reached  forth;,  and  unto  what  the 
weakness  of  man  be  lifted  up, 

34.  This  is,  believe  me,  a  most  wholesome  authority,  this  xvi. 
a  lifting  up  first  of  our  mind  from  dwelling  on  the  earth,  this 
a  turning  from  the  love  of  this  world  unto  the  True  God. 
It  is  authority  alone  which  moves  fools  to  hasten  unto 
wisdom.  So  long  as  we  cannot  understand  pure  (truths), 
it  is  indeed  wretched  to  be  deceived  by  authority,  but  surely 
more  wretched  not  to  be  moved.  For,  if  the  Providence  of 
God  preside  not  over  human  affairs,  we  have  no  need  to 
busy  ourselves  about  religion.  But  if  both  the  outward 
form  of  all  things,  which  we  must  believe  assuredly  flows 
from  some  fountain  of  truest  beauty,  and  some,  I  know  not 
what,  inward  conscience  exhorts,  as  it  were,  in  public  and  in 
private,  all  the  better  order  of  minds  to  seek  God,  and  to 
serve  God ;  we  must  not  give  up  all  hope  that  the  same  God 
Himself  hath  appointed  some  authority,  whereon,  resting  as 


614  Miracles  of  authority  and  of  grace. 

DE  on  a  sure  step,  we  may  be  lifted  up  unto  God.  But  this, 
tate'  setting  aside  reason,  which  (as  we  have  often  said)  it  is  very 
CRE-  hai'd  for  fools  to  understand  pure,  moves  us  two  ways ;  in 

DENDI.  .  ,  .  -,    ■         ^  n    n  -,1 

part  by  miracles,  in  part  by  multitude  of  loUowers :  no  one 

of  these  is  necessary  to  the  wise  man  ;  who  denies  it  ?     But 
this  is  novv  the  business  in  hand,  that  we  may  be  able  to  be 
wise,  that  is,  to  cleave  to  the  truth  ;  which  the  tilthy  soul  is 
utterly  unable  to  do  :  but  the  filth  of  the  soul,  to  say  shortly 
what  I  mean,  is  the  love  of  any  things  whatsoever  save  God 
and  the  soul :  from  which  filth  the  more  any  one  is  cleansed, 
the  more  easily  he  sees  the  truth.     Therefore  to  wish  to  see 
the  truth,  in  order  to  purge  your  soul,  when  as  it  is  purged 
for  the  very  purpose  that  you  may  see,  is  surely  perverse  and 
preposterous.     Therefore  to  man  unable  to  see  the  truth, 
authority  is  at  hand,  in  order  that  he  may  be  made  fitted  for 
it,  and  may  allow  himself  to  be  cleansed ;    and,  as  I  said 
a  little  above,  no  one  doubts  that  this  prevails,  in  part  by 
miracles,  in  part  by  multitude.     But  I  call  that  a  miracle, 
whatever  appears  that  is  difficult  or  unusual  above  the  hope 
or  power  of  them  who  wonder.      Of  which  kind  there  is 
nothing  more  suited  for  the  people,  and  in  general  for  foolish 
men,  than  what  is  brought  near  to  the  senses.     But  these, 
again,   are   divided  into    two  l<inds ;    for  there  are   certain, 
which   cause  only  wonder,  but  certain  others  procure  also 
great  favour  and  good-will.     For,  if  one  were  to  see  a  man 
flying,  inasmuch  as  that  matter  brings  no  advantage  to  the 
spectator,  beside  the  spectacle  itself,  he  only  wonders.     But 
if  any  affected  with  grievous  and  hopeless  disease  were  to 
recover  straightway,  upon  being  bidden,  his  affection  for  him 
who  heals,  will  go  beyond  even  his  wonder  at  his  healing. 
Such  were  done  at  that  time  at  which  God  in  True  Man 
appeared  unto  men,  as  much    as   was   enough.      The  sick 
were  healed,  the  lepers  were  cleansed ;  walking  was  restored 
to  the  lame,  sight  to  the  blind,  hearing  to  the  deaf     The 
men  of  that  time  saw  water  turned  into  wine,  five  thousand 
filled  with  five  loaves,  seas  passed  on  foot,  dead  rising  again : 
thus  certain  provided  for  the  good  of  the  body  by  more  open 
benefit,  certain  again  for  the  good  of  the  soul  by  more  hidden 
sign,  and  all  for  the  good  of  men  by  their  witness  to  Majesty: 
thus,  at  that  time,  was  the  divine  authority  moving  towards 


Miracles  why  not  frequent.    Moral  effects  of  the  Gospel.  G15 

Itself  the  wandering  souls  of  mortal  men.     Why,  say  you,  do      de 
not  those  things  lake  place  now  ?  because  they  would  not   tate' 
more,  unless  they  were  wonderful,  and,  if  they  were  usual,    cre- 
they  would  not  be  wonderful ''.     For  the  interchanges  of  day  — — - 


and  night,  and  the  settled  order  of  things  in  Heaven,  the 
revolution  of  years  divided  into  four  parts,  the  fall  and 
return  of  leaves  to  trees,  the  boundless  power  of  seeds,  the 
beauty  of  light,  the  varieties  of  colours,  sounds,  tastes,  and 
scents,  let  there  be  some  one  who  shall  see  and  perceive 
them  for  the  first  time,  and  yet  such  an  one  as  we  may 
converse  with  ;  he  is  stupified  and  overwhelmed  with 
miracles :  but  we  contemn  all  these,  not  because  they  are 
easy  to  understand,  (for  what  more  obscure  than  the  causes 
of  these  ?)  but  surely  because  they  constantly  meet  our 
senses.  Therefore  they  were  done  at  a  very  suitable  time, 
in  order  that,  by  these  a  multitude  of  believers  having  been 
gathered,  together  and  spread  abroad,  authority  might  be 
turned  with  effect  upon  habits. 

35.  But  any  habits  whatever  have  so  great  power  to  hold  xvii. 
possession  of  men's  minds,  that  even  what  in  them  are  evil, 
which  usually  takes  place  through  excess  of  lusts,  we  can 
sooner  disapprove  of  and  hate,  than  desert  or  change.  Do 
you  think  that  little  hath  been  done  for  the  benefit  of  man, 
that  not  some  ^gw  very  learned  men  maintain  by  argument, 
but  also  an  unlearned  crowd  of  males  and  females  in  so 
many  and  different  nations  both  believe  and  set  forth,  that 
we  are  to  worship  as  God  nothing  of  earth,  nothing  of  fire, 
nothing,  lastly,  which  comes  into  contact  with  the  senses  of 
the  body,  but  that  we  are  to  seek  to  approach  Him  by  the 
understanding  only }  that  abstinence  is  extended  even  unto 
the  slenderest  food  of  bread  and  water,  and  fastings  not  only 
for  the  day',  but  also  continued  through  several  days  together ; 
that  chastity  is  earned  even  unto  the  contempt  of  marriage 
and  family ;  that  patience  even  unto  the  setting  light  by 
crosses  and  flaines ;  that  liberality  even  unto  the  distribution 

''  cf.  Retract,  b.  i.  c.  14.  5.    "  In  would  not  move  unless  they  were  won- 

another    place,    where    I    had    made  derful,    and    if  they    were  usual  they 

mention   of  the    miracles,  which    our  would  not  be  wonderful.'     But  this  I 

Lord  Jesus  did,  while  He  was  here  in  said  because  not  so  great  miracles,  nor 

the  Flesh,  I  added,  saying,  '  Why,  say  all  take  place  now,  not  because  there 

you,  do    not  those  things    take   place  are  none  wrought  even  now." 
now?'  and  I  answered,  '  Because  they         '  ciUotidiana,i.e.eachday  till  evening. 


616    Church  aulhority  improves  whom  it  does  not  perfect. 

DE  of  estates  unto  the  poor ;  that,  lastly,  the  contempt  of  this 
TATE  whole  world  even  unto  the  desire  of  death?  Few  do  these 
^^^-    thincs,    yet   fewer  do    them    well    and    wisely  :    but   whole 

BENDI.  _0    '      ^  ^  .  r  -11 

nations  approve,  nations  hear,  nations  favour,  nations,  lastly, 

love.  Nations  accuse  their  own  weakness  that  they  cannot 
do  these  things,  and  that  not  without  the  mind  being  carried 
forward  unto  God,  nor  without  certain  sparks  of  virtue. 
This  hath  been  brought  to  pass  by  the  Divine  Providence, 
through  the  prophecies  of  the  Prophets,  through  the  man- 
hood and  teaching  of  Christ,  through  the  journeys  of  the 
Apostles,  throtigh  the  insults,  crosses,  blood,  of  the  Martyrs, 
through  the  praiseworthy  life  of  the  Saints,  and,  in  all  these, 
according  as  times  were  seasonable,  through  miracles  worthy 
of  so  great  matters  and  virtues.  When  therefore  we  see  so 
great  help  of  God,  so  great  j  regress  and  fruit,  shall  we  doubt 
to  hide  ourselves  in  the  bosom  of  tliat  Church,  which  even 
unto  the  confession  of  the  human  race  from  [the]  apostolic 
chair'"  through  successions  of  Bishops,  (heretics  in  vain  lurking 
around  her  and  being  conJeraned,  partly  by  the  judgment  of 
the  very  people,  partly  by  the  weight  of  councils,  partly  also 
by  the  majesty  of  miracles,)  hath  held  the  summit  of  authority, 
iprimasTo  be  unwilling  to  grant  to  her  the  first  place',  is  either 
surely  the  height  of  impiety,  or  is  headlong  arrogance.  For, 
if  there  be  no  sure  way  unto  wisdom  and  health  of  souls, 
unless  where  faith  prepare  them  for  reason,  what  else  is  it  to 
be  ungrateful  for  the  Divine  help  and  aid,  than  to  wish  to 
2  al.  resist  authority  furnished  with  so  great  labour'-?  And  if  every 
streiigtig^,^.j.^j^^  of  teaching,  however  mean  and  easy,  requires,  in 
order  to  its  being  received,  a  teacher  or  master,  what  more 
full  of  rash  pride,  than,  in  the  case  of  books  of  divine 
:>  sanra-  mysteries  ^  both  to  be  unwilling  to  learn  from  such  as 
mento-   jj^tg,.pr(.t  them,  and  to  wish  to  condemn  them  unlearned  ? 

ruin  1  '  _ 

xviii,  36.  Wherefore,  if  either  our  reasoning  or  our  discourse 
hath  in  any  way  moved  you,  and  if  you  have,  as  I  believe,  a 
true  care  for  yourself,  1  would  you  would  listen  to  me,  and 
with  pious  faith,  lively  hope,  and  simple  charity,  entrust 
yourself  to  goud  teachers  of  Catholic  Christianity  ;  and  cease 

•"    He  clearly  means  the    Apostolic     Unity  of  the  Church,  §.  S' and  4.  Oxf. 
office  and  presidency  in  general.     For     Tr.  p.  1J4.  and  note  b. 
illustration,  see    St.    C'ynrian    on    the 


No  Truth  lost  in  accept uiy  the  Church'' s  teaching.      617 
not  to  pray  unto  God  Himself,  by  Whose  goodness  alone     de 

■  ...  UTILI- 

we  were  created,  and  suffer  punishment  by  His  justice,  and  tate 
are  set  free  by  His  mercy.  Thus  there  will  be  wanting  to  '^^^^ 
you  neither  pi'ecepts  and  treatises  of  most  learned  and  truly  - — - — 
Christian  men,  nor  books,  nor  calm  thoughts  themselves, 
whereby  you  may  easily  find  what  you  are  seeking.  For  do 
you  abandon  utterly  those  wordy  and  wretched  men,  (ibr 
what  other  milder  name  can  T  use  ?)  who,  whilst  they  seek  to 
excess  whence  is  evil,  find  nothing  but  evil.  And  on  this 
question  they  often  rouse  tlieir  hearers  to  enquire  ;  but  after 
that  they  have  been  roused,  they  teach  tliem  such  lessons  as 
that  it  were  j^referable  even  to  sleep  for  ever,  than  thus  to  be 
awake.  For  in  place  of  lethargic  tliey  make  them  frantic, 
between  which  diseases,  both  being  usually  fatal,  there  is 
still  this  difference,  that  lethargic  persons  die  without  doing- 
violence  to  others ;  but  the  frantic  person  many  who  are 
sound,  and  specially  they  who  wish  to  lielp  him,  have  reason 
to  fear.  For  neither  is  God  the  author  of  evil,  nor  hath  it 
ever  repented  Him  tliat  He  hath  done  aught,  nor  is  He 
troubled  by  storm  of  any  passion  of  soul,  nor  is  a  small  part  of 
earth  His  Kingdom :  He  neither  approves  nor  commands 
any  sins  or  wickedness.  He  never  lies.  For  these  and  such 
like  used  to  move  us,  when  they  used  them  to  make  great 
and  threatening  assaults,  and  charged  this  as  being  the 
system  of  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  is  most 
false.  Tluis  then  I  allow  that  they  do  right  in  censuring 
these.  What  then  have  1  learnt  ?  What  think  you,  save 
that,  when  these  are  censured,  the  Catholic  system  of  teaching 
is  not  censured.  Thus  what  I  had  learnt  among  them  that 
is  true,  I  hold,  what  is  false  that  T  had  thought  I  reject. 
But  the  Catholic  Church  hath  taught  me  many  other  things 
also,  which  those  men  of  bloodless  bodies,  but  coarse  minds, 
cannot  aspire  unto  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  God  is  not  corporeal, 
that  no  part  of  Him  can  be  perceived  by  corporeal  eyes,  that 
nothing  of  His  Substance  or  Nature  can  any  way  suffer 
violence  or  change,  or  is  compounded  or  formed  ;  and  if  you 
grant  me  these,  (for  we  may  not  think  otherwise  concerning 
God,)  all  their  devices  are  overthrown.  But  how  it  is,  that 
neither  God  begot  or  created  evil,  nor  yet  is  there,  or  hath 
there  been  ever,  any  nature  and  substance,  which  God  either 


618      Calmness  of  spirit  needful  for  religious  learning. 


DE 

UTILI- 
TATE 
CRE- 

DENDI 


begot  not  or  created  not,  and  yet  that  He  setteth  us  free  from 
evil,  is  proved  by  reasons  so  necessary,  that  it  cannot  at  all 
be  matter  of  doubt ;  especially  to  you  and  such  as  you ;  that 
is,  if  to  a  good  disposition  there  be  added  piety  and  a  certain 
peace  of  mind,  without  which  nothing  at  all  can  be  under- 
stood concerning  so  great  matters.  And  here  there  is  no 
rumour  concerning  smoke,  and  I  know  not  what  Persian  vain 
fable,  unto  which  it  is  enough  to  lend  an  ear,  and  soul  not 
subtile,  but  absolutely  childish.  Far  altogether,  far  otherwise 
is  the  truth,  than  as  the  Manichees  doat.  But  since  this 
discourse  of  ours  hath  gone  much  further  than  I  thought, 
here  let  us  end  the  book ;  in  which  I  wish  you  to  remember, 
that  I  have  not  yet  begun  to  refute  the  Manichees,  and  that 
I  have  not  yet  assailed  that  nonsense  ;  and  that  neither  have 
I  imfolded  any  thing  great  concerning  the  Catholic  Church 
itself,  but  that  I  have  only  wished  to  root  out  of  you,  if  I 
could,  a  false  notion  concerning  true  Christians  that  was 
maliciously  or  ignorantly  suggested  to  us,  and  to  arouse  you 
to  learn  certain  great  and  divine  things.  Wherefore  let  this 
volume  be  as  it  is ;  but  when  your  soul  becomes  more  calmed, 
I  shall  perhaps  be  more  ready  in  what  remains''. 


^  cf.Retr.b.  i.ch.  14.6.  "But  in  the 
end  of  the  book  I  say.  '  But  since  this 
discourse  of  ours,  &c.'  This  I  did  not 
say  in  such  sort  as  though  I  had  not 
hitherto  written  any  thing  against  the 
Manichaeans,  or  had  not  committed  to 
writing  any  thing  at  all  about  Catholic 
doctrine,  when  so  many  volumes  before 
published  were  witnesses  that  T  had 
not  been  silent  on  either  subject  ;    but 


in  this  book  written  to  him  I  had  not 
yet  begun  to  refute  the  Manicheeans, 
and  had  not  yet  attacked  those  follies, 
nor  had  I  as  yet  opened  any  thing  great 
concerning  the  Catholic  Church  itself; 
because  I  hoped  that  after  that  begin- 
ning made,  T  should  write  to  that  same 
person  what  I  had  not  yet  here 
written." 


INDEX. 


Abortions,  question  of  their  resurrectioD, 

13G,  7. 
Abraham,  Christ  the  promised  Seed  of, 
5,   8.  His  example  cited,  296,  297, 
298,  300,  303.  actions  of  figurative, 
409,  10.  told  no  lie,  448.  knew  the 
state  of  the  world  from  Lazarus,  536. 
Abstinence,     required      before     Bap- 
tism,   43.    easier    than    moderation, 
290,  299.  from  food  &c.  for  ill  ends, 
645.  practice   of,    a   benefic   due  to 
authority,  615. 
Academics,  most  acute  men,  99.     St. 
Augustine's    work    against,    99.   St. 
Augustine  once  inclined  to,  597. 
Accident,  none  distinct  from  substance 

in  God,  32. 
Action,  whether  implied  in  permission, 
396,   7,   421.    always    conceived   in 
the  heart,  440.  indifferent,  takes  its 
character   from    motive,    440,    441. 
some   unconsciously   prophetic,  456. 
character  determined  by  the  intention, 
506.  unless  rightly  done,  s'n,  607. 
Adam,  see  man.  Paradise,  sin,  etc.  all 
born  of,   under   condemnation,    116. 
and  Eve,  220.  Job  how  unlike,  549. 
Address,  (imaginary)  to  a  catechumen, 

219—237.  another,  238—242. 
Admonition,  desired  by  S.  Aug.  51?. 
Adultery,  marriage  of  the  divorced  is, 
38.  must  be  forsaken  before  Baptism, 
43.   committed   unawares    must    be 
corrected,  44.   guilt  of  depends  on 
knowledge,  44.  none  would  defend,  45. 
inconsistent    with    repentance,    47, 
72.     Worse  than  things  which  John 
required  to  forsake,  73.  than  dancing, 
81.  a  work  of  the  Devil,  83.  included 
in  '  dead  works,'  52.  as   needful  to 
renounce  as  idolatry,  53,  54.     Had 
not  been  common  even    among  bad 
Christians,  70.  question  what  amounts 
to,    71.   what  is   so,  determined  by 
Christ,   66.  whatP    278,  283.  com- 
pared with  fornication,  283.  might  be 


justified  on  same  grounds  as  lying^ 
439,  441.  is  evil,  while  even  second 
marriage  is  good,  357.  some  guilty  of, 
fear  perjury,  468.  penance  done  for, 
575. 
^Esop,  Fables  of,  445. 
^Etiology,  explanation  by,  582. 
Affections,    carnal,    are  '  wood,    hay, 

stubble,'  63,  64,  65,  127. 
Africa,   Catholic   Church  not  limited 

to,  181. 
Agahus,  foretold  St.  Paul's  sufferings, 

146. 
Agapes,  79.  note  f. 
Age,   qualifies   to   give   counsel,  375. 

flower  of,  brief,  376. 
Aged,  marriage,  277,  278. 
Ages,  seven :  of  which  the  last  to  be  an 
age  of  rest,  219. 

six  ofthem  defined  by  S.Augustine, 

228,  229. 
Albertus  Magnus,  on  relief  of  future 

punishment,  152.  note  a. 
Alexis,  of  Plato  and   Virgil  thought 

allegorical,  595. 
Allegory,  in  real  events,  389,  410,  449. 
no  lie  if  the  thing  figured  is  true, 
389.  Jacob's  deceit  was,  448.  use 
of,  449.  explanation  by,  582.  in- 
stances of,  584,  5. 
Almighty,  what  He   Who   is,  cannot 

do,  563. 
Alms,  requisite  in  penitence,  128.  con- 
sidered in  the  Judgment,  ib.  Do 
not  cover  sins  not  repented  of,  ib. 
forgiveness  a  kind  of,  129.  other 
kinds,  ib.  correction  a  kind  of, 
ib.  The  wicked  vainly  trust  in, 
130.  did  they  alone  cleanse,  faith 
needless,  131.  first,  mercy  to  our- 
selves, 131.  such  cleanse  inner  man, 
132.  Forgiveness  of  offenders,  a 
kind  of,  129.  thought  to  atone  for 
most  sins,  70.  offered  for  the  de- 
ceased, 151.  means  of,  not  to  be 
gotten    by    sin,    442.    a  means    of 


6-20 


INDEX. 


pardon,   458.  given  to   Christ,  505. 
to  be   done  for  a  heavenly  reward, 
506. 
Almsgiving,  advanced  by  Christianity, 

615. 
Altar,  prayers  at  the,  344.   ministers 
of,    Christian    Priests,  497.    prayei.s 
offered  at  the,  519. 
Alter7intives,  397,  401,  405-  9. 
Ambrose,   St.    Bp.    of   Milan,   on    the 
death  of  Val en  ■iuianvirithont  baptism, 
141,  note  p.  heard  by  St.  Augustine, 
597. 
Anrtlogij,  explanation  by,  582. 
Ananias,  appearance  to  St.  Paul,  540, 
Angel,  St.  Mary  how  saluted  by,  109. 
Temple    may    not    be    built    to    a, 
574. 
Angels,  many  things  believed   about, 
89.  one  first  gave  rise  to  evil,    102. 
fallen,  not  to  be  renewed,  103.  those 
who  stood,   assured   of  stedfastness, 
104.  number  of,  to  be  filled  up  from 
mankind,    104,   123.  number  of  un- 
known,  104.     They  and  men  alone 
capable  of  injustice,  93.  do  not  wish 
to  be  worshipped,  1?0.  divers  orders 
of,    121.    our    ignorance    about,    ib. 
appearances  of,  ib.     Bodily  or   not, 
121,   2.  Satan  imitates,   122.  Christ 
died  not  for,  122.  reconciled  to  men 
in  Christ,  123.  their  knowledge,  ib. 
man   raised  again   to  be  companion 
of,  139.  reprobate,  eternally  punished, 
140.  wills  of  thwart  not  God's  will, 
146.    all    are    beneath    Christ,    160. 
men  made  like  the,  in  the  Resurrec- 
tion, lS5.cannotsin,  256.  entertained 
by  Lot,  395.  ministry  of,  to  Lazarus, 
521.  free  of  both  worlds,  537.  may 
communicate  the  events  of  this  to  the 
dead,  ib.  blessed  in  clear  knowledge, 
603. 
Anger,  darkens  the  mind's   eye,   445. 

attributed  to  God,  543. 
Anima,  animus,  mens,  421. 
Anna,  and  Susanna,  284,  306.   more 
blessed  than  Ruth,  356.  unless  Ruth 
knew   what  would  follow,   3!)0.  pro- 
bably knew  Christ  should  be  born  of 
a  Virgin,   ib.      Her  long  and   early 
widowhood,    366.    her    piety,    367. 
recognised   Christ  with   His   Virgin 
Mother,  360,  368. 
Antiphrasis,  is  no  lie,  448.  instances 

of,  449. 
Anti(juily,  testimony  of,  to   Religion, 

612. 

Apocrt/pha,  books  of,  537.  quoted,  519. 

Apustle,  God  spoke  in  him,  5!0. 

Apostles,  common  men  chosen  to  shew 

Christ's    power,    12.    prophesitd    of, 

13.  ill  what  sense  to  call  none  father 


on  earth,  23.  did  they  teach  faith 
before  morals?  45,  sqq.  Must  have 
established  rules  as  to  breaking  otF 
illicit  marriages  or  not,  72.  But  in 
other  cases  also,  73.  all  held  the 
same  things  needful  for  salvation, 
oS.  allowed  some  things  by  way  of 
pardon,  13.'5.  not  taught  all  orally  by 
Christ,  180.  whetter  bound  to  li\e 
of  the  Gospel,  412.  Acts  of  the,  a 
place  to  find  examples,  423,  452. 
example  of,  no  obligation  not  to  la- 
bour, 475,  476,  477,  478,  479.  main- 
tained by  holy  women  and  those 
among  whom  they  preached,  476, 
477,  478,  479.  words  not  to  be  de- 
rided, 481.  divided  their  provinces, 
497.  had  power  not  to  work,  ib.  to 
live  by  the  Gospel,  ib.  speak  with 
authority,  512.  once   of  the    world, 

555.  chosen   not  just  but  justified, 

556.  else  had  first  chosen  Christ,  ib. 
use  the  fourfo'd  exposition,  582—4. 
Acts  of,  rtjected  by  Manicheis,  in- 
consistently, 583.  teaching  handed 
down  from,  598.  effect  of  their  labours 
on  nations,  616. 

Apostolic  chair,  succession  from,  616. 
and  note,  m. 

Apparitions,  in  dreams,  529 — 541.  of 
the  dead  without  their  consciousness, 
529,  &c.  asof  the  living,  unconscious, 

529,  530,  531,  &c.  540.  images 
only,  not  ofsculs  themselves,  530,  ike. 
produced  by  the  ministry  of  Angels, 

530,  534,  639.  asking  for  burial, 
529,  530.  use  of,  ib.  pointing  out 
places  of  burial,  529,530.  foretelling 
things  future,  530,  not  to  be  denied, 
529.  instances  of  in  sleep,  531.  point- 
ing out  where  things  should  be  found, 

531,  seen  when  awake,  532.  in 
trances,  532,  533.  Doctrines  taught 
by,  ib.  of  Samuel  to  Saul,  537.  of 
St.  Felix,  538.  of  Saints  whether 
themselves  or  angelic  appearunces 
doubtful,  539,  540.  of  John  the 
Monk.  540.  of  Ananias  to  St.  Pail, 
ib.  John  would  have  solved  S.  Aug.'s 
difficulties,  541. 

Apftts,  396. 

Archangels,  mentioned  in  Scripture, 
121. 

Archimedes,  not  to  be  explained  by 
Epicurus,  590. 

Arena,  matches  of  the,  569. 

Arianism,  guarded  against,  173.  Bi- 
shops who  had  consented  to,  restored 
184. 

Arians,  persecution  of  the  Church  by, 
184. 

Aristotle,  not  to  be  explained  by  an 
enemv   590. 


INDEX. 


621 


Ark,  unclean  animals  in,  82.  even  tliey 

entered  by  the  door,  ib. 
Aniti/,  of  tlie  virtues  and  of  the  vices,  250. 
Arti;.aiis,  !?inging  at  work,  493. 
Ascension  of  Christ  foretold,   10.  wit- 
nessed by  i^postles,   12.   of  Christ's 
Body,  24.    of  Christ,   hovr  followed, 
118.    in  the    Body,    179.    how    our 
Loid  prefigured,  455.  of  our  Loid, 
572,  57.S,  576. 
Ashes,   of  Martyrs,   thrown    into    the 

Rhone,  523.  scattered,  528. 
Aspcr,  a  grammarian,  594. 
Assent,   some  wou'd   suspend,   99.    is 

necessary  to  faith,  ib. 
Assumptiun  of  manhood   bj*    God   the 

Son  complete,  108. 
Atoms,  soul  not  formed  of,  587. 
Ai/rjNstine,  St.  discoursed  on  the  Creed 
before    Council   at    Hippo,    15.     oc- 
casion of  his  writing  on  Faith  and 
Works,  37.    his  work  on  the  Letter 
and  Spirit,  57.  his  exposition  of  sal- 
vation  by   fire,    62,  «fec.   84.    would 
rather  hear  others  speak,  62.  how  he 
escaped    danger   by   a  mistake,  95. 
wrote,  on  his  conversion,  against  the 
Academics,  99.    his  letters  on   the 
perpetual  virginity  of  St.  Mary,  108. 
his  bock  on  Faith  and  "Works,  126. 
his  complaint  (in  commenting  on  the 
Epistle    to     Galatiars,)     135.     his 
opinion    about  infants,    141.    of  the 
number   c.f  the    saved,    142     when 
consecrated  Bishop,    159.   wrote  on 
the  Christian  Conflict  in   a    humble 
style,    159.    his    feelings   when    dis- 
coursing to  others,  188.  listened  to 
with   eagerness,    189.    his    beautiful 
advice  to  those  who  are  catechizing, 
2115,  206.  his  condescension  in  dis- 
courseimplied,  209.  recommendsthat 
the  catechumens  should  sit,  210.  re- 
lates a  personal  anecdote,  210.    how 
he  felt  while  catechising,  214,  215. 
how  he  catechized,   215.    expresses 
doubt  on  a  point  connected  with  mar- 
riage,   292.     not    at    variance    with 
Council  of  Carthage,  353.  his  many 
engagements,  353.  his  books  on  mar- 
riage and  virginity,  369,  384.  wrote 
against  Faustus,  3^9.  vvoiks  of,  on 
Divine  grace,  372.  his  works  on  Lying 
of  different  dates,  382.  uses  a  homely 
style  in  practical  matters,  383.   his 
avocations,  426.  life  laborious,  (bodily 
infirmity)  509,  510.  did  what  he  ex- 
horted others  to  do,  511.    found   a 
Bishop's  life  more  laborious  than  a 
Monk's, 510.  not  submitting  toman's 
judgment,   511.    desired   to    be    ad- 
monished, 512.  visitednightly  by  his 
mother  while  she  lived,  534.  not  after 


her  death,  534.  never  completed  his 
Petractations,  643.  when  ordained 
Priest,  577-  his  early  love  of  truth, 
578,  581.  his  prayer  for  Honoratus, 
578.  how  led  into  Manicheism,  ih. 
nine  years  in  ir,  ib.  tempted  by 
discussions,  579.  only  a  '  Hearer,' 
ih.  did  not  then  give  up  the  world, 
ib.  helped  to  mislead  Honoratus, 
ib.  his  hopes  at  that  time  earthly, 
580.  contrast  afterwards,  580.  his 
eyes  weak  from  past  delusions,  581, 
his  book  '  De  Spirilu  et  Litera,'  586, 
note  c.  his  belief  about  the  Old 
Testament,  590.  young  when  led  into 
error,  590,  91.  his  way  of  search  for 
true  religion,  59S.  disappointed  in 
Faustus,  596,  7.  tended  at  times 
toward  Academics,  597.  his  prayers 
for  help,  ib.  hears  St.  Ambrose,  ib. 
becomes  a  Catechumen,  ib.  his  pur- 
pose of  writing  further  to  Honoratus, 
618. 

Aurelius,  Bp.  of  Carthage,  desired  S. 
Aug.  to  write  on  the  work  of  Monks, 
470^,511. 

Authority,  see  Faith,  of  doctrine  to  be 
strictly  guarded,  402,431 — 3.  neces- 
sity of  in  religion,  698.  source  of  what 
we  believe,  604.  lovers  of  truth  be- 
lieve, 605.  for  doctrine  same  as  for 
belief  in  Clirist,  610.  some  probable 
a  priori,  613.' shewn  by  miracles  on 
multitudes,  614.  brought  to  bear  on 
life  through  numbers,  615.  seat  of  in 
Catholic  Church,  616. 


B. 


Bahyhn.  meaning  of  the  word,  226.  the 
Chu-eh  imprisoned  there,  226,  227. 
represents  the  world,  459. 

Bagaia,  Council  of,  159. 

Ball,  pleasure  of  playing  with,  378. 

Baptism, {aeti Regeneration,  Type)iiome 
put  it  before  instruction  in  duty,  37.  of 
persons  unlawfully  married,  38.  of 
those  living  in  other  sin,  ib.  absti- 
nence and  continence  in  jireparation 
for,  43.  much  moie  sin  to  be  forsaken 
before,  ib.  instruction  of  life  should 
precede,  except  in  the  approach  of 
death,  ib.  remission  of  sins  in,  ib. 
preparation  for,  best  time  for  in- 
struction, ib.  Did  the  Apostles  give, 
before  teaching  duty?  45,  sqq.  of 
the  Eunuch,  48,  54.  profession  re- 
quired in,  longer  than  his,  48.  Creed 
taught  before,  51.  principles  taught 
in,  52.  makes  us  temples  of  God,  54. 
not  named  by  our  Lord  to  the  young 


622 


INDEX. 


man,56.old  man  tobepntoff  before,and 
new  put  on,  44,  requires  love  toman 
as  well  as  to  God,  51.  Red  Sea  a  figure 
of,  ib.  of  John,  required  repentance, 
55.  at  any  rate  teaching  of  duties, 
55,  6.  publicans  required  to  renounce 
extortion  for,  73.  regeneration  not 
conferred  in  John's,  1 16.  might 
be  received  in  sin,  if  ill  livers  were 
*  saved  by  fire,'  59.  public  offenders 
not  admitted  tn,  unreformed,  60,  73. 
to  be  refused  to  fornicators,  66,  69. 
refused  to  harlots,  stage-players,  &c. 
69,  70.  received  in  sin  saves  not 
without  conversion,  69.  may  perhaps 
be  allowed  in  doubtful  cases,  71. 
symbol  delivered  in,  ib.  all  sin  re- 
mitted in,  72.  not  needed,  if  repent- 
ance not  needed,  76.  will  not  save 
those  who  continue  in  sin,  80.  insuf- 
ficient without  Christian  life,  81. 
salvation  not  promised  without,  ib. 
dancers  not  admitted  to,  82.  sin  of 
receiving  unreformed,  ib.  Sacrament 
of,  death  to  sin,  113.  new  birth  in,  ib. 
even  infants  die  to  original  sin  by,  ib. 
the  likeness  of  Christ's  death,  117. 
all  sin  remitted  in,  124.  needful  to 
salvation,  131.  case  of  those  who  die 
without,  140,  and  note  p.  makes  men 
sons  of  God  and  the  Church,  111. 
saves  not  evil  livers,  126.  of  the 
Church,  impudently  held  invalid  by 
Donatists,  1 83.  of  Heretics,  not  to  be 
repeated,  ib.  is  of  the  Churcli  onl)-, 
ib.  of  heretics,  '  form  of  Godliness,' 
ib.  remits  original  sin,  258.  puts 
away  all  sin,  295.  of  children,  312, 
remits  from  all  sin,  347.  supposed 
case  of  Ijing  in  order  to  give,  466. 
necessary  for  admission  to  Paradise, 
633.  at  Easter,  ib.  in  order  to  the 
judgment,  573.  makes  men  temples 
of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  574.  remis- 
sion of  all  sins  in,  575.  received,  to 
be  guarded  by  good  life,  ib.  washes 
once  for  all,  ib,  why  not  repeated, 
576. 

Baptized  ■persons  pray,  347. 

Barnabas,  simulation  of  corrected,  390, 
452. 

Barrenness,  does  not  make  divorce 
lawful,  282,291,  304. 

Beaiift/,  of  truth,  463.  inward  is  what 
Christ  love^,  374,  5.  false,  lawful  to 
none,  375.  spiritual,  decays  not,  ib. 

Bees,  have  progeny  without  intercourse, 
276. 

Begging  Monks,  509. 

Beginners,  lying,  well  meant,  excused 
in,  389,  416,  458,  460. 

Beginning,  of  God's  ways,  Christ  the, 
28.  The  Father  is  Beginning  of  The 


Son,  ib.  The  Son  also  The  Begin- 
ning, ib.  Godhead  has  none,  569. 

Belief,  see  Faith,  of  historical  facts, 
604.  implies  objects  unseen,  2.  of 
things  on  earth  requisite,  ib.  a  step 
before  understanding,  16.  different 
from  opinion,  383.  needed  before  un- 
derstanding, 396.  of  a  lie,  not  always 
hurtful,  403,  430.  of  false  doctrine,  a 
real  misery,  430.  in  the  heart,  not 
enough  without  confession,  438.  of 
historical  facts,  604. 

Bene-dictio  better  than  bona  dictio,  202. 

Betrayal,  sin  of,  405,  6,  460.  by  silence, 
407,  8. 

Bible,  see  Scripture. 

Bill  of  divorcement,  283. 

Bimembris,  instance  of,  137. 

Birds,  their  habits  alluded  to,  296. 
who?  349.  image  of  the  proud,  498. 
not  to  be  imitated  in  all  points,  499, 
500,  501,  &c.  in  cages,  500.  not 
imitated  in  picking  food  or  flies,  501. 
caught  by  want  of  water,  579. 

Bishop,  empowered  to  relax  certain 
excommunications,  353.  addresses 
another  Bishop's  flock  bypermission, 
.508,  516. 

Bishop's  life  laborious,  509,  510.  recent 
increase  of  occupation,  509. 

Bishops,  represented  in  the  Gospel  by 
fishers,  US.  Catholic,  overthrew 
Priscillianism,  435.  called  upon  to 
judge  and  mediate  in  secular  matters, 
500.  by  Apostolic  injunction,  ib.  to 
be  obeyed,  511.  succession  of  from 
Apostles,  616. 

Blasphemy,  worst  in  one  who  knows  it 
such,  434,  5,  457,  466.  none  can  be 
allowable,  465,  468.  suggested  by 
Job's  wife,  550. 

Blessedness,  called  Right  Hand  of 
God,  573. 

Blessing,  put  for  cursing,  449. 

Blood,  of  Christ  given  the  pardoned  to 
drink,  5/5. 

Bodies  of  the  married  are  holy,  288. 

Body,  (see  Flesh.  Christ.)  palpable 
after  resurrection,  15.  how  acts  on 
the  soul,  23.  of  Christ  ascended,  24. 
objections  to  this,  ib.  spiritual,  what, 
24,  25.  lowest  part  of  man,  34.  less 
quickly  restored  than  soul  and  spirit, 
ib.  resurrection  of,  ib.  renewed,  will 
not  be  flesh  and  blood,  35.  human, 
caused  by  God  to  walk  on  water, 
36.  may  be  raised  by  Him  to 
Heaven,  ib.  death  of,  a  punishment, 
102,  140.  the  Temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  120.  in  what  kind  angels 
have  appeared,  121,  122.  a  weight 
on  the  soul,  124.  matter  of,  known  to 
God,  138.  to  be  restored  as  a  statue 


INDEX. 


623 


recast,    138.    how   called   spiritual, 

139.  animal,  is  not  soul,  (anima,)  ib. 
of  Christ  called  Flesh  after  resur- 
rection, ib.  of  the  wicked  rises  in- 
corruptible but  capable  of  suffering, 

140.  celestial  in  the  resurrection, 
160.  chastening  of  the,  165.  of  the 
just  to  rise  in  a  better  state,  166. 
pain  of,  afflicts  the  bad,  cleanses  the 
good,  166,  7.  while  in,  we  see  not 
some  things,  167.  brouglit  to  obe- 
dience, by  the  soul  obej'ingGod,  171. 
of  Christ  real,  assumed  through 
soul,  174.  not  merely  like  the  dove, 
1 76.  of  Chri  jit's  risen ,  not  to  be  judged 
of  as  other  bodies,  178.  after  resur- 
rection will  be  heavenlj',  185.  may 
be  holy  in  marriage,  358,  9.  of  all 
the  Faithful  is  '  members  of  Christ,' 
359.  its  peaceful  members  made  the 
soul's  pattern,  265.  soul  to  be  pre- 
ferred to,  394.  purity  of,  depends  on 
soul,  394,  465.  Priscillianists  erred 
concerning,  432.  hurt  only  by  the 
pain  of  dying,  not  after  death,  ib.526, 
528,  620.  resurrection  of,  520,  521. 
faith  in  resurrection  of,  confirmed  by 
care  for  the  dead,  521,  542.  obtained 
by  the  spirit,  625.  not  affected  by  the 
treatment  of  the  corpse,  620,  521, 
626,  528.  motions  of,  affect  the  minti, 
■524.  an  interest  felt  in,  by  us  while 
living,  526,  7,  9.  overcome  by  the 
Martyrs,  526.  real  good  of,  in  the 
life  to  come,  546,  7.  to  be  restored 
entire,  547-  patience  partly  in,  ib. 
mangling  of,  in  Martyrs,  "648.  a 
creature  of  God,  674.'  Temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ib.  resurrection  of, 
576.  not  our  object  in  religion,  592. 

Bona  dictio,  Pagan  ;  Benedictio,  Chris- 
tian, 202. 

Boyhood,  good  and  bad  reasons  for 
preferring,  588.  rashness  incident  to, 
590. 

Bread,  daily,  prayer  for,  154.  breaking 
of,  at  Troas,  the  Eucharist,  494,  5. 

Breviary,  Eoman,  on  Feast  of  St.  John 
Baptist,  71,  note  d. 

Bridegroom,  Christ  the,  14. 

Burial,  of  Christ,  24.  in  the  memorials 
of  martyrs,5 17,523,539,542.  place  of, 
518.  want  of,  does  not  affect  the  dead, 
519, 520, 522,525, 528, 529.  a  grief  to 
the  living, 528.  external  rites  of^for  the 
comfort  of  the  living,  520,  528,  542. 
no  benefit  to  the  wicked,  520,  529. 
care  for,  a  duty,  521.  why,  529.  by 
the  Patriarchs  and  their  children, 
621.  significative,  522.  commended 
in  Scripture,  521,  2.  rewarded,  622. 
want  of,  and  place  of,  does  not  hinder 
resurrection,  .520.  or  rest,  522, 5, 530. 


place  of,  a  benefit  only  as  occasioning 
prayer,  523, 4,5, 542.  to  slight,  irreli- 
gious, 530.  place  of,  naturally  a  sub- 
ject of  interest,  526,  7.  loss  of,  how  a 
punishment,  ib.  only  to  our'  feelings 
while  living,  ib.  how  a  kindness, 529. 

Business  distracting  the  mind  unsuit- 
able to  preachers,  288. 

But,  force  of,  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  155. 

Butler,  Analogy,  1. 


Calling,  each  to  remain  in,  483. 

Canaanitish  Woman,  had  living  faith, 
65.  her  reply,  232. 

Cu7ididianus ,  bearer  of  S.  Aug.'s  book 
'  on  Care  for  the  Dead,'  542.  urged 
S.  Aug.  to  write  it,  ib. 

Canticles,  prophecy  of  Christ  and  the 
Church,  14. 

Care  for  the  Dead,  book  on,  occasion 
of  writing,  537,  542. 

Caring  for  temporal  things  forbidden, 
472. 

Caring  not,hj  some  limited  to  spiritual 
wants,  471. 

Carnally-minded  like  grass,  498. 

Carthage,  fourth  Council  of,  353.  in- 
troduction of  monasteries  into,  470. 
divisions  respecting  them,  ib. 

Cassiodorus,  his  book,  De  Inst.  Div. 
Lit.  159,  577. 

Catechising,  (see  Catechumen,^  recol- 
lection of,  appealed  to,  44.  subjects 
of,  indicated  in  the  Gospels,  55. 
should  strike  hard  at  sin,  69.  why 
some  things  neglected  in,  70.  should 
include  points  of  duty,  82.  difficulties 
of,  187,  8.  treated  under  three  heads, 
191.  (1)  Manner  of  narration: — 
how  Scripture  is  to  be  discoursed  of, 
191.  charity  must  reign,  191,  208. 
love  to  be  the  end  proposed,  195.  of 
which  S.  Aug.  gives  an  illustration 
by  his  beautiful  advice,  196,  200. 
how  it  may  be  sometimes  begun,  197. 
may  commence  with  Genesis,  197, 
218.  compared  to  golden  links  which 
should  just  hold  together  the  jewel- 
truths  of  Scripture,  197,  8.  (2)  Pre- 
cept and  Ejchortation  : — resurrection 
and  judgment  may  follow  narration, 
198.  to  be  genera]  rather  than  par- 
ticular,ib.  of  what  duration,  199,238. 
how  well  informed  persons  are  to  be 
dealt  with,  200.  (3;  Of  cheerfulness 
in  the  speaker  : — impeded  by  diffi- 
culties of  giving  utterance  to  thought, 
203.  the  condescension  required  in 
talking  to  simple  people  is  distressing 


624 


INDEX. 


to  the  speaker,  204.  an  exercise  of 
patience  and  love,  ib.  feeble,  when 
the  speaker's  heart  is  secretly  con- 
sumed by  some  uneasiness,  ib.  how 
the  preceding  impediments  are  to  be 
remedied,  so  th:it  the  speaker  may 
proceed  with  cheerfulness,  205. 
should  be  done  in  the  same  spirit  as 
weact towards  children, 205, 208.  its 
pleasures,  208.  a  thought  suggested 
to  those  who  must  needs  catechize 
with  a  heavy  heart,  21 1 ,  12.  another 
consideration,  212.  another,  213.  use 
of  excited  feelings  in  catechizing,  ib. 
a  comfort  under  the  sense  of  sin,  ib. 
the  style  of  it  must  differ  with  the 
auditory,  214.  a  specimen  promised, 

203.  one  actually  supplied,  215 

beginning  with  an  examination  of 
the  catechumen's  motive,  216 — 218. 
. proceeding  to  a  reviewof  Revela- 
tion, from  its  commencement,  218. 
our  first  parents,  220.  the  fall,  2:i. 
the  flood,  222.    the  call  of  Abraham, 

223.  the   deliverance   from    Egypt, 

224.  the  forty  years  in  the  wilder- 
ness, 225.  the  promised  land,  ib.  the 
Babylonish  captivity,  226.  the  return 

to  the  land,  228 The  mystery  of 

times  and  seasons,  ib.  the  sixth  age 
begins  with  Christ's  coming,  229. 
brief  view  of  His  lowly  condition, 
and  mysterious  humility,  230.  the 
passion,  the  resurrection,  the  Chris- 
tian penttco«t,  231.  early  converts, 
ib.  S.  Paul,  232.  the  Church,  the 
Day  of  Judgment,  heaven  and  hell, 
233.    the    immort;ility    of  the   soul, 

234 Exhortation  to  holiness,  234- 

237 conclusion    of  the  address, 

237 — 238.  another  shorter  specimen, 
238—242. 

Caiechmnen,  (see  Catechizing  and  Sa- 
cramenf,)  Instruction  preparatory  to 
making,  (1)  S.  Aug.  first  supposes 
the  case  of  a  very  humble  person,  his 
frame  of  mind  unknown,  196.  de- 
sirable that  something  should  be  first 
known  of  him,  ib.  possible  motives 
for  coming,  196,217,  18.  what  to  be 
warned  against,  193.  by  our  mouth 
hears  God,  199.  how  long  to  be 
kept,  ib.  (2)  the  case  of  a  very 
learned  applicant  supposed,  ib.  how 
such    an  one   is   to   be   dealt   wiih, 

200.  (3)  a  casein  the  mean  between 
(1)  and  (2),  how  to  be  dealt  with, 

201.  2.    what  to  be  warned  against, 

202.  all  who  come  to  be  cwtechized 
are  to  be  regarded  wiih  patient  love: 
see  Catechiziiifi  (3).  how  their  con- 
tempt should  affect  us,  207-  pleasure 
of  guiding  them,  208,  9.  how  their 


confidence  to  be  won,  209.  when  they 
seem  inaccessible,  how  to  be  dealt 
with,  209.  should  be  allowed  to  sit, 
if  possible,  210.  anecdote  of  one,  ib. 
should  bemade  tof^:el  interested, 21 1. 
affect  the  speaker  differently,  214. 
specimen  of  an  address  to  one,  216- 
237.  another  shorter  address,  238- 
242.  ceremon)'  of  making  one,  237, 
7iote.  having  a  second  wife,  case  of, 
295.  St.  Augustine  becomes  one, 
597. 
Catecfminens,  MSQ  of  their  state,  44. 'no 
special  epistles  to,  46.  none  made 
without  renouncing  heathenism,  53. 
learned  and  repeated  the  Creed,  563. 
still  under  their  sins,  576.  regenera- 
tion prayed  for  for  them,  ib. 
Catliolic,    title  of,  whose   by  consent, 

596. 
Cal/iulics,see  Church,  do  not  rebaptize, 

183. 
Catiline,  his  powers  of  endurance,  645, 
Cato,  gave  up  his  wife  to  another,  45. 

cited,  296. 
Cataphryges,  see  Montanists. 
Causes.^  see  God,  Nature,  of  good  and 
evil  worth  knowing,  94.    of  common 
things  obscure,  615. 
Centurion,  case  of  the,  331,  2.    ready 

faith  of,  praised,  612. 
Chalcedon,    Council    of,    excommuni- 
cates (Church)  widows  who  marry, 
353. 
Chance,  see  Fate. 

Change   of  elements,    possible   in  the 
body,  36.  sudden  at  resurrection,  ib. 
Chant,  inequality  of  voices  in,  139. 
Character,  care  of,  a  point  of  charity, 

37«. 
Characterem,  (of  Baptism,)  576. 
Charifi/,  feasts  of,  79.  all  things  to  be 
referred  to,    191,   see   Love,    of  the 
married  state,  278.    shewn  in  com- 
municating any  good  to  others,  354. 
in  keeping  good  repute,  378.    unity 
of  the  Church    belongs  to,  559.    a 
mark  of  the  free-born,  561.  the  Church 
abides  in,  575. 
Chase,  simile  of,  383. 
Chastiti/,  may  not  be  broken  to  serve 
another;  why  then   truth  .^   101.    of 
continence,     better     than     married 
chastity,  302.  wedded,  is  a  good,  357, 
362.  wedded,  is  God's  gift, 372.  com- 
plete,   {ififegritas,)    of  virgins    and 
widows,    372.    spiritual   delights  in, 
377.    not  to  be  broken  to  save  a  life, 
393.  or  a  soul,  466.   not  lost  by  vio- 
lence, 394,  421.    of  mind  what,  421, 
465.    of  mind  not  to  be  broken,  more 
than  of  body,  to  detect  heresy,  439, 
40.    is  of  the  truth,  464,  5.    cannot 


INDEX. 


025 


teach   adultery,  4i)5.    advanced  by 
Christianity,  (315. 

Cheerfulness,  see  Catechizing  (3). 

Children,  why  baptized,  312.  tl^e 
Three  Holy,  352.  Soug  of,  ib, 
having,  a  reason  for  not  marrying 
again,  361.  spiritual,  may  serve  in- 
stead of  natural,  3(51,  376.  virginity 
of,  a  compensation  to  parents,  361, 
368.  desire  of,  lawful,  but  not  most 
praiseworthy,  362.  having,  a  bless- 
ing, not  a  merit,  366,  368.  bringing 
up  well,  is  of  good  will,  363.  spiritual 
fruits  in  place  of,  375,  6.  lawfully 
begetting,  for  God  a  good  work,  440. 
power  of  a  parent  over,  446.  loss  of, 
549,570.  exorcised,  564.  know  their 
parents  by  faith,  4,  605. 

Childhood,  why  a  grown  man  may 
prefer,  588. 

Chrism,  anointing,  6. 

Christ,  (see  Lvve)  the  Seed  of  Abraham, 
5.  nations  blessed  in,  6.  whence  so 
called,  ib.  So  honoured  though  cru- 
cified, a  miracle,  8.  witnessed  to  by 
Jewish  prophecy,  11.  sufferings  of, 
contrasted  with  His  Victory,  12. 
name  of,  honoured  even  by  heietics, 
13.  The  Bridegroom,  14.  Rose 
again  with  real  body,  15.  The  Only 
Begotten  Son,  18.  Created  as  Heal 
of  the  Church,  20.  In  what  sense 
First-begotten,  21.  Unchangeable, 
ib.  Perfect  Man  from  His  concep- 
tion, 22.  had  a  mother  on  earth,  ib.  as 
God,  had  no  mother,  ib.  not  defiled 
by  conception,  23.  crucified,  dead, 
and  buried,  24.  rose  again,  ib. 
ascended  into  Heaven,  ib.  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand,  25.  will  judge 
quick  and  dead,  ib.  Was,  is,  and  is 
to  come,  as  Man,  26.  Called  The 
Beginning, 28.  Texts  alleged  against 
equal  Godhead  of,  29.  explained,  ib. 
bore  with  a  devil  among  His  Apo- 
stles, 40.  Doctrine  of,  comprehends 
character  of  His  Body  as  well  as  His 
Person,  49.  crucified,  implies  cruci- 
fixion to  the  world,  50.  way  made 
for,  by  repentance,  55.  answer  of,  to 
the  young  man,  56.  the  foundation, 
62.  His  dealing  with  the  woman 
of  Canaan,  66.  They  come  not  to, 
who  persist  in  breaking  His  laws,  66. 
Advocacy  of,  no  encouragement  to 
sin,  75.  Grace  of,  needed  by  all  for 
salvation,  77.  the  way  of  righteous- 
ness, 78.  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
the  Virgin  Mary,  1 10.  not  Son  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ib.  as  Man,  was 
made  by  Him,  111.  One  Person  in 
two  Natures,  112.  conceived  without 
original  sin,  ib.     How  called  sin,  ib. 


as  Mediator  takes  away  sin,  115. 
alone,  needed  not  to  be  born  again, 
ib.  Born  at  first  of  the  Spirit,  116. 
Byptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  ib. 
Baptized  for  humiliation,  ib.  Mys- 
teries of  His  life  patterns  for  us, 
1 1 7.  His  coming  to  Judgment  future, 
119.  His  words  thunder,  130.  able 
to  raise  the  dead,  ib.  Looked  on 
St.  Peter  to  move  him.  136.  in  what 
sense  'died  to  sin,'  113,  118.  died 
not  for  Angels,  122.  Body  of,  called 
flesh  after  resurrection,  139.  could 
not  have  freed  us  were  He  not  God, 
150.  example  of,  ib.  unchangeable 
and  above  every  creature,  160.  every 
where  called  Son  of  the  Most  High, 
1 70.  our  highest  example,  ib.  honour- 
ed both  sexes,  177.  took  His  body  to 
Heaven,  179.  Seated  at  God's  right 
Hand,  ib.  is  the  foundation  of  the 
Catholic  faith,  87.  so  not  among 
Heretics,  88.  our  belief  concerning, 
89.  To  think  He  shall  die  again 
were  a  great  evil,  97.  faith  in,  the 
way  to  God,  100.  sacrifice  of,  107. 
Birth  of,  lOS.  wholly  free  from  sin, 
though  perfect  man,  ib.  both  God 
and  Man,  ib.  a  reasonable  soul,  ib. 
Son  not  by  grace  but  nature,  ib.  full 
of  grace  as  Son  of  Man,  ib.  as  God, 
without  beginning,  ib.  as  man  how 
full  of  truth,  110.  brought  in  grace, 
156.  old  Fathers  saved  by  faith  in,  ib. 
in  Himself  unchangeable,  169.  could 
have  freed  man  otherwise  i  f  He  would, 
ib.  Each  fool  has  his  objection  to, 
for  this  or  that  in  His  life,  ib.  His 
medicine  for  all  our  ills,  170.  is 
'True  God,'  173.  is  no  mere  man, 
ih.  is  real  Man,  174.  Assumed  soul 
through  Spirit, body  through  soul,  ib. 
By  so  doing  not  defiled,  ib.  Suffering 
no  objection  to  His  Godhead,  177, 
8.  Rose  again  in  the  same  body 
that  died,  178.  His  coming,  the 
object  of  the  Old  Testament,  194. 
His  condescension  a  motive  and  mo- 
del for  ours,  205.  why  He  paid  tribute, 
227.  reason  of  His  life  of  denial,  229, 
230.  lowly  condition,  230.  our  pat- 
tern, ib.  condescends  to  our  slowness, 
245.  and  the  Church,  their  union, 
263.  heretical  notion  concerning,  264. 
came  in  real  flesh,  264.  took  a 
human  body  and  a  human  soul,  267. 
really  hungered  and  thirsted,  &c. 
299.  saw  fit  not  to  abstain  like 
the  Baptist,  ib.  imitation  of,  328. 
the  object  of  love,  351.  taught  hu- 
mility when  near  His  Passion,  333, 
334,  335.  Himself  the  model  for 
virgins,  337,  338.  the  object  of  virgin 


S  S 


626 


INDEX. 


love,  351.  crucified,  fo  be  gazed  on 
with  the  inward  eyes,  ib.  the  best 
Husband,  352.  maj-  not  be  loved 
little, ib.  ancientsserved, by  marriage, 
359,  60.  recognised  by  Anna  as  a 
child,  360, 368.  conceived  in  chastity, 
can  make  virginity  fruitful,  364. 
shewn  to  be  worthiest  object  of  love, 
374.  loves  an  inward  beauty,  ib. 
marriage  to,  by  vow  of  continence, 
how  to  be  understood,  363.  allowable 
to  a  wife  with  husband's  consent, 
ib.  A  husband,  in  the  Spirit,  to  the 
married  as  to  the  Church,  363,  4.  did 
and  commanded  all  for  our  salvation, 
393.  no  lie  to  be  told  about,  401,  2. 
patience  of,  perfect,  410.  yet  did  not 
literally  turn  the  other  cheek,  410. 
sayings  of,  that  seem  false,  are  figu- 
rative, 423,  454,  5.  denied  before 
men  in  pretending  heresy,  435,  6. 
few  deny  sincerely,  437-  kept  back 
some  truth,  447.  called  a  '  Rock,' 
'  Lion,'  &c.  448.  under  our  sins 
figured  by  Jacob,  450.  Himself  a 
Prophet,  454.  assumed  shew  of  ig- 
norance, 454.  His  '  feigning,'  ib. 
not  to  be  denied  to  make  another  a 
Christian,  468.  exhorts  Martyrs  to 
patience, 547.  forbearance  of,to  Judas, 
648.  chose  and  justified  the  Apostles, 
556.  faith  of,  saved  the  old  Saints, 
556,  7.  made  poor  for  our  sakes,561. 
poor  of,  to  be  made  rich,  562.  with- 
out sin,  restores  from  sin,  564,  5. 
what  He  teaches  of  Himself,  567. 
born  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  ib.  His  birth  lowly  as 
being  among  men,  ib.  Passion  and 
Death  of,  ib.  born  perfect  as  Son  of 
God,  569.  born  of  the  Virgin  in  ful- 
ness of  time,  when  He  would,  ib. 
how  Man,  ib.  God  and  JMan,  ib. 
death  of,  a  pattern  to  Martyrs,  ib. 
Resurrection  of,  569,  576.  sets  a 
prize  as  in  the  arena,  568.  arose  to 
die  no  more,  670.  example  of,  goes 
beyond  Job's,  572.  forsaken  of  Gcd 
only  for  this  life,  ib.  what  He  suffered 
of  the  Jews,  ib.  ascension  of,  ib. 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  573. 
shall  crme  to  judge  quick  and  dead, 
ib.  the  Church  abides  in,  as  branches 
in  the  Vine,  675.  the  Root,  ib.  sin 
of  killing,  not  unpardonable,  ib.  mem- 
bers of,  shall  follow  Him,  676.  used 
the  four  ways  of  exposition,  582 — 4. 
veil  of  Law  done  away  by,  586. 
teaching  handed  down  from,  598. 
even  heretics  bid  us  believe  in,  609. 
on  whose  testimony  we  do  so,  610. 
planted  His  religion  by  the  way  of 
faith.,  612.  death  and  resurrection  of. 


shut  out  fear,  613.  God  in  true  Man, 
614.  miracles  of,  various,  ib.  their 
use,  614,  15.  effects  of  His  Incarna- 
tion and  teaching,  616. 

Christiaiiilii,  derided  as  credulous,  1. 
is  not  without  evidence,  5.  testimony 
of  mankind  to,  595.  profession  of,  free, 
}b.  effects  of,  on  the  masses,  615,  16. 

C/irist'ans,  bad  conduct  of  some,  70. 
marked  by  Faith  as  Jews  by  Law, 
78.  not  to  be  made  like  Jewish  Pro- 
selytes, 80.  holy  life  required  of,  81. 
under  stricter  rule  than  Jews,  101. 
chddren  of  God  and  the  Church  by 
Baptism,  111.  must  be  conformed  to 
Christ's  Cross,  Burial,  Resurrection, 
Ascension,  118.  called  gods,  120. 
may  call  God  '  Father,'  128.  not  to 
return  evil,  129.  law-suits  between, 
134.  state  of  those  who  have  left  the 
faith,  but  claim  the  name,  168,  171. 
all  one  commonwealth,  505.  state  of, 
as  longing  for  inheritance,  561.  work 
and  prize  of,  569.  more  numerous 
than  Jews  and  Pagans  united,  596. 
they  are  not,  who  forbid  faith  in  Christ 
before  reason,  611.  misrepresented, 
618. 

Churchy  (see  Ministers,)  quotes  her- 
self as  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  6,  9. 
called  the  '  Queen,'  6.  visible  as  such, 
-7.  isherself  an  evidence,  10.  witness 
of  past  and  future,  1 1.  spread  abroad 
by  suffering,  13.  Bride  of  Christ,  14. 
sin  of  dividing,  ib.  Christ  Head  of 
the,  20.  Holy,  means  the  Catholic, 
33.  must  have  discipline,  though  con- 
taining evil  men,  38,  40.  not  to  use 
the  visible  sword,  38.  power  of,  to 
bind  and  loose,  40.  abiding  though 
with  evil  men,  42.  good  will  be  mixed 
with  evil  in,  to  the  last,  ib.  marriage, 
how  sacred  in,  46.  character  of,  im- 
plied in  truth  concerning  its  Head, 
49.  good  and  evil  in,  78.  evil  men 
enter  not  as  such,  Q7-  how  open  to 
'  good  and  bad,'  67,  81,2.  sin  brings 
persecutionon,7].  severity  of,  figured, 
82.  the,  mother  of  the  Baptized,  111. 
our  faith  concerning,  119,20.  temp's 
of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  120.  militant 
and  triumphant,  ib.  Heavenly  part 
to  be  known  to  us  hereafter,  122. 
part  on  earth  redeemed,  ib.  remission 
of  sin  granted  in,  126.  examples  of 
seeking  things  above  in  the,  171. 
conquers  by  suffering,  ib.  minds  not 
vain  questions,  ib.  corn  and  chaff  in 
the,  ib.  difference  between  Head  and 
members  of,  175.  to  be  at  God's  right 
hand,  179.  heedless  living  in,  181. 
not  limited  to  Africa,  ib.  the,  struck, 
not  slain,  by  Donatus,  182.  progress 


INDEX. 


627 


of,  since  the  Douatists  were  cut  off, 
183.    should   be  full  of  mercy,   184. 
our  mother,  188.  the  wicked  must  be 
endured  in   it,  199,  217,  21S,  221, 
226,  23.5,  240,  241.    its  authority  su- 
preme   over    private    opinion,    200. 
like    Jerusalem    of  old,   is   held    in 
captivit}^   by   the    world's    Babylon, 
207.  in  what  sense  the  old  Fathers 
belonged     to    the     Christian,     224. 
a    Vine,    watered    by    the    blood   of 
Martyrs,  233.    an    heretical    notion 
concerning,    264.     Christ    and    the, 
263,  265.  not  yet  perfect,  2G5.  made 
subject  to  Christ,  ib.  in  what  sense 
it  "  lusteth  against  Christ,'' 266.  htr 
daily  cry,  ib.  dealt  with  by  Christ  as 
the  body  is  by  the  spirit,  267.    the, 
a  IM other  and  a  Virgin,  309.  a  holy 
Virgin,   315.    sometimes  called  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  325.  the,  a  vir- 
gin and  spouse  of  Christ,  364, 375,  6. 
includes    the    departed,    380.    in    a 
household,  381.  authority  of  its  prac- 
tices  though  not  in  Scripture,  519. 
disunion   with,  breaks  charity,  559. 
mother  of  God's  children,  563.  named 
in  Creed  after  the  Holy  Trinity,  575. 
the   Temple   of  God,  ib.    victorious 
over  heresies,  ib.  abides  in  charity, 
ib.    Body  of  Christ,  576.  milk  from 
the  teats  of,  579.    with  what  error 
charged    by    3Iauichees,   589,   698. 
Catholic,  prima  facie  claims  of,  596. 
her   teaching  from    Christ   and   the 
Apostles,  598.  witnessed  to  by  people 
and  nations,  610.  testimony  of  man- 
kind leads  us  to,  616.  doctrines  of, 
concerning  God,  617. 

Churches,  building  of,  441.  seats  in, 
the  exception,  (apparently)  in  S.  Au- 
gustine's time,  210.  of  withdrawing 
from  in  time  of  service,  ib.  by  whom 
filled  on  Festival  days,  236.  ' 

Cicero^  lectured  on,  531.  his  rule  for 
argument,  580.  studied  because  ac- 
knowledged by  all,  593.  conspirators 
put  to  death  by,  604. 

Circumcelliones,  plots  of,  95,  note  h. 

Circumcision,  made  uncircumcision  by 
leaving  the  law,  390,  92.  for  whom 
lawful,  391.  a  seal,  ib.  is  not  for 
Christians,  586. 

City  of  God,  St.  Aug.  on,  15. 

Clean,  who  are  in  God's  sight,  400. 

Clergy,  habitual  crimes  of,  135.  not 
bound  to  labour,  476,  7,  8,  9,  80. 
may  claim  maintenance  from  their 
people,  476,  7,  8,  9,  all,  as  well  as 
Apostles,  480,  64,  85.  employments 
fitted  for,  488.  receiving  support  not 
as  mendicants — of  right,  ib.  receive 
support  that  they  may  avoid  distract- 


ing occupations,  489.  injunctions  to 
support,  488,  491,  2.  for  the  good 
of  the  people,  491.  have  the  same 
right  to  maintenance  as  Apostles, 
497.  ministers  of  the  altar  dispensers 
of  Sacrament,  ib.  to  become,  for  the 
sake  of  a  maintenance  wrong,  505, 
507.  not  to  be  careful,  50/. 
Ccecilianvs,  falsely  accused,  41.  Dona- 
tus  could  not  prove  charges  against, 
182. 
Cacilius,  not  studied  instead  of  Cicero, 

593. 
Coeval,  image  of  the  Coeternal,  568. 
Coin,  adulterate,  S3. 
Colours,  divers,  signify  what,  6. 
Commanilmcnts,  the  two  chief,  51,  74, 
not   to   be  separated,   51,   56.    ten, 
division    of,  52.    mention  of  by  our 
Lord,  66,  61,  62.   breach  of,  forfeits 
salvation,  64,  83.  pertain  not  to  mere 
faith  only,  74.    of  love  to  God  and 
man,  Gospel  hangs  on,   as   well    as 
Law,  157,  194,  5. 
Command,  of  the  Lord,  why  S.  Paul 

had  none,  316. 
Commands,  clear,  to  be  obeyed  at  all 
risks,  409, 10.  explained  by  examples, 
410,  11. 
Communion,  of  the  Father  and  the  Son, 

30.  is  no  substance,  32. 
Community    of    goods   at    Jerusalem, 
489.    ot  goods,  benefit  of,  507.    all 
Christians  one,  505. 
Compacts,  sexual,  how  far  sinful,  279, 

280. 
Competenies,   learned    the    Creed,   15. 
why  so  called,  44.  earnestness  of,  ib. 
82.  astepbevond  other  Catechumens, 
ib.  533. 
Concealment ,  not  in  itself  lying,  447,  8, 

of  many  things  lawful,  589. 
Conceptacuhnn,  412. 
Conception,  of  our  Lord  no  defilement, 

23. 
Concubinage  for   offspring's   sake   un- 
-  lawful,  291.   was  lawful  among  the 
ancient  fathers,  292.    lawfulness  of 
a  certain  kind  of,  doubtful,  ib. 
Concupiscence,    gradually    weakened, 
515.    patience    not   to   minister    to, 
546. 
Confession,  of  sins,  360.   medicine  of, 

417.  remedy  for  lies,  468. 
Confnis.  585. 

Conflict,  Christian,  the  field  of,  within, 
161.  of  virtues  and  vices  in  the  soul, 
248.  of  the  Christian,  250,  260, 
61. 
Conjugal  love,  see  Love. 
Conscience,  good,  excuses  not  careless- 
ness of  repute,  378.  solace  of,  in  evil 
report,   379.    sinning    against,    434. 


S  S  2 


628 


INDEX. 


moves  all  good  minds  to  seek  God, 
613. 

Consent,  in  thought  constitutessin,  246, 
47.  yielded  and  withheld,  260,  61. 
withheld  is  mortification  of  the  mem- 
bers, 271.  what  constitutes,  39/  — 
400.  when  it  ju»;tifies  doing  a  man  a 
wrong,  401.  chastity notlostwithout, 
421. 

Consenthis,  his  enquiries  about  Pris- 
cillianists,  382,  428.  St.  Augustine's 
epistles  to,  426, note  a.  praise  of,  427. 
advised  to  write  against  Priscillian- 
ism,  436,  450. 

Continence,  required  before  Baptism, 
43.  door  of,  244,  246.  why  mentioned 
last  by  S.  Paul,  250.  God's  gift,  243, 
267.  the  gift  of  God's  Spirit,  253. 
difficult  to  treat  of,  243.  from  mar- 
riage glorious,  ib.  of  the  lips,  ib.  to 
attain,  we  must  not  trust  in  our 
own  strength,  251.  forbears  excuses, 
253.  sought  of  God  by  David,  254. 
required  against  all  sin,  256.  peace 
the  prize  of,  257.  not  a  persecution 
of  our  nature  but  its  healthful  chas- 
tisement, 267.  falsely  laid  claim  to, 
ib.  different  kinds  of,  so  called,  but 
not  deserving  the  name,  268.  falsely 
so  called,  ib.  its  office,  269.  is  re- 
fusing the  consent  of  the  mind,  271. 
must  watch  the  thoughts,  ib.  how 
puts  down  lust,  272.  glory  of  perse- 
verance in,  due  to  God,  273.  the 
greater  of  two  goods,  283,  302,  320. 
and  marriage  two  goods,  283.  com- 
pared to  fasting,  284.  how,  is  not  on 
a  level  with  the  marriage  of  the  old 
Fathers,  296,  298.  a  virtue  of  the 
soul,  298.  in  habit  and  in  act,  309. 
praise  of  the  stale  of,  301.  the  root- 
virtue,  305.  profitable  for  the  life  to 
come,  315,  SIG,  320,  323.  when  un- 
willingly professed,  334.  of  widows: 
its  rank,  345.  widowed,  better  than 
nuptial  chastity,  367.  best  for  those 
who  '  receive'  it,  361,  2.  strength  of, 
measures  merit  of  widowhood,  366. 
of  heretics  not  to  persuade  us,  368. 
all  is  God's  gift,  369,  70.  though 
willing,  371.  term  properly  used  of 
virgins  or  widows,  372.  universal, 
supposed  danger  of,  389.  praised  by 
Epicurus,  587. 

Contraries,  none  to  being,  21.  rule  of 
logicians  for,  fails  in  good  and  evil, 
93.  instances  of,  429. 

Conversion,  not  to  be  brought  about  by 
lying,  424,432.  33. 

Cornutiis,  a  grammarian,  594. 

Correction,  a  kind  of  alms,  l'z9. 

Corruption  of  nature,  what,  92. 

Council,  at  Hippo,  A.D,393, 15.  fourth 


of  Carthage,  its  canon  about  widows, 
353, 

Comicils,  weight  of,  against  heretics, 
516. 

Counsel,  spiritual,  beyond  law,  157. 

Creation,  of  matter  implied  in  omnipo- 
tence, 17.  sometimes  confounded  with 
begetting,  20.  doctrine  of,  90.  all 
good,  the  whole  better  than  each 
part,  359. 

Creature,  The  Son  not  3,  20.  Wisdom  of 
God  became,  ib.  the,  held  unclean  by 
some,  41.  goodness  of,  not  as  the 
divine,  90.  each  good ,  and  all  together 
very  good,  91.  gives  pleasure  by 
approach  to  that  which  loves  it,  558. 
visible  and  invisible,  564. 

Credu'ousness,  distinguished  from  faith, 
698,  600. 

Creed,  learned  by  heart,  15, 16.  known 
before  the  Scriptures,  16.  commented 
on  for  defence  against  heresy,  ib. 
briefly  delivered  to  novices,  36.  see 
Faith,  heads  of,  mentioned,  48.  asked 
again  from  candidates  for  Baptism, 
51.  easy  to  commit  to  memory,  88. 
carnally  understood,  milk;  spiritually, 
strong  meat,  153.  rule  of  faith  or 
symbol,  563.  not  written,  ib.  repeated 
by  Catechumens,  564.  scattered 
through  Scripture,  563.  calls  not  the 
Son  Almighty,  yet  implies  this,  667. 

Crime,  difference  of,  from  sin,  124.  holy 
men  live  without,  ib.  capable  of  par- 
don, 125.  alms  remit  not,  without 
amendment,  128,  132. 

Crimes,  penance  done  for,  675. 

Crispina,  mentioned,  344. 

Crispus,  baptized  by  St.  Paul,  60. 

Critics,  destructive^  368. 

Cross,  of  Christ,  Baptism  in  the,  117. 
used  in  making  a  Catechumen,  225, 
and  237.  {where  see  the  note.)  why 
Christ  chose,  569. 

Crown,  promised  to  those  only  who 
strive,  160.  is  not  for  the  impatient, 
551.  for  those  who  strive,  569. 

Crucifixion,  24. 

Cry,  great  sin  called,  136. 

Cup,  of  the  Lord,  Catechumens  prepare 
to  be  admitted  to,  44. 

Cups,  three,  of  one  water,  28. 

Curia,  of  Tullium,  532. 

Curiositi/,  idle,  danger  of,  in  reading, 
275.  of  the  unlearned,  164.  for- 
bidden, 573.  what  it  means,  598,  9. 

Curma,  vision  of,  532,  3. 

Cyneyins,  buried  in  the  Basilica  of 
Felix,  517. 

Cyprian,  St.  his  letter  on  the  lapsed,  70 
what    he   says    of  evil    men    in  the 
Church,  83.  on  unity  of  the  Church, 
616,  note  ro. 


INDEX. 


629 


D. 


Dancers,  not  admitted  to  Baptism, 
82. 

Danger,  seeking,  tempting  God,  oOS. 

Daniel  and  S.  Paul,  ^21. 

Darius  Comes,  Ep.  to,  1.  St.  Augus- 
tine's letter  to,  543. 

Darkness,  what,  in  which  devils  rule, 
162.  Race  of,  a  fable  of  the  Mani- 
ehees,  ib.  part  of  God  supposed  in 
prison  of,  163.  Rulers  of,  in  heavenly 
places,  what,  164. 

David,  child  of,  died  uncircumcised, 
yet  saved,  141,  note  p.  a  great  saint, 
253.  spake  rashly,  273.  rash  oath  of, 
no  exan  pie,  445 — 7.  his  feigned  mad- 
ness, 44i).  patient  forbearance  of, 
547. 

Da)/,  of  eternity,  meant  by  '  to-day,' 
1 16.  the  first  and  the  Lord's  day, 
495. 

Dar/s,  obseiving,  how  great  a  sin, 
134. 

Dead,  care  for,  517 — 542.  pagan  opi- 
nions of,  518,  519,  528,  529.  at  rest, 
522,  525,  529.  sacrifice  foi-,  in  Mac- 
cabees, 519.  benefited  by  the  sacrifice 
of  the  altar,  prayers,  and  alms,  542. 
not  afl'ected  by  the  condition  of  the 
body,  519,  &c.  unconscious  when 
seen  in  visions,  530,  &c.  do  not 
know  what  happens  in  this  world, 
634,  535,  538.  or  their  happiness 
would  be  affected,  534,  535.  except 
in  special  cases,  536,  537.  perhaps 
by  information  from  other  spirits, 
536,  537.  from  Angels,  537.  frofn  the 
Holy  Spirit,  ib.  interpose  not  ordi- 
narily, 534,  &c.  5.38.  nor  as  they 
please,  538.  sometimes,  537,  538.  a 
blessing  thereby,  535.  by  extraordi- 
nary divine  permission,  538.  we  care 
and  pray  for  without  knowing  their 
state,  536,  538.  (see  Prayers.) 

Deadly,  see  Sin. 
Dead  works,  what,  52,  69. 
Death,  of  the  soul,  what,  35.  victory 
over,  36.  of  the  body,  man's  punish- 
ment, 102.  man  capable  of,  as  soon  as 
alive,  137.    the  second,  undying,  140, 

152.  even  the  first,  caused  by  sin, 
ib.  of  the  reprobate,  to  God,  eternal, 

153.  question  of  lying  to  prevent,  388, 
462-464.  sin  worse  than,  393.  wrongly 
thought  of  as  worst  evil,  419.  for 
mercy  and  truth,  a  gain,  460.  sin  the 
sting  of,  468. 

Decalogue,  division  of,  52,   and  note  p. 

(see  Commandments.) 
Deceit,  purpose  of,   implied  in   lying, 

384.  may  be  by  means  of  truth,  385. 


safest  to  avoid,  entirely,  387.  turns  on 
itself,  456. 

Defamation,  question  of,  to  prevent 
crime,  401.  especially  condemned, 
414.  in  will,  ib. 

Degradation,  punishment  of,  38.  punish- 
ment for  Clergy,  135. 

Degrees  of  glory  in  Heaven,  327,  328. 
346. 

Deijica,  554. 

Delight  of  righteousness  now  made 
superior  to  that  of  sin,  135.  in 
righteousness,  156. 

Delights,  spiritual,  supersede  carnal, 
177. 

Demetrias,  consecrated  a  Nun  A.D. 
413,  353  her  choice  of  virginity 
praised,  356,  368,  and  note  a.  be- 
come like  St.  Mary,  370.  before  her 
mother  in  the  kingdom,  374.  grand- 
mother of,  3"5^  care  needed  lor,  as 
young,  ib.  book  on  virginity  recom- 
mended to  her,  381. 

Demons,  not  to  be  thought  to  dwell  in 
highest  Hraven,  162.  why  called 
rulers  of  darkness,  ib.  served,  268. 
confess  themselves  tormented  by 
Martyrs,  540,  541.  by  living  Saints 
541. 

Deogratias,  a  deacon  of  Carthage,  ad- 
dressed by  S.  Augustine,  187. 

Deserter,  mark  of,  not  changed,  576. 

Desire,  see  Lust. 

Desires,  earthly,  lead  to  endurance, 
545.  such  following  of,  considered 
lawful,  ib. 

Despair,  remedy  against,  in  Christ,  171. 

Devil,  fall  of  the,  103.  Christ  over- 
came the,  by  justice,  not  by  mere 
power,  116.  the,  overcome  by  the 
nature  he  had  deceived,  151.  king- 
dom of,  152.  the,  how  to  overcome, 
159, 164,  186.  conquered  by  our  Lord, 

160.  how  cast  out,  ib-  how  he  rules, 

161.  where  to  be  fought  with,  ib. 
sinners  the  dust  he  eats,  ib.  where 
he  dwells,  162.  overcome  in  both 
sexes,  177.  his  temptation,  235,  241. 
the-,  called  a  lion,  448. 

Devils,  confessed  the  same  as  St.  Peter, 
59.  believe  and  tremble,  63.  have 
dead  faith,  66,  73,  74,  90.  final  pu- 
nishment with,  102.  fell  irrecovera- 
bly, 103.  number  of,  unknown,  104. 

Dictinius,  reiormed  from  his  error,  431. 
his  book  called  the  '  Pound,'  432, 
462,  468. 

Diet,  what  St.  Augustine  used,  580. 

Difficulties,  to  be  borne  with,  541. 

Dilectiones,  79,  note  f. 

Discipline,  see  Excommunication,  the 
Church  must  have,  38.   enforce^  by 


630 


INDEX. 


St.  Paul,  39.  somethin'k,  needless, 42. 
can  only  deal  with  what  is  known, 
67,  83.  restrains  evil  doctrine,  68. 
not  to  be  conformed  to  bad  pre- 
cedents, 69.  not  to  be  given  up,  82. 
of  the  Church  to  be  applied  to  parti- 
culars, 42.  loving,  a  work  of  mercy, 
129.  lack  of,  complained  of,  135. 
responsibility  of  not  enforcing,  ib. 

Discourse  to  a  catechumen,  see  Ad- 
dress. 

Disease,  different,  needs  different  treat- 
ment, 40.  of  nature,  what,  258, 

Dispensation,  in  time,  for  man's  sal- 
vation, 173. 

Dives,  care  for  his  brethren  did  not 
imply  that  he  knew  of  their  state, 
536. 

Divorce,  allowed  in  Koman  Republic, 
45.  rebuked  by  Christ,  283.  may  not 
take  place  for  barrenness,  282,  291, 
304.  does  not  dissolve  marriage,  283, 
291,  304.  dissolves  marriage  in  the 
world's  opinion,  283.  why  permitted 
the  Jews,  682. 

Doctrine,  evil,  to  be  prevented,  68.  is 
bad,  whether  obeyed  or  not,  69.  not 
to  be  corrupted,  82.  origin  of  errors 
in,  201.  sound,  a  protection  to  good 
purpose,  368,  9.  error  of,  in  some 
good  men,  372.  authority  of,  done 
away  by  lying,  396,  432,  3.  some  to 
be  believed  before  understood,  396. 
lying  about,  worse  than  suffering  any 
thing,  401,  422.  may  be  withheld, 
not  falsified,  402.  teaching  to  sin  to 
be  shunned,  458. 

Dogs,  to  be  endured  in  the  Church,  42. 
what  is  holy  not  to  be  given  them, 
ib.  Canaanitish  woman  no  longer  a 
dog  when  received,  67.  return  to 
their  vomit,  80. 

Donatists,  lay  in  ambush  for  St.  Au- 
gustine, 95.  reception  of  Fraetextatus 
and  Felieiamis,  64, 159.  their  account 
of  the  prophecies  of  the  Church's 
universality,  182.  suicides  of,  560. 
not  martyrdoms,  551. 

DoMo/;/*,  schism  of,  41.  party  of,  di- 
vided, 159,  182.  portion  of,  not  the 
Catholic  Church,  181.  struck  the 
Church,  but  slew  her  not,  182. 

Donatus,  the  grammarian,  594. 

Doulle-shape,  instance  of,  137. 

Dove,  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  ap- 
peared real,  ]  76,  7-  compared  with 
Christ's  Humanity,  176.  not  born  of 
a  dove,  177.  what  signified  in  it,  ib. 
power  of  God  to  create,  ib: 

Dreams,  caused  by  angels,  121.  and 
miracles,  admonitory,  197.  appear- 
ances in,  529,  &c.  see  Apparitiu7is. 


Drunkenness,  sober,  of  the  Spirit,  168. 

a  fault  in  act  or  habit,  600. 
Du/citius,  brother  of  Laurentius,  85. 

questions  of,  ib. 
Duty  of   marriage    among   the   early 

people  of  God,  285,  292.  294,  313. 

higher,  supersede  slower,  418.  cannot 

require  a  sin,  443. 
Duumvir,  532. 
Dwelling  called  '  sitting,'  573. 


E. 


Earth,  sinners  are,  and  so  Satan's 
food,  161.  creation  of  the,  564. 

Ecclesiasticns,  said  to  be  written  by 
Solomon,  537.  not  in  the  canon  of 
the  Hebrews,  ib. 

Eclipses,  no  need  to  know  cause  of,  40. 

Economy,  some,  used  toward  aliens 
without  lying,  439.  practised  'by  our 
Lord,  447. 

Egypt  type  of  state  of  sin,  52.  repre- 
sents the  world,  459. 

Election,  by  free  grace,  144.  Divine,  is 
grace,  555,  precedes  faith,  556.  ex- 
amples of,  557. 

Elements,  changes  possible  in,  35. 

Etigere,  557. 

Eloquence,  few  attain,  yet  masters  of 
known,  593. 

Emmanuel,  to  be  the  name  of  the 
ViVgin's  Son,  6. 

Emperor,  heathen,  grants  pardon  to 
the  courage  of  Firmus,  406,  7. 

Enchiridion,  what,  ^6. 

End  of  the  Lord,  our  example,  672. 

Endurance,  not  patience,  267.  of  suf- 
ferings for  worldly  objects,  544.  of 
men  for  temporal  objects,  ib.  even 
for  vain  things  is  praised, 646.  prac- 
tised lor  wicked  ends,  545, 548.  such, 
is  not  patience,  545,  6.  yet  is  an  ex- 
ample, 546.  in  surgical  cases,  ib. 
worldly,  strong  in  proportion  to  lust, 
553,  555,  558.  this  is  animal  and 
devilish,  654.  like  stupor  of  disease, 
557.  liantic,  of  misguided  lust,  658. 

Enemies,  prayer  for,  shews  that  good- 
will comes  by  grace,  107. 

Envying  and  pride,  331. 

Epicurus,  sometimes  praises  conti- 
nence, 587.  his  error  about  pleasure, 
687,  8.  not  fit  to  explain  Archi- 
medes, 590. 

Epistle  to  the  Romans,  chief  object  of, 
77,  78. 


INDEX. 


631 


Epistles,  written  to  the  baptized,  46. 
order  of  teaching  in,  ib.  no  ar- 
gument from,  against  teaching  Cate- 
chumens morals, ib.  Catholic,  chiefly 
aimed  against  Antinomianism,  57. 
of  St.  Faul  written  for  men's  sal- 
vation, 411,425.  truth  clearly  put 
forth  in,  452.  of  St.  Paul,  said  by 
Manichees  to  be  interpolated,  583. 

Erasmus,  his  opinion  of  the  '  De  Pa- 
tientia,'  543, 

Error ^  from  not  keeping  a  mean,  40. 
instances  of,  on  each  side,  41.  what, 
dangerous,  94,  95,  98.  of  what  kind 
may  be  useful,  95.  what  is,  ib.  ne- 
cessity of,  a  misery,  ib.  ugliness 
of,  96.  in  faith  worse  even  than  lying, 

97.  of  doctrine  worse  than  of  fact, 

98.  from  deception  of  senses,  98,  99. 
some  would  avoid,  by  suspending  all 
assent,  99.  when  a  sin  or  fault,  100. 
hurtful  when  we  think  we  know,  122. 
is  in  knowledge  what  wickedness  in 
action,  172.  arises  from  pride,  173. 
truth  frees  from,  falsehood  involves 
in,  3S3.  of  fact  does  little  harm, 430. 
easy  to  talk  against,  579.  three  kinds 
of,  in  reading,  587.  hurts  not  unless 
believed,  ib.  charitable  no  evil,  588. 

Ernchts,  Orations  of,  593. 

Esau,  rejection  of,  143.    b'rthright  cf, 

what  it  signified,  450. 
Eternal  Life  the  penny  in  the  parable, 

327. 
Eternity,  Christ  called,  169.   not  un- 
derstood by  men,  169.    no  space  of, 

between   the   Father   and    the   Son, 

568. 
Eucharist,  sacrifice  of  the   Mediator, 

151.    Blood  of  Christ  given  to  drink 

in,  575. 
Eulogius,   sees    S.  Aug.   in   a  dream, 

531. 
Eunuch,    the,    with    what    profession 

baptized,  48. 
Eumtchs,  for  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven, 

324.  monks  professed  to  be  as,  513. 
Eusebiifs,    Eccl.    Hist,   translated   by 

Euffinus,  525. 
Evanescere,  437. 
Eve,  a  help  to  the  tempter,  549.  Adam 

tempted  by,  570. 
Every,  used  for  '  any,'  415. 
Evidence,  of  prophecy,  5,  8,  &c.  of  the 

Jews,  11,  12. 
Evil,  place  of,  91.  good  brought  out  of, 

91,  97.  is  privation  of  good,  91.  is 
no  substance,  ib.  cannot  exist  with- 
out good,  92.  in  what  sense,  cannot 
produce  good,  94.  cause  of,  a  muta- 
ble will,  102.  course  of,  ib.  not  to  be 
returned  for  evil,  129.  that  ill  things 
should  be  is  good,  and  therefore  per- 


mitted, 142,  146.  good  brought  out 
of,  145.  origin  of,  asked  by  Mani- 
chees, 163.  not  self-existent,  255. 
Manichaean  errors  concerning,  255, 
257,  262.  permitted,  but  not  there- 
fore approved,  255.  turned  into  good 
by  God,  255,  56.  see  S/«.  uses  of,  266. 
lusts,  what, 260. perfected  hereafter, ib. 
not  a  substance,  261.  its  nature  ex- 
plained, ib.  others  doing,  is  not  our 
sin,  398.  question  of  doing  less,  to 
avoid  greater,  399, 400,  403.  wrongly 
measured  through  earthly  affections, 
419.  comparison  of  evils,  424.  not  to 
bo  done  that  good  may  come,  441. 
good  brought  out  of,  456.  God  not 
author  of,  617.  is  no  substance,  ib. 

Ejcamination  cf  candidates  for  Bap- 
tism, 44. 

Ed'amples,  see  Saints,  how  to  be  judged 
of,  456. 

Exconnnmiicafion,  punishment  of,  38, 
&c.  to  be  used  in  charity,  39.  ac- 
knowledged needful  for  greater  sins, 
70,  81,125.  prevented  by  prevalence 
of  sins,  135.  may  be  incurred  by  a 
valid  marriage,  353.  needed  for 
crimes,  6/5.  caution  not  to  incur,  ib. 

Excuses,  shunned  by  continence,  253. 
useless  before  God,  254.  of  fatalism, 
ib. 

Exhortation,  needful  to  spur  us  to 
action,  354,  369.  use  of,  implies 
acting  on  others'  will,  373.  less 
effective  than  prayer,  ib. 

Exorcism,  before  Baptism,  43.  of  chil- 
dren shews  original  sin,  564. 

Experience,  of  friendship  leaves  room 
for  faith,  3. 

Exsufflatio7i  of  children,  5G4. 

Eye,  inward  and  outward,  1. 

Eyes,  their  honourable  place  in  the 
body,  359.  want  of,  supplied  by  hear- 
ing, &c.  377.  wenk  from  darkness 
cannot  bear  light,  608.  fools  use,  more 
readily  than  the  mind,  613. 


F. 


Fables,  are  no  lies,  455. 

Fairness  of  Christ,  the  love  of  virgins, 
350.  what  Christ  seeks,  351. 

Faith,  (see  Grace,)  of  things  unseen 
derided,  1.  defended  by  i-.nalogy,  ib. 
necessary  to  friendship,  2.  even  after 
trial,  3.  if  ( ue  to  human  things, 
more  so  to  divine,  5.  prophesied  of, 
a  ground  of  faith,  13.  fruitful  by  as- 
sociation, 33.    Christian,  cannot  de- 


G32 


INDEX. 


ceive,  35.  learned  in  order  to  obedi- 
ence, 36.  some  think  it  will  save 
without  good  works,  37.  professed  in 
a  few  words  in  clinical  Baptism,  43. 
sometimes  mentioned  hef'ore  morals, 
45,  &c.  as  well  as  practice  in  Ten 
Commandments,  53.  without  works 
is  dead,  83.  more  articles  of,  required 
than  sometimes  named, 48.  law  can- 
not be  kept  without,  56.  implied  in 
obedience,  ib.  not  sufficient  for  sal- 
vation without  love,  66,  7,  61,  83. 
man  justified  by,  before  works,  57. 
doctrine  of  St.  I'eter,  58.  of  St. 
James,  59.  Christ  dwells  in  the  heart 
by,  62.  of  grace  has  love,  63,  73,  83. 
of  Canaanitish  woman,  65.  violence 
of,  73.  distinguishes  Christians  from 
others,  as  law  does  Jews,  78.  how 
far  independent  of  reason,  87.  pro- 
gress from,  to  sight,  ib.  believes,  88. 
love  and  hope  cannot  be  without,  ib. 
•implies  assent,  99.  in  Christ,  work- 
ing by  love,  the  way  to  God,  100.  a 
gift  of  God,  105,  our  Lord  conceived 
by,  lOS.  not  working  by  love  is  dead, 
126.  Catholic,  what  founded  on,  87. 
Hope,  and  Charity,  86,  &c.  their 
connection,  8S.  special  objects  of, 
89.  cffaturegood,eauseshope,  89.  im- 
plies concurrent  will,  106,  616.  with- 
out love  is  worthless,  155.  love  to 
God  and  our  neighbour  by,  157. 
Catholic,  a  security  against  de- 
ceivers, 164,  181.  some  have  left, 
and  yet  would  be  called  Christians, 
168.  set  forth  in  few  words,  172. 
contains  mysteries  above  reason,  and 
also  facts,  ib.  clearly  set  forth  in 
Scripture,  181.  simple  food  of,  185. 
good  life  to  be  added  to,  185,  6.  our 
means  of  victory,  159.  rule  of,  ib.  563. 
bows  the  soul  to  God,  171.  leads  to 
hope  and  love,  ib.  needful  before  we 
can  understand  truth,  172.  of  the 
ancient  Saints,  219.  and  works,  271. 
without  putting  down  lust  is  dead, 
272.  in  wedlock,  279.  conjugal,  less 
worthy  than  virginity,  355.  of  pro- 
fession, to  be  kept,  .362.  whence 
named,  422.  of  Christ,  none  justified 
without,  557.  before  understanding, 
506.  is  in  order  to  eternal  life,  573. 
on  authority,  blamed  by  Manichees, 
578,  598.  distinguished  from  cre- 
dulity, 598 — 600.  question  if  still  a 
fault,  600.  necessary  for  friendship, 
600,  602.  teacher  uses,  towards 
learner,  600.  no  harm  in,  though 
reason  might  be  used,  601.  dis- 
tinguished from  knowledge  and  opi- 
nion, 603.  faulty  only  when  rash  or 
wrong,  604.  of  histoiical  facts,  ib.  is 


on  authority,  ib.  needful  in  common 
life,  605.  parents  knownby,  4, 605,  6. 
most  needful  of  all  in  religion,  and 
why,  606.  before  reason  no  rash- 
ness, 609.  they  are  not  Christians 
who  forbid  faith  in  Christ  before  rea- 
son, 611.  miracles  lead  to,  612.  pre- 
pares way  to  wisdom,  616. 

Fu/l  of  man  through  pride,  20,  567. 

Fal/i/ig,  danger  of,  340. 

Falselivod,  not  all,  is  a  lie,  96,  383. 
leads  to  error,  ib.  some  may  be 
thought  useful,  386,  7.  (see  Lie.) 

Faltonia,  Proba,  mother  of  Juliana, 
368,  note  a. 

Fame,  endurance  from  desire  of,  544. 

Famine,  provided  against,  411. 

Fasting,  compared  to  continence,  284. 
adds  to  the  merit  of  widowhood,  367- 
time  of,  how  to  be  used,  378.  before 
receiving  the  Eucharist,  494.  con- 
tinuous for  several  days,  615. 

Fafalisiiijhs  excuses  blasphemous,  254. 

Fate,  inconsistency  of  those  who  speak 
of  it,  254. 

Father,  The,  The  Son  anointed  by, 
6.  made  all  things  by  The  Son,  18. 
to  declare  himself,  begat  what  Him- 
self Is,  19.  distinct  from  The  Son,  20. 
Himself  God,  26.  The  Beginning  of 
The  Son,  28.  hath  not  His  Being  from 
The  Son,  28.  nor  from  any  other,  29. 
how  greater  than  The  Son,  108.  co- 
eternal  with  Son  imaged  by  coeval, 
568.  The,One  God  with  TheSon,  566. 
doth  what  He  will,  ib.  never  with- 
out The  Son,  568. 

Father,  human,  death  of,  supposed 
threatened  to  compel  to  sin,  397,  8. 
power  of  over  children,  446.  why 
greater  than  sons,  566. 

Fathers,  (see  Saints,}  Catholic,  re- 
mark on  their  writings,  20i,  their 
occasional  errors,  as  individual 
writers,  to  be  expected,  and  pardon- 
able, ib.  the  old,  how  they  married, 
290,  293,  4,  366.  typical  in  their 
marriage  of  many  wives,  295. 

Fai/stus.,  the  Manichee,  attacked  Pa- 
triarchs' marriages,  369.  his  pre- 
tensions and  failure,  596,  7. 

Fear, -whnt,  102.  of  God,  comes  before 
love,  186.    of  God,  salutary,  195.  to 
displease   God  entertained   by    love, 
338,  9.    spoken  of  by  St.  Paul,  339. 
likely  to  mislead,  444.    of  God,  His 
gift,  559.  patience  founded  on,  560. 
Feast,  conversation  at  a,  599. 
Feasts  of  charity,  79. 
Feigning,  in  our  Lord    no   falsehood, 

454,  455. 
Felieianns,  reception  of,  by  Donatists^ 
159. 


INDEX. 


633 


Felix,  St.  burial  in  his  Basilica,  517. 
appeared  at  Nola,  537. 

Fellowship,  attainable  without  mar- 
riage, 285. 

Female,  contrasted  with  male,  294. 

Fesliral-dat/s,  236. 

Fides,  i'rom  Jieri,  422. 

Figure,  of  the  Divine  economy,  exhi- 
bited in  the  birth  of  Jacob,  192,  224. 
(see  Ti/pe)  of  speech,  271,  272.  in 
speech  no  lie,  449,  454,  455. 

Filth  of  soul,  love  of  any  thing  but 
God  and  the  soul,  614. 

Final  goods,  284. 

'  Finger  of  God,''  means  the  Ho^y 
Spirit,  225. 

Fire,  salvfition  through,  38.  some  think 
ill  livers  saved  through,  55,  69,  126. 
everlasting  burns  everlastingly,  61. 
meaning  of  salvation  through,  62, 
«$rc.  84, 126, 127.  evil  livers  not  saved 
by,  79,  126.  trial  ty,  even  in  this  life, 
127.  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels,  161 .  coeval  father  of  light,  668. 

Firmiis,  Bishop,  courage  of,  406,  407. 

Fish,  hooked,  like  a  bad  man  with  the 
baits  of  pleasure,  165.  The  just 
signified  by,  179. 

Five  periods  of  times,  192.  ages  of  the 
world  accomplished  at  Christ's  com- 
ing, 228. 

Flames  of  the  world,  352. 

Flesh  and  blood,  what,  15,  35.  soul 
called  flesh  where  it  seeks  fleshly 
goods,  34.  resurrection  of  the  flesh, 
34,  35.  changed  in  resurrection,  185. 
put  for  man,  108.  matter  of,  in 
God's  keeping,  138.  all  to  be  restored, 
yet  not  each  particle  to  same  place, 
ib.  celestial  body  how  not  flesh  and 
blood,  139.   living  after  the,    what, 

251.  meaning  of,  in  Scripture,  251, 

252.  how  saved,  2.^9.  Manichaeaii 
errorconcerning,  262,264.  as  created, 
spoken  well  of  by  S.  Paul,  262. 
Christ's,  was  true,  264.  not  evil, 
ih.  likened  to  the  Church,  265,  266. 
its  works,  may  be  sins  of  the  soul, 
269. 

Flora,  a  pious  widow,  517. 

Fn-lus,  beginning  of  life  in,  137- 

Food,  allegorical  interpretation  of,  161, 
preserves  man  :  so  generation  man- 
kinil,  292,  293.  uncooked,  netds  ex- 
ercise to  digest,  601.  necessary  in 
retreats,  502.  strong,  not  for  the 
diseased,  598,  608. 

Fools,  all  who  are  not  wise,  606,  and 
note  i.  do  best  to  follow  the   wise, 

607,  613.  cannot  know  wisdom  surely, 

608.  incapable  of  reason  concerning 
God,  611,  614.  easiest  led  by  means 
of  sense,  613,  614, 


Forgery  of  wills,  441. 

Forgiveness  of  ofFi^nders  a  kind  of  alms, 
129.  when  asked  due  by  Divine  com- 
mand, 130.  asked  by  all,  shews  all 
sinful,  357.  of  sins,  realised  in  bap- 
tism, 575.  three  ways  of,  ib.  only  for 
the  baptized,  ib. 

Form,  prescribed,  87.  of  all  things 
from  God,  17.  power  of  receiving, 
from  Him,  ib.  of  godliness  given  in 
heretical  baptism,  183. 

Fornicalion,  compared  with  adultery, 
183. 

Fornicators,  no  fitter  for  baptism  than 
idolaters,  64.  to  be  refused  baptism, 
66. 

Fortitude,  spiiit  of,  559. 

Forum,  said  to  talk,  (see  Figure  of 
speech.') 

Fouders,  why  the,  covir  up  waters,  679, 

Foxts,  who  ?  349. 

Free,  why  man  is  left,  256. 

Free-horn,  love  is  of,  561. 

Free-will,  (see  TVi/l)  lost  by  sin,  104. 

Friendship,  founded  on  faith,  2.  exists 
before  fully  proved.  3.  attainable 
without  marriage,  285.  none  without 
faith,  601,  602. 

Fronto,  informant  of  Consentius,  430, 

Fruitfulness,  not  to  be  compared  to 
virginity,  313,  315. 

Fruits,  thirty-fold  and  hundred-fold, 
344,  345,  sixty-fold,  345. 

Future,  past  used  for,  1 80. 

Future  life,  continence  profitable  for, 
315,316,  320,  323,324, 


G. 


Gaius,  baptized  by  St.  Paul,  50. 

Games,  brutality  of  them,  216.  what 
men  will  sufl'er  for,  644.  illustrate  the 
Christian  conflict,  569, 

Gaul,  niaifyrs  of,  623. 

Generation,  Divine,  26.  Eternal,  diffi- 
cult to  behold  in  the  mind,  173.  (see 
Dut'i)  preserves  mankind,  as  food 
man,  292.  of  mortal  creatures  is  by 
corruption,  b()o.  of  The  Son  from 
eternity,  568.  of  light  by  fire  shews 
the  coeval,  ib.  coeternal  without 
parallel,  ib. 

Genius,  finds  not  truth  without  God's 
help,  602. 

Gentiles,  as  well  as  Jews  needed  grace, 
77.  not  to  use  Jewish  customs,  390, 
392,  453.  typified  by  the  woman 
with  issue  of  blood,  454,  idolatrous 


634 


INDEX. 


called  Pagans,  483,  487.  debtors  to 
Jews,  498. 

Gift,  The  Holy  Ghost  called,  29. 

Gifts,  are  all  from  God,  341.  prayed 
for,  are  not  of  ourselves,  342.  of 
dififereut  kinds,  345.  spiritual,  one 
person  may  have  many,  539. 

Girding  the  loins,  what?  257. 

Glvry,  state  of,  after  resurrection,  156. 
different  degrees  of,  327,  328, 
346. 

Gladiators^  baptism  denied  to,  70. 

God,  blessed  Abraham,  5.  most  fitly 
born  of  a  Virgin,  6.  is  not  in  any 
special  place,  10.  the  True,  now  in- 
voked by  all,  12.  if  Almighty,  created 
matter,  17.  begat  That  which  Him- 
self Is,  19.  no  being  contrary  to,  21. 
not  to  be  imagined  in  human  form, 
25.  human  likeness  of,  not  to  be 
placed  in  a  temple,  ib.  Trinity  in 
Unity,  26,  41.  not  Three  Gods",  27. 
is  Love,  31.  the  Head  of  Christ, 
ib.  seen  by  the  pure  in  heart,  33. 
love  of,  excludes  love  of  the  world, 
51.  dead  faith  really  knows  not,  74. 
our  duty  to,  ib.  shrinks  not  from  de- 
stroying the  evil-minded,  ib.  requires 
Christian  life  as  well  as  Baptis^m,  81. 
chastises  negligent  Churches,  71. 
worship  of,  is  wisdom,  86.  to  be 
worshipped  by  faith,  hope,  and  love, 
86.  sight  of,  highest  happiness,  87. 
is  the  Cause  of  all  things,  90.  '  Ruler 
Supreme  of  things,' 91.  why  He  per- 
mits evil,ib.  the  way  to,  100.  Cause 
of  all  good,  101 ,  2.  His  dealing  with 
man  as  free,  102.  just  anger  of,  ib. 
continues  life  even  to  fallen  angels, 
ib.  His  mercy,  ib.  salvation  wholly 
ascribed  to,  106.  wiath  of,  no  emo- 
tion, 107.  the  Father  of  the  baptized, 
111.  the  Church  His  Temple,  built 
of  gods,  120.  what  passeth  all  un- 
derstanding passeth  not  His,  124. 
wrath  of,  for  sins  of  fathers  tempered 
with  mercy,  115.  His  favour  not 
'  bought'  by  alms,  128.  wonderful 
working  of,  13S.  will  of,  not  frus- 
trated by  man,  141,  145.  how, 
'wills  all  men  to  besaved,'  142,  147. 
gathered  children  of  Jerusalem 
against  her  will,  142.  can  change 
man's  will  at  His  pleasure,  143. 
wrath  of,  no  perturbation,  153.  ex- 
clusion from  His  presence  great 
misery,  ib.  loved  now  by  faith,  157. 
thought  by  the  Manichees  to  divide 
Himself  into  portions,  &c.  162.  part 
of,  miserable  according  to  them,  163. 
subjection  to,  makes  us  masters  of 
ourselves,  165,  191.  makes  all  serve 
willingly  or  unwillingly,  165.  justice 


of,   in    placing  His  creatures,    167. 
care  of,  in  governing  them,  167.  ser- 
vice of,  matter  of  revelation,  ib.  sweet- 
ness of,  168.  power  of,  misjudged  by 
unbelievers,   177.   substance  of,  un- 
changeable,   ib.     meaning    of    His 
'  Right  Hand,'  179.    His  judgment 
of  foreknowledge,   181.     His    Love, 
193.    His  severity  the  foundation  of 
man's  love,  195.  only  hears  the  sovCs 
cry,  202.    worthy  of  prai.^^e,  let  man 
act  as  he  will,   220.    long-suffering 
with  the  ungodly,  222.   permits  evil, 
why  ?    255,   6.    brings  good   out  of 
evil,  256.    Manichcean   heresy  con- 
cerning, 255,  257.   His  nature,  257. 
a   Physician,  258.    favour  of,  gives 
continence,  369.  gifts  of,  no  blessings 
unless  owned,  370.    all  good  comes 
from,  377.    labours  to  win,  pleasant, 
378.      '  hates'    sinners,     '  destroys' 
liars,  392,  3,  427.    who  unclean  in 
.sight    of,    400.     hears    our    inward 
speech,  413.    wronged,  though  not 
hurt,  by  sins  of  luxury,  420.    to  be 
honoured   outwardly  as   well  as  in- 
wardly,   429.     Phscilli;inists    erred 
concerning,    ^32,    3.     sin    against, 
worse  than  against  man,  43 J.  some- 
times heals  secretly,  436.    we  must 
depend  on,  after  all  means,  461.  will 
provide  where  we  cannot  rightly,4C7. 
impassible,  643.  passions  attributed 
to,  ib.  patience  His  gift,  ib.  and  562. 
Himself  long-suffering,  though   not 
sufiering,  543,4.  His  wrath,  jealousy, 
&{".  ineffable,  ib.    His  '  repentance' 
implies  no  error,  544.    caies  for  our 
body,  547.  not  lost  but  by  will,  549. 
Himself  afflicted  Job,  ib."   riches  of, 
552,  562.    patience  likens  to,  554. 
(see    Patience.)    free    mercy   of,    to 
old  Saints,  557.  how  first  loves  sin- 
ners,   ih.    works    in    us    good   will, 
558,  562.  Father  of  those  to  whom 
the  Church  is  Mother.  563.    hence 
called  Father  in  the  Creed,  ib.     Al- 
mighty yet  cannot  lie,  &c.  ib.    does 
what  He  will,  but  can  will  no  wrong, 
564.  made  all  things,  visible  and  in- 
visible, ib.  image  of,  in  the  mind,  ib. 
the  Son  of,  is  God,  565.  one  will  in, 
ib.    not  two   Gods,  ib.    not  lost  by 
misfortunes,  570,  1.   a  Temple  is  for 
Him,  574.  willed  to  have  a  house  on 
earth  where  He  might  be  prayed  to, 
ib.    Who  clothes  the  grass,  creates 
it,  ib.  not  three  Gods,  but  one  God, 
ib.  just  in  binding  men  by  law,  5SG. 
dwells  iu  pure  souls,  590.    called  to 
witness,  ib.    reasons  concerning,  un- 
derstood by  few,  601.    helps   those 
who  go  humbly  and  charitably,  602. 


INDEX. 


635 


knowledge  of,  the  true  wisdom,  606, 
search  for  true  religion  presupposes 
faith  in,  608.  cannot  be  displeased 
with  our  believing,  609.  demands 
faith,  611.    the  wise  most  near   to, 

612.  mercy   of,    shewn   in    Christ, 

613.  conscience  moves  us  to  seek, 
ib.  now  known  by  nations  not  to  be 
of  earth  or  fire,  615.  Old  Testament 
charged  with  false  doctrines  about, 
617.  not  author  of  evil,  ib.  reasons 
for  seeking  to,  ib.  kingdom  of,  uni- 
versal, ib.  liable  to  no  passion,  ib. 
providence  of,  points  out  the  Church, 
616.  never  lies,  6)7.  no  substance 
but  is  of  Him,  618. 

Godhead,  of  Father  and  Son,  some  call 
The  Holy  Ghost  so,  30.   others  held 
not  to  be  a  Substance,  32. 
Gods,  men  called,  26.    Christians  so 

called,  120. 
Gold,  may  be  known  and  not  had,  608. 
Goliath  and  ZacchEeus  compared,  302. 
Good,  created,  90,  91.    diminution  of, 
evil,  91.  in  what  sense  it  cannot  pro- 
duce evil,  94,    and  evil,  causes  of, 
must  he  known,  ib.  calling  evil  good 
and  good  evil  is  in  doctrine  not  in 
fact,  98.    cause  of,  God's   goodness, 
101,  2.  brought  out  of  evil,  256,  all 
nature  is,  257.    in  what  degree  at- 
tainable, 260.    perfect,  reserved  for 
the  future  life,  ib.    man  so  created, 
261.  the  substance  of  the  flesh  is,ih. 
men  not  exempt  from  sin,  266.  supe- 
rior, makes  not  lesser  good  an  evil, 
357,  8.  some  implied  in  '  better,'  ib. 
more    honoured    by  having  a  good 
below  it  than  an  evil,  359,  364.   fall 
from  a  higher,  is  an  evil.  362,  3.  all, 
comes  from  God,  377.    sin  aims  at 
some,  in  this  life,  420.  temporal,  may 
be  given  up  without  sin,  ib.    of  other 
kinds  may   be  kept  by  doing  some 
things    otherwise   wrong,  420,  421. 
three  things  to  be  kept,  for  sanctity's 
sake,  421.    luminous,  of  truth,  463. 
impassible, 554.  highest,  not  attained 
without  loving  it,  613. 
Good  men,   few,    compared    with    the 

wicked,  221. 
Goods,   final    and   instrumental,    284. 
when  abused,  become  sin,  285.     of 
marriage  are  offspring,  faith,  sacra- 
ment, 305. 
Good  work,  what,  207. 
Gospel,  first  preaching  of,  13.    not  to 

seem  sold,  482,  486. 
Gospels,  said  by  Manichees  to  be  inter- 
polated, 583, 
Government,    (God's    moral,)    of    the 

world,  255, 
Grace,  faith  of,  has  love,  63,  73,  83,  of 


Holy  Spirit  sets  us  free  from  con- 
demnation, 77.  needed  both  by  Jew 
and  Gentile,  ib.  time  of,  foretold,  88. 
precedes  all  human  merit,  106,  107. 
dispensation  of,106,&e.  Christ  full  of, 
as  Man,  108.  Manhood  made  without 
sin  by,  109.  St.  Mary  full  of,  ib.  made 
natural  to  Man  in  Christ,  112.  justi- 
fies from  many  offences,  116.  freedom 
of,  to  Jacob,  143.  alone  separates  the 
redeemed  from  the  lost,  144.  was 
needed  in  Paradise,  149.  alone  sets 
the  will  free,  ib.  state  of  man  under, 
156.  not  wanting  under  the  law,  ib. 
need  of,  denied  by  some,  371.  de- 
stroys not  free-will,  371 — 3.  election 
of,  655.  assists  the  just,  and  justifies 
the  ungodly,  556.  frees  from  the  Law, 
but  condemns  it  not,  585,  6. 

Grammarians,  how  good  ones  act,  197. 
expected  to  find  good  sense  in  Virgil, 
591.  several  named,  594. 

Grass,  image  of  the  carnal,  498. 

Gratitude,  due  from  virgins  to  God, 
341. 

Greek,  words  borrowed  from,  582. 

Greeks,  philosophers,  shoemakers,  487. 

Guests,  duty  of  protecting,  443,  445. 

Guidance  of  Scripture  and  of  Signs 
contrasted,  197. 


H. 

Habits,  hard  to  change,  615. 

Hair,  bosses  of,  335.  worn  long  by  some 
monks,  512.  long,  thought  a  sign  of 
sanctity,  ib.  St.  Paul's  rule  against, 
ib.  to  imitate  Nazarites,  513.  of  Na- 
zarites  figure  of  the  veil  of  the  Law, 
ib.  pretended  humility  of  long,  ib. 
every,  in  God's  keeping,  547. 

Happiness,  supreme,  what,  87-  is  not 
in  knowledge  of  nature,  94.  perfect, 
excludes  error,  100.  cannot  be  in 
things  which  Christ  despised,  171. 
of  perfect  knowledge  not  yet  ours, 
603. 

Head,  place  of,  in  the  body,  175. 

Head  dress  of  women,  334. 

Health  and  immortalitv,  two  goods, 
283, 

Hearers,  order  of,  among  Manichees, 
579,  what  said  of,  when  they  left 
them,  580, 

Hearing,  studiousness  of,  599, 

Heart,  its  mouth,  244,  '^45,  247.  con- 
tinence must  be  seated  there,  244. 
its  consent,  244,  246.  its  language, 
244.  picture  of  purity  of,  271. 

Heathen,  urge  reasons  about  Heaven, 
24.  poetry,  how  dealt  with,  197. 
having  a  second  wife,  C3se  of,  295, 


G36 


INDEX. 


Heaven,  Christ  ascended  to,  24.  pro- 
mised the  same  to  us,  ;!■.  body  how 
fitted  for,  ib.  36.  and  earth,  explained 
of  spirit  and  body,  154.  used  in  seve- 
ral senses,   162.   the   air   so   called, 


164.  degrees  of  glorv  in,  o2V,  32S 
.346. 
Heavenly   places,    rather   ours    called 
than  the  devil's,  164.  we  are  said  to 
be  in, 
Hebrews,  authority  of  Epistle  to  the, 

89. 
Heresies,  what,  refuted  in  the  Enchi- 
ridion, 85.  discussion  of,  endless,  88. 
what,  mentioned  in  the  book  on  the 
Christian  Conflict,  J 59.  light  in  vain 
against  the  Church,  6/5. 
Heresy,  acknowledges  Christ,  13.  per- 
mitted for  trial's"  sake,  ib.    calls  for 
comments  on  the  Creed,  16.    Arian 
and  Sabellian,  20.    pretence  of,  may 
cause  real,  431,  2.    how  to  be  ex- 
posed, 436.  secret,  sometimes  healed 
secretly,  ib. 
Heretic,  he  is  a,  who  contradicts  faith, 
hope,  or  charity,  87.   not  (very  one 
is  a,  who  believes  heretics,  577.  what 
makes  a,  577,  8.   silence  to  be  kept 
to  a,  ib.  each,  claims  name  of  Catholic, 
596,  spoils  that  claim  by  pretending 
to   reason,   598,   611.    cannot   claim 
authotity,  or  do  without  it,  610,  11. 
that  on  which  we  believe  Christ  is 
against  them,  61 1. 
Heretics,  have  some  belief  in  common 
with    us,    87.    have   not  Christ,   ib. 
call   their   congregations    Churches, 
33.    seeking  glory  in  the  Name  of 
Christ,    171.    their  mine's  confused 
with    strife   and  carnal  views,    173. 
the  heedless  give  heed  to,  181.  con- 
tinence of,  should   not  persuade  us, 
368.  widows  and  virgins  of,  inferior 
to    Catholic   wives,   369.     not   to  be 
tracked  out  by  lying,  427,  &c.    sin 
less  in  speaking  heresy  than  Catholics 
would,  430,  435.   little  harm  in  be- 
lieving, when  they  pretend  Catholic- 
ism, 430.    converted,  may  take  com- 
fort In  their  former  ignorance,  435. 
converted,  will   correct  otliers,  436. 
yet  in  their  sins,  576.  why  not  re- 
baptized,  ib.  all,  would  have  us  be- 
lieve in  Christ,  609.  many  ways  con- 
demned, 616. 
Herod,  called  '  thev'   who  sought  the 

child's  life,  114. 
Hidden  life  with  Christ,  270. 
Hilary,  St.  de  Trinitate,  28,  n. 
Hippo  Regius,  Council  at,  15. 
History,  exjilunation   by,  582.    of  the 
Exodus     allegorical,    though     true, 
684. 


Holy  Ghost,  (see  Spirit.)  Reconciles  us 
to  God,  31.  final  unbelief  sins  against, 
GQ.  sin  against,  136.  help  of,  needful 
for  any  good,  155. 
Holy  Spirit,  procession  of,  90,  and  note 
g.  given  us  through  a  Mediator,  107. 
Christ  horn  of,  110,  116.  agift  equal 
to  the  Giver,  110.  not  Father  of 
Christ,  as  Man,  ib.  but  Creator,  111. 
works  of  the  Trinity  ascribed  to,  ib. 
our  belief  concerning  Hira,  119,20. 
shewn  to  be  God  by  His  place  in  the 
Creed,  120.  is  God,  as  having  a 
Temple,  ib.  gives  remission  of  sins, 
125,  136.  body  of  any  Christian  a 
temple  of,  359."  speaking  in  St.  Paul, 
492. 

Homicide,  lying  to  screen  from  punish- 
ment, 405.  justifiable,  407, 

Homo,  put  for  Manhood,  170,  note  a. 

Honoratitx,  several  of  the  name,  577. 
one  a  companion  cf  St.  Aug.  in 
Manicheism,    ib.    a   lover  of  truth, 

578.  prayed  for,  578,  581.  how  led 
astray,  578.    not  then  a  Christian, 

579.  his  friendship  with  St.  Augus- 
tine, 587.  will  wonder  at  the  "Old 
Testament  being  called  pure,  590. 
called  on  to  take  more  pains,  595. 
a  sincere  and  earnest  enquirer,  616, 
618. 

Honorins,  laws  of,  against  idols,  1. 
Hope,  with  faith  leads  to  prayer,  83. 
sometimes   used   for   expectation  in 
general,  88,  89.  not  to  be  placed  in 
man,  122,  154,  552.  carried  forward 
by  miseries  of  this  life,  125.  springs 
from  faith,  and  has  love  with  it,  163. 
mat(,er  of  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  154. 
without  love  is  vain,  155.  of  eternal 
life  followed  by  many,  171-  of  Chris- 
tians in  the  Judgment,  573.  worldly, 
its  objects,  580.  of  discovery  implied 
in  search,  639, 
Horace,  fable  of  quoted,  455. 
Hour  of  Christ,  as  Man  what,  23. 
House,  temporal  and  eternal,  459. 
Humility,  recovery  of  man  through,  20. 
of  Christ,  230.  most  needful  for  vir- 
gins,   331,    351.    who    would    follow 
Christ,  350.  its  praise,  331.  instances 
of,  332,  33.  commended  by  our  Lord, 
332.  335.  taught  by  Christ  near  His 
Passion,  332,    learnt  of  Christ,  336. 
unfeigned,  needed,  344.    treated  ful- 
ly of  by  S.   Aug.,   349.    of  Saints, 
352.  and  holiness,  ib.  need  of  in  pious 
widows,  3()7. 
Hundred-fold,  fruits  of  virginity,  344, 

346. 
Hunting,  pleasure  of,  378. 
Husband  (see    Marriage,    Wife)    and 
wife,  their  union,  263.    relative  du- 


IxNDEX. 


637 


ties,  263,  268.  might  once  have 
many  wives,  294.  must  have  but  one, 
295." 


I  AM,  meaning  of  the  Name,  21. 

Idleness,  leads  to  vain  talking,  499. 

Iilolaters,  a  mincuity,  596. 

Idolatry,  ironical  defence  of  Baptism 
in,  64.  a  deadly  sin,  70.  conforming 
to,  to  avoid  violence,  397.  might  be 
done  to  save  life  if  lying  lawful,  429. 
conformity  to,  no  where  allowed, 
453. 

Idols,  laws  of  Honorius  against,  I. 
some  still  believed  in,  10.  rejection 
of,  prophesied,  ib.  generally  fulfilled 
12. 

Ignorance,  what,  harmless,  90, 94.  not 
all,  is  error,  95.  of  one's  own  being 
alive,  impossible,  99.  a  consequence 
of  the  fall,  102.  noc  in  matter  of 
faith,  harmless,  122.  to  be  borne 
patiently,  641.  for  our  good,  ib. 

Image,  Christ  is,  of  the  Father,  28.  of 
God,  not  to  be  placed  in  a  temple, 
25.  of  God,  in  the  mind,  515. 

Images,  of  persons  and  things  seen  in 
visions,  530.  &c. 

Imitation  of  Christ,  328. 
Imtnortality,  the  penny  in  the  parable, 

327. 
Impatience,     evil    of,    543.     produces 

greater  ills,  ib. 
Impurity,  legal,  not  always  sin,  297. 
Incarnation,    called   dispensatioii,   26, 

108.  faith  in  the,  173. 
Incest,    compared    with    adultery   and 

fornication,  283. 
7«i7onv//;^A/i?,begets  Incorruptible,  565. 
Incorruption,  future  gain  ot,  547. 
Indidgentia ,  124. 
Infants,  (see  Baptism,)  die  to  sin  in 

Baptism,  113,  117,  118.   when  they 

began  to  live,  137.  case  of  those,  who 

die    unbaptized,    141,    and    note    p. 

baptized  against  their  will,  142. 
Infirmity,  a  reason  for   not   working, 

496.    pleaded  as  an  excuse,  ib.    of 

those    who    have     been    delicately 

brought  up,  497. 
Injury,  not  to  be  done  to  one  man  to 

save  another,  401,  403. 
Inspiration,  nature  of,  87. 
Instrumental,  goods,  284. 
Integritas,  said  of  virgins  and  widows, 

372. 
Intention,  determines  the  character  of 


an  action,  506.  pure,  the  single  eye, 
ib. 

Intercourse  of  sexes  for  pleasure  a 
sin,  133.  venial  in  married  state, 
ib.  sexual,  when  right,  when  wrong, 
440,  1. 

Intermediate  state,  (see  Soul,  Purga- 
tory, Fire.) 

Interpolations,  sunposed  in  holy  Scrip- 
ture, 583,  4. 

Invisible,  (see  Faith,')  things  seen 
only  by  cleansed  heart,  33. 

Invocation  of  Saints,  (see  Saints.) 

Involuntary  contintnce  estimated,  334, 

Isaac,  sou  of  Abraham,  &c.  5.  told  no 
lie,  448.  inherited  otherwise  than 
his  biothers,  561. 

Israel,  compared  with  Sodom,  389. 
history  of,  figurative,  410. 

Israelites,  not  only  disbelieved,  but 
slew  Christ,  73.  whole  people  as  it 
were  a  prophet,  360. 

Israelitess,  without  guile,  Rahab  be- 
came, 460. 


Jacob,  an  ancestor  of  Christ,  5.   erred 
not    from   faith  in   thinking   Joseph 
dead,  100.    wrestled  with  the  Angel 
as  if  in  a  body,  122.    a  mystery  in 
the  manner  of  his  birth,   192,  224. 
bis  example  quoted  for  lying,  388. 
his  deceit   was  a  mystery,  448,   9. 
acted  in  the  figure  of  Christ,  449, 
50. 
James,    St.    doctrine    of,     concerning 
faith  and  works,  126.    says  that  we 
all  offend,  134. 
Jealousy,  attributed  to  God,  543. 
Jehu,  falsehood  cf,  no  safe  example, 

428,  9. 
Jericho,  represents  the  world,  459. 
Jerome,  St.  his    comments  on   Isaiah 
and  St.  Paul,  37.    did  not  teach  the 
error  condemned  by  St.  Augustine, 
ib.  death  of,  alluded  to,  85,  137.  re- 
cords a  monstrous   birth,    137.    opi- 
nion of,  about  St.  Peter's  simulation, 
390,  and  note. 
Jerusalem,  the  heavenly,  to  have  her 
full   number,    104,    123.    reasonable 
creation    in,    119.    meaning   of  the 
word,   226.    heavenly   and    earthly, 
contrasted,  459.   Christians  living  ia 
common  at,  489.  the  heavenly,  what 
gifts  her  sons  have,  561. 
Jesus,  (see  Christ,)  preaching  of,  im- 
plies teaching  the  character  of  mem- 
bers of  His  Body,  49.   supported  by 
pious  women,  4  76,  T. 


638 


INDEX. 


Jewish  Christians  kept  the  Law,  484. 
did  not  impose  it  on  the  Gentiles,  ib. 
were  cireumcise-1,  ib. 

JeiL'S,  named  from  Judah,  5.  our  wit- 
nesses to  prophecy,  11,  12.  blindness 
of,  foretold,  ib.  preserved  for  testi- 
mony, ib.  (see  Israelites,)  and  Gen- 
tiles, both  needed  grace,  77.  dis- 
tinguished by  law  as  Christians  by 
faith,  77i  8.  made  proselytes  children 
of  hell,  80.  obstinacy  of,  l7l.  (see 
Judaistii,  Law,)  their  notions  of  de- 
tilements,  409.  priesthood  of,become 
vile,  410.  heart  of,  metaphorically 
called  '  stony,'  448.  rites  of,  called 
'  sacramenta,'  453.  permitted  to  ill- 
treat  our  Lord,  572.  many  of,  par- 
doned after  murder  of  Christ,  575. 
and  heathens,  outnumbered  by  Chris- 
tians, 59G. 

Job,  his  example  cited,  298.  patience 
of,  in  various  temptations,  549.  was 
thought  to  worship  God  for  temporal 
things,  ib.  compared  with  Adam,  ib. 
tried  in  mind  by  his  friends,  550.  an 
example  to  such  as  kill  themselves, 
ib.  trials  of,  fearful,  570.  how  his 
children  were  doubled  to  him,  ib. 
God's  witness  to,  ib.  tempted  by  his 
wife,  ib.  stood  fast  in  God,  571.  re- 
stored to  prosperity  for  our  example, 
672.  yet  we  are  not  to  expect  the 
like,  ib. 

Jo/in,  St.  (Evangelist,)  blessed  Virgin 
entrusted  to,  23.  Epistle  of,  47. 
beautifully  alluded  to,  266.  his  ex- 
ample cited,  300.  alluded  to,  328. 
Baptism  of,  (see  Baptism.) 

John,  St.  the  Baptist,  required  repent- 
ance, 55.  question  for  what  he  re- 
proved Herod,  71. 

Jo/m,  the  Monk,  539.  had  the  gift  of 
prophecy,  ib.  consulted  by  Theo- 
dosius,  ib.  appeared  to  one  in  sleep, 
540.  patient  in  hearing  and  answer- 
ing questions,  ib. 

Joke,  a,  not  a  lie,  383.  whether  for  a 
perfect  man  to  use,  not  discussed,  ib. 

Joseph,  St.  his  fear,  and  the  Angel's 
answer,  1 10.  chosen  to  evidence  the 
perpetual  virginity  of  St.  Mary,  487. 

Joseph,  temptation  of,  439.  his  con- 
cealment no  lie,  449. 

Josep/ius,  h's  statements  about  Herod's 
marriage,  71,  note  d. 

Josiah  sparing  the  Prophet's  bones, 
527.  spared  the  knowledge  of  the 
affliction-!  which  followed  his  death, 
535. 

Jotham,  parable  of,  455. 

Joy,  of  the  Lord,  in  seeing  His  go- 
vernment, 167.  different  degrees  of 
inHeaven,328.  godly,given  to  us,559. 


Judah,  Jews  named  from,  5.  fornica- 
tion of,  no  example,  456,  7 • 

Judaism,  how  far  St.  Paul  allowed, 
390—2,  453. 

Judas,  prophesied  of,  9.  an  example  of 
evil  tolerated,  476.  our  Lord's  pa- 
tience with,  548. 

Jude,  St.  agrees  with  St.  Peter  about 
evil  livers,  79. 

Judge,  seems  required  for  '  false  wit- 
ness,' 404,  5.  417.  information  to, 
no  betrayal,  406.  tortures  inflicted 
by,  545. 

Judgment,  reason  for  believing,  11. 
will  separate  good  and  evil,  14.  of- 
fice of  the  Son,  25.  of  quick  and 
dead,  25,  6.  the  last,  by  works,  and 
for  eternity,  61,  75,  6.  put  for  '  dam- 
nation,' 75,  6,  108.  some  would  ex- 
plain of  temporary  punishment,  7Q. 
our  Lord  makes  bu*;  two  parts  in,  ib. 
of  quick  and  dead  by  Christ,  119. 
even  the  just  to  be  judged,  ib.  re- 
mission of  sins  relates  to,  125.  alms 
considered  in,  128.  none  lost  but  by 
just,  141.  fixes  the  state  of  bad  and 
good,  152.  doctrine  of  the,  179.  some- 
times put  for  condemnation,  180. 
in  what  sense  forbidden  us,  ib.  of 
quick  and  dead,  573.  preparation 
for,  our  work  here,  ib. 

Juliana,  thanks  St.  Aug.  for  a  warn- 
ing, .353.  address  to,  ib.  asked  St. 
Aug.  to  write,  353,  4.  not  to  take  all 
as  written  for  herself.  354,  368.  had 
children  when  left  a  widow,  361,  367. 
highest  achievements  open  to,  367. 
is  to  communicate  the  book  toothers, 
373.  had  vowed  continence,  ib. 
household  of,  a  Church,  38  I. 

Justification,  (see  Faith,  Sin,  Love,) 
through  Christ's  rigliteousness,  113. 
b}^  faith  before  works,  57.  true,  takes 
place  in  Baptism,  117. 


K. 


Keys,  given  to  the  Church  in  St. 
Peter,  185.  lost  by  not  believing 
their  power,  ib. 

Kids,  skins  of,  meant  sins,  450. 

Kitid,  most  kindly,  of  all  things  in  God, 
18. 

Kindred,  spiritual,  preferable  to  hu- 
man, 309. 

Kingdom  of  Heaven,  who  take  by  vio- 
lence, 73.  of  God,  prayer  for  its 
coming,  154. 

Kings,  prayed  for,  though  proud,  148. 
entitled  to  honour,  227. 

Kiss,  not  refused  to  Judas,  548. 


INDEX. 


639 


Kn&wledge,  (see  Ignorance,)  medical, 
not  given  in  perfection,  94,  5.  some, 
hurtful,  95,  97.  some,  needful  to 
worship  of  God,  97.  and  charity, 
two  goods,  283.  of  dilScult  questions 
a  divine  gift,  539.  all  wlio  know, 
partake  of,  54G.  different  ways  of 
desiring,  599,  600.  distinguished 
from  opinion  and  belief,  603.  of  evil, 
no  misery,  604.  matter  of  belief  may 
be  called,  ib.  what,  if  wisdom,  606. 


Labour,  pleasure  in,  378.  those  able 
to,  happier,  496.  a  duty  of  monks,  493. 
practised  in  good  monasteries,  499, 
humbling  effect  of,  on  the  wealthy, 
503,  4.  spiritual  uses  of,  ib.  for  the 
common  store,  504,  in  the  rich  more 
charitable  than  almsgiving,  ib.  when 
not  lost,  561,2. 

Lamb,  The,  followed  by  virgins,  328, 
348.  by  married  persons,  ib. 

Lamps,  burning,  what,  257. 

Language  and  thought,  (see  Thought,') 
theory  of,  as  a  vehicle  of  thought, 
189.  ungrammatical  of  ministers, 
202. 

Laurentius,  who  he  was,  85.  St.  Au- 
gustine's good  hope  of,  158. 

Law,  not  given  till  after  Red  sea,  51. 
contains  faith  as  well  as  practice,  53, 
how  it  made  offences  abound,  169. 
distinguishes  Jews,  as  faith  does 
Christians,  76.  without  the  spirit 
condemns,  73.  where  no,  no  trans- 
gression, 76.  who  are  '  without  law,' 
77.  helpless  without  the  Spirit,  155. 
state  of  man  under,  15G.  compre- 
hended in  Love,  157.  counsel  given 
beyond,  ib.  old,  not  become  detest- 
able, 391 — 393.  of  God,  unmoved  by 
circumstances,  444.  "  and  the  pro- 
phets :"  more  than  these  now  hang 
on  the  two  commandments,  194,  195. 
of  nature,  294.  under,  in,  without, 
distinguished,  483.  under,  Jews,  ib. 
in,  spiritual  men,  ib.  without,  unbe- 
lieving Gentiles,  ib.  of  Moses,  of  God, 
not  contrary  to  the  Gospel,  ib. 
St.  Paul  i/i,  not  under,  ib.  Jewish, 
permitted  eating  in  the  fields,  501. 
supposed  wish  to  combine,  with  the 
Gospel,  534.  in  what  sense  contrary 
to  the  Gospel,  585.  Ceremonial, 
mysteries  of,  586.  In  the  letter, 
killeth,  ib.  wants  an  expounder,  590. 


Laws,  of  man  in  some  sort  Christian, 

596. 
Law-suils,  venial  unle.^s  before  heathen.s, 

133. 
Laying  out  more,  St.  Paul,  497. 
Lazarus,  (see  Resurrection,)  borne  by 

Angels,  521.  buried,  what  signified 

in,  454.  told  Abraham  the  state  of 

the  Jews,  536. 
Lectures  of  Rhetoricians,  531 . 
Leeches,  (see  Surgeons,)  546. 
Lejt-hand,  what  means,  573. 
Legal  purification  shews  not  marriage 

sinful,  297.  was  for  the  type  of  sin,  298. 
Leisure,  what,  had  St.  Paul,  402. 
Leonas,  messenger  of  Conseutius,  426. 
Letter  and  spirit,  work  of  St.  Augus- 
tine on,  59. 
Lewdness,  worse  than  theft,  443,  444. 
Liar,    not   every  one  is   a,    who  lies, 

402. 
Liberft/,  (see  Free  TVit/,)  spirit  of,  31. 

Christian,    not   freedom   to    sin,   78. 

of  fallen    man  is  only   to  sin,    104. 

true,  given   by   new    creation,    105. 

Christian,  391,  392,  452. 
Lie,  (see  iy/;/o",)  question  if  ever  a  duty, 

96.  more  or  less  sinful  according  to 
intention  and  subject,  96,  100.  truth 
is  a,  if  not  thought  true  when  spoken, 

97.  question  if  ever  lawful,  382,  &c. 
a  joke  is  not  a,  383.  nor  a  mistake, 
383,  384.  definition  of,  384,  388, 
454.  how  to  be  safe  from,  387. 
question  if  ever  useful,  387,  447. 
examples  quoted  in  favour  of,  388, 
456,  468.  cases  of  danger  requiring, 
388,  462,  465.  condemned  as  false 
witness,  388.  and  in  more  general 
terms,  389,  and  note,  407,  423.  alle- 
gory is  not,  389,  448.  sometimes  al- 
lowed in  imperfect  state,  390.  New 
Testament  never  favours,  300,  452. 
God  hates,  even  to  destroying,  392, 
393,  427.  corrupts  the  soul,  395,  any 
sin  as  easily  justified,  395,  457.  good 
men  lose  authority  by  telling,  396. 
about  Christ,  401.  several  cases  of, 

402.  none  lawful  in  doctrine,  402, 
445.  not  to  be  told  to  give  pleasure, 

403.  useful,  question  of,  403,  414, 
419,  459.  if  not  to  defend  crime,  404. 
how  to  escape,  when  questioned,  406. 
how  to  escape,  when  silence  betrays, 
408.  Five  kinds  of,  condemned,  three 
still  questioned,  408,  409.  wish  to 
use,  forbidden,  415.  what,  threatened 
with  destruction,  416.  Deceit  is, 
even  when  it  is  not  '  false  witness,' 
417.  a  harmless  one,  to  save  pudicity 
of  body,  allowed,  yet  truth  may  be 
preferred,  422.  Eight  sorts  of,  all 
shewn  to  be    evil,  424.  which   sorts 


C40 


INDEX. 


less  culjiable,  ib.  none  is  good,  427. 
examples  of,  quoted  from  Scripture, 

428.  448.   every,   contrary  to   truth, 

429.  pretending  heresy  worst  kind  of, 

430.  metaphor  or  antiphrasis  is  not, 
448,  none  is  '  just,'  45",  433.  no  holy 
person  glories  in,  4G0.  one,  leads  to 
another,  463.  about  religion  worst, 
404,  469.  not  to  be  told  to  save  a 
soul,  4G6.  rather  trust  God,  467.  put 
for  sin  in  general,  467.  not  less 
wicked  tlian  lewdness,  468. 

Life,  eternal,  36.  some  thought  faith 
only  needful  to,  37.  what  required  for 
entering  into,  56,  61,  63.  dead  faith 
will  not  win,  74.  eternal,  promised  to 
baptism  and  Christian  life,  not  to 
either  alone,  81.  eternal  obtained 
through  remission,  125.  this,  unhappy 
in  the  necessity  of  error,  96.  when  it 
begins  in  man,  13/.  of  the  wicked 
why  prolonged,  238.  eternal,  not  to 
be  given  for  temporal,  393,  419.  good 
here,  eternal  hereafter,  worth  pati- 
ence, 546. 

Lifting  up  the  heart, \s  by  God'shelp,  37. 

Light,  coeval  offspring  of  fire,  568.  real 
and  pretended,  580.  strong,  not  borne 
at  once,  608.  beauty  of,  a  standing 
miracle,  615. 

Lips,  (see  Mouth.)  have  spoken  if  the 
heart  has  consented,  244. 

Literal  sense  the  usual  one  of  the 
Epistles,  472. 

Liturgy,  quoted,  3/0. 

Living  after  man,  is  living  after  the 
flesh,  25:. 

Logicians,  their  rule  that  contraries 
cannot  coexist  in  one  subject,  93. 

LombartI,  Peter,  on  relief  of  future 
punishment,  152,  no:e  a. 

Lord,  The,  not  greater  and  lesser,  565. 

Lot,  entertained  Angels,  395.  his  ex- 
ample discussed,  395,  443,  445. 
excused  by  perturbation,  445.  knew 
not  his  guests  to  be  Angels,  461. 

Lofs  Wife,  type  of  returning  to  sin,  80. 

Love,  act  of,  invisible,  3,  4.  title  of, 
how  applied  to  The  Holy  Ghost,  30. 
means  of  our  reconciliation  to  God, 
31.  Godhead  called  by  some,  ib. 
whether,  be  a  Substance,  32.  to 
God  and  man  commanded,  33. 
ineffable,  in  eternal  life,  36.  of  God 
cannot  stand  alone,  51.  of  God  and 
man  must  go  together,  56.  fulfils 
the  law,  58,  73.  of  self  required,  16, 
63.  faith  of  grace  has,  (see  Grace,) 
leads  to  prayer,  68.  shed  abroad 
by  The  Holy  Spirit,  74.  of  enemies 
a  high  virtue,  129.  of  God,  His  own 
gift,  131.  of  self  after  the  world  self- 
hatred,  132.    of  self,  after  God,  133. 


greater  than  Faith  and  Hope,  155. 
is  the  measure  of  goodness,  ib.  Gospel 
and  Apostleshang  on,  as  well  as  Law, 

157,  194,  195.  prevailing,  expels  lust, 

158.  perfected  hereafter,  ib.    to  an- 
other in  Christ,  ib.  of  God  and  man, 
Christian  character,   186.    excludes 
fear  or  desire  of  the  world,  ib.    f>f 
God,   exhibited    in    the    coming   of 
Christ,  193.    incentives  to  Christian, 
ib.  of  Christ 'towards  man  constrains 
a   return    of,    illustrated   by    human 
reaards,    193,   194,  205.    the  end  of 
Christ's  coming,  194,  also  193.  should 
always  be  the  end  proposed,  195,197, 
207.  makes  works  "  good,"  208.  dic- 
tates what  S.  Aug.  says,  214.  is  dif- 
ferently   afftcted,"  according  to   the 
object  it  addresses,  215.  of  husband 
for   wife.  Apostolical   argument  for, 
263.  fears  to  displease  God,  338,  339, 
owed    to    God   by  virgins,  341.    of 
Christ,  on  the  part  of  virgins,  351. 
the  remedy  for  pride,  352.  of  neigh- 
bour as  self,  393.  misdirected,  makes 
false  estimates,  419.  rectitude  of,  the 
soul's  chastity,  421—3.    of  God,  is 
God's  gift,  553.    the  ground  of  pa- 
tience, 553, 657.  kindled  by  The  Holy 
Ghost,  554.    of  creature,   already  in 
creature  loving,  558.    of  God,  not  in 
creature  unless  given,  559.    submits 
without  hope  of   temporal  rewards, 
671.  only  way  to  attain  highest  good, 
613. 

Lucan,  quoted,  88,  520. 

Lucifer,  Lnciferians  fall  with,  184. 

Luciferians,  do  not  rebaptize,  183.  yet 
are  cut  off  through  their  pride,  184. 

Lucretius,  error  of,  about  the  soul,  687. 

Lucvs  (juod  non  luceat,  448. 

Lif/ce,  St.  gives  the  Lord's  Prayer  in 
five  petitions,  154. 

Lust,(seeWortd,Cnncupisce?ice,Desire,) 
the  means  by  which  the  body  pollutes 
the  soul,  23.  "(see  S(«.)  love  prevailing, 
expels,  158.  the  means  of  Satan's 
ru'e,  161,2.  what  is  chiefly  so  called, 
246,  247.  our  enemy,  to  be  resisted, 
248.  its  resistance  the  business  of 
man,  249. (see  Continence^  Sin,  Good, 
Evil,  Flesh,  Church.)  proved  to  be 
of  the  soul  as  much  as  of  the  body, 
269.  how  put  down,  272.  sexual,  its 
sinfulness,  279,  280.  definition  of,395. 

Lying,  (see  Lie,)  more  miserable  than 
erring,  96.  defended  by  Priscillian- 
ists,  96,  and  note  i.  about  the  way 
of  11 'e  inexcusable,  96.  not  always 
worse  than  error,  97.  not  sufficient 
defence  of,  that  it  may  be  useful, 
101.  New  Testament  forbids 
strictly,  ib. 


INDEX. 


041 


M. 


Maccabees,  book  of,  refeired  to,  519. 

Madmen,  strength  of,  not  healthv, 
368. 

Mnqicarts,  268.  in  briaeing  up  Samuel, 
537. 

Male  and  female  contrasted,  294. 

Mulefici,  469. 

Man,  (see  Christ,)  how  different  from 
brutes,  22.  hotly,  soul,  and  spirit,  33. 
good,  as  a  nature,  93.  or  angel  alone 
capalale  of  injustice,  ib.  good  and 
evil  together  in,  ib.  fall  of,  102. 
corruption  of  the  race,  102,  115. 
preserved  to  be  renewed.  103.  wrath 
of  God  on  the  whole  race,  10'.  hope 
not  to  be  placed  in,  122,  522.  not  to 
glory  in  his  own  merits,  144,  150. 
every,under  condemnation  by  original 
sin,  145.  of  all  kinds  saved,  and  all 
that  are  saved,  saved  by  God's  will, 
147.  would  have  increased  in  Para- 
dise, 148.  created  with  free-will,  ib. 
created  upright,  150.  evil  overcome 
by,  in  Christ,  151.  four  states  of, 
Nature,  Law,  Grace,  Glory,  156. 
heart  of,  not  known  to  man,  157. 
our  duty  to,  revealed,  167.  created 
free,  168.  learns  his  place  in  creation 
from  Christ,  170.  distinguished  frorri 
brute  by  reason,  174.  not  to  be  trusted 
in,  183.  assumed  by  God  The  Son, 
1 69, 70,  and  note  a.  178. (see M(7h// 610./.) 
One  Person  with  theW  isdom  of  God  in 
Christ,  175.  assumed  iu  Christ  not 
merely  as  in  saints,  ib.  in  Christ  has 
a  human  spirit,  176.  fall  of,  foreseen, 
220.  living  after,  what,  251.  (see 
Free-will.)  image  of  God  in,  564.  his 
dominion  over  the  creatures,  ib. 
begins  in  imperfection,  569.  know- 
ledge concerning,  a  part  of  wisdom, 
60G.  nature  of,  assumed  by  God, 
613.  height  he  may  attain  to,  shewn 
in  Christ,  ib. 

Manes OT Manichceifs,  (see  Manichees.) 

Manhood,  assumed  by  The  Son,  28. 
perfect  in  Christ,  108.  of  Christ  had 
no  merit  till  assumed,  109.  assumed 
by  the  Son  of  God,  170, 174.  in  Him, 
loved  not  the  things  of  time,  170. 
perfect  in  Christ,  174,  176. 

Manichees,  denied  creation,  17.  thought 
conception  unworthy  of  Christ,  23. 
held  the  sun  for  a  god,  ib.  their  no- 
tion of  the 'race  of  darkness,'  159,162. 
ridiculed  the  Christian  Faith,  159. 
their  crafty  advances,  163.  thought 
the  Holy  Ghost  came  in  Manichsus, 
181.  misunderstood  plain  Scripture, 
ib.  their  heresy,  255,  257,262,264, 
refuted,  262.    dismissed,   267.    their 


saying,  300.  their  heretical  opinion, 
305.  said  the  law  was  not  of  God, 
483,  object  to  believing  on  autiiority, 
678.  their  pretence  of  reason  and 
leaned  discussions,  579.  their  order 
of  Hearers,  579,  80.  refute  rather 
than  prove,  579.  their  contemptuous 
phrases,  580.  attack  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, ib.  think  Scripture  interpolat- 
ed, 583.  and  how,  584.  ofwhaterror 
they  accuse  the  Church,  589.  wor- 
ship the  sun,59L>.  boasted  of  Faustus, 
596.  enquire  origin  of  evil,  617. 
charges  of  against  Scripture,  ib.  of 
bloodless  bodies,  but  coarse  minds, 
ib.  fabks  of,  618. 

Manichceua,  place  claimed  for  among 
Apostles,  584. 

Mankind,  how  they  inight  have  multi- 
plied had  Adam  not  sinned,  276, 
277. 

Mansions,  many  in  heaven,  327. 

Manual,  Christian,  what  it  must  con- 
tain, 86,  88.  size  of,  limited,  158. 

Marriage,  (see  Divorce,  Husband, 
Wife,)  of  the  divorced,  adultery,  38. 
some  condemned,  41.  others  made  it 
equal  to  virginity,  ib.  unlawful,  when 
so  known  to  be,  is  adultery,  44.  Sa- 
crament of,  in  the  Church,  45.  Chris- 
tian, indissoluble,  ib.  lloman  law  al- 
lowed this,  ib.  possession,  in  good 
faith,  though  wrongful,  if  not  known 
so,  45.  such  must  be  given  up  when 
discovered,  ib.  brings  temptation  to 
worldliness,  61.  in  what  case  separa- 
tion allowed,  C4.  how  to  live  in,  with- 
out worldliness,  65.  with  unbelievers 
condemned,  70.  by  St.  Cyprian,  71. 
allowed  in  later  times,  ib.  of  Herod, 
question  about,  ib.  doubtfully  lawful 
to  be  avoided,  ib.  prevents  not  origi- 
nal sin  in  the  otFspring,  115.  makes 
that  venial  which  were  else  crime, 
133  a  remedy  against  fornication, 
ib.  forbearing,  a  spiritual  counsel, 
157.  its  end,  268,  269.  not  re- 
garded as  unholy  by  the  Fathers, 
275.  Manichffan  view  of,  ib.  a 
low^er  state  than  virginity,  ib.  the 
iirst  bond  of  human  society,  ib.  that 
of  our  first  parents,  holy,  276.  Christ 
w^ent  to  one,  277.  how  a  good, 
277,  283,  305.  intended  as  well  for 
help  as  offspring,  277.  of  aged  per- 
sons, 277,278.  continence  in,  praise- 
worthy, 278.  brings  good  out  of  evil, 
ib.  its  uses,  278,  80,  8  1.  its  grave 
joy,  278.  how  far  certain  compacts 
deserve  the  name,  279,  80.  its  abuse, 
not  thesin  of  marriage,  but  of  persons, 
280.  Sacramental,  282,291,295.  the 
lesser  of  two  goods,  283,  302,  320.  of 


T  t 


64-2 


INDEX. 


the  just,  better  than  the  virginity  of 
the  impious,  284.  not  evil,  but  good, 
283,  84,  298.  in  what  sense  it  is 
"  better"  not  to  marry,  285,  292. 
was  once  a  duty,  ib.  no  longer  a 
duty,  ib.  S  Paul's  view  of,  286.  not 
sinful,  28G,  295.  to  be  not  sinful 
must  be  without  excess,  287.  holy, 
though  the  partner  is  unholy,  288. 
that  looks  only  to  pleasing  God  rare, 
289.  how  piously  contracted  by  the 
old  Fdthers,  290,  293,  294,296,  30  >. 
cannot  be  dissolved,  except  by  death, 
282,  201,  304.  of  many  wives,  al- 
lowable once,  292.  compared  to  the 
taking  of  food,  '292,  93.  was  once 
contracted  with  spiritual  desire,  294, 
306.  hard,  to  use  it  like  Abraham, 
301.  compared  to  ordination,  304. 
goods  of,  three,  305.  of  the  old  Fa- 
thers, holier  than  virginity  now,  30'!. 
summary  of  S.  Aug.'s  book  on,  308. 
how  that  of  the  old  Fathers  must  be 
regarded,  ib.  net  sinful,  but  full  of 
ttcuble,  318,  319,  320.  not  even  in- 
directly condemned  by  S.  Paul,  318, 
320,  322.  its  fruits  thirty  fold  only, 
314.  of  (professed)  widows  wrongbut 
valid,  353.  ends  with  the  lite  of  either 
party,  355.  good  of,  shewn,  in  that 
the  bodies  of  married  Christians  are 
members  of  Christ,  35.5.  due  of,  not 
to  be  withheld  for  fear  of  temptation, 
356.  chastity  in  God's  gift,  356,372. 
evil  of  excess  in, not  of  marriage,  but 
venial  through  it,  356.  ends  of,  ib. 
Sacrament  of,  ib.  second,  allowable, 
356,  366.  second  .attacked  by  Mon- 
tanists,  &c.  357.  Body  as  well  as 
Spiri*-,  holy  in,  357,  8.  more  desirable 
in  old  Covenant,  359.  of  Patriarchs, 
was  for  off-pring,  360,  and  so  for 
Christ's  coming,  ib.  pi-ovides  against 
temptation,  361.  not  needed  when 
we  may  have  spiritual  children,  361 , 
380.  better  than  unstable  purpose  of 
widowhood,  361,  2.  still  good  under 
the  Gospel,  362.  desire  of,  wrong 
after  vows,  ib.  not  itself  then  con- 
demned, but  the  breach  of  vow,  363. 
this  marked  in  that  '  wishing,'  not 
'  marrying,' is  mentioned,  ib.  in  such 
case  is  not  adultery,  ib.  though  worse, 
364.  argument  from  '  marriage  to 
Christ'  refuted,  363.  dissolution  of 
culpable,  leads  to  real  adultery, 
364.  third  or  fourth,  lawful,  though 
less  worthy,  365.  seventh  allowed 
by  our  Lord  to  be  marriage,  ib.  and 
not  damnable,  ib.  often  repeated, 
naturally  matter  of  shame,  366.  hard 
questions  about,  369.  ranks  below 
continence,  ib.  book  'or.  the  good  of,' 


ib.  of  Patriarchs  attacked  by  Fanstus, 
ib.  holiness  of,  inferior  by  reason 
of  cares,  374.  less  needful  since 
the  world  is  perishing,  376.  many 
in  it  have  to  keep  continence,  ib. 
fools  should  consult  the  wise  about, 
607.  many  have  learned  to  despise, 
6J5. 

Married,  faithful  women  are  mothers 
of  Christ,  312.  persons  in  one  respect 
cannot  follow  the  Lamb,  329.  may 
be  fitter  than  virgins  for  Martyrdom, 
314.  fruitfulness  may  not  vie  with 
virgin  chastity,  312,  315  persons 
may  follow  the  Lamb,  329,  349. 

Mar/ha  and  Mary,  284. 

Martyr,  supposed  terms  put  to  a,  397. 
no  place  for,  if  doctrine  may  be 
denied,  428.  makes  real  gain,  460. 

Martyrs,  said  to  die  though  their  souls 
die  not,  1/8.  their  blood  nourished 
the  early  Church,  233.  not  prayed 
for  at  the  Altar,  444,  memorials  of, 
523,  539,  642.  (see  Saints.)  care 
for  others,  the  living,  523,  528,  &c. 
prayers  to,  523.  ashes  dispersed,  ib. 
of  Gaul,  ib.  bodies  of,  523,  528. 
overcame  natural  regard  for  the  fate 
of  their  bodies,  527,  8.  removed  from 
knowledge  of  earthly  things,  538.  tor- 
menting demons,  540.  patience  of,  in 
scorn  and  pan,  548.  true,  do  not  kill 
themselves,  550.  who  suffer  out  of  the 
Church,  559.  effect  of  their  sufiFerings 
on  mankind,  616. 

Martyrdom,  higher  than  virginity,  346. 
often  a  liidden  gift,  ib.  a  thought  to 
humble  virgins,  ib.  common  among 
Christians,  615. 

Mary,  (see  Virgin.)  the  B.  Virgin,  of 
Jewish  race,  5.  Virgin  after  Christ's 
birth,  6.  truly  Mother  of  Christ,  22. 
acknowledged  by  Him  as  Man  on  the 
Cross,  23.  the  Blessed  Virgin,  con- 
ceived by  Faith,  108.  like  the 
Church,  an  ever  Virgin  Mother,  ib. 
saluted  as  '  full  of  grace,'  109.  her 
question  to  the  Ancrel,  110.  suspected, 
ib.  conceived  Christ  in  chastity, 
364.  holy  virgins  become  like,  370. 
Christ  born  of,  567.  Virgin  after 
His  birth,  ib.  ever  Virgin,  487. 

Man/,  (sister  of  Lazarus,)  210.  and 
Martha,  284,  306,  321. 

Master,  one,  to  many  slaves,  294. 
power  of  over  slaves,  446.  opposed  to 
'  schoolmaster,'  586.  of  grammar, 
591. 

Masters,  and  servants,  237. 

Matrimony ,  (see  Marria<j;c.) 

Matter,  created,  17.  before  it  received 
form,  18.  analogies  of,  hold  not  in 
Godhead,  32. 


INDEX. 


613 


MatthexUy  St.  gives  the  Lord's  Praj-er 
in  7  petitions,  15.3. 

Mean,  necessity  of  keeping,  41. 

Meats,  some  held  some  unclean,  41. 

Mechanics,  became  Monks,  498. 

Mediator,  a,  needed  for  man,  107,  140. 
what  He  must  be,  150. 

Medicine,  what,  for  all  our  ills,  170. 
taking,  implies  hope  of  recovery, 
609.  '^ 

Meditation,  in  the  Law  of  God,  378. 
consistent  with  work,  493. 

Members  of  sin,  how  mortified,  270, 
271.  all  members,  though  diflering 
in  honour,  3.!J9. 

Memorials  of  Martyrs,  518, 5-23  prayers 
offered  there,  obtain  special  bless- 
ings, 517,  18,  23.  buried,  542. 

Men,  Christians  truly  so,  513.  figure 
the  ruling  principle  of  the  mind, 
515. 

Mercy,  works  of,  129,  of  God  prevents 
us,  133.  of  God,  free,  144.  how  far 
an  excuse  for  wrong  actions,  458, 
459. 

Merits  of  man  cannot  procure  salvation, 
104.  none  before  grace,  105,  6,  and 
note  d.  555.  not  to  be  gloried  in  as 
differing  from  others,  144.  none  ever 
without  preventing  grace,  149.  none 
to  be  acquired  after  this  life,  151. 
Metaphor,  is  no  lie,  448. 
Midwives,  Hebrew,   quoted  for  lying, 

388,  458.     were   not    prophesying, 

389,  459.  temporally  rewarded,  389. 
excused  as  beginners,  410,  458".  be- 
lieved, as  to  parents,  605. 

Milan,  St.  Ambrose  Bishop  of,  597- 

Mind,  things  in,  perceived  without 
sight,  1.  of  others,  not  directly  per- 
ceived, 2,  cVrc.  begets  not, but  makes 
words,  19.  as  it  were  reproduced  in 
speech,  ib.  rational  spirit  called,  22. 
sovereign  power  of,  disgraced  by  bo- 
dy'ssin,440.  partsofthe,  howfigured, 
516.  patience  a  virtue  of,  547.  wounds 
of,  548.  incomprehensible  to  itself, 
664.  prepared  for  truth  by  believing, 
602,  610.  of  the  wise  brought  in  con- 
tact with  God,  612. 

Ministers  may  chance  to  be  very  un- 
learned, 202.  how  they  are  to  be 
borne  with,  ib.  sit,  in  some  Churches, 
210. 

Miracle,  spread  of  the  Gospel  a,  8. 

Miracles  and  Dreams,  admonitory, 
197.  meant  to  produce  faith,  612. 
what  are,  614.  better  than  reasons 
to  impress  fools,  613.  point  out 
authority,  614.  some  more  gracious, 
some  more  wonderful,  ib.  why  less 
frequent,  615,  and  note  k.  witness  of 
against  heretics,  616. 


Mistrust  of  self  oar  security,  251. 
Monachisiii,  a  holy  purpose,  509.  S.  Aug. 

desires  its  increase,  ib. 
Monasteries,  introduction  of,  into  Car- 
thage, 470.  good,  practise  manual  la- 
bour, 499.   indifferent  to  which  one's 
property  has  been  given,  505.  time 
divided  for  labour  and  devotion  and 
study,  510. 
Monastery,  some    may  labour    others 
instruct,  494.  by  turns,  ib.   owes   a 
maintenance  to  those  who  have  sur- 
rendered tlieir   property   to   it,  504. 
division  of  works  in,  505. 
Monica,  St  failed  not  to  visit  St.  Aug. 
every  night,  534.  would  have  come 
in  spirit  if  possible,  534,  5. 
Monks   not    labouring    for   their   own 
support,  470.  the  work  of,  occasion 
of    writing,    ib.     some    wore    their 
hair  long,  ib.  labouring  in  spiritual 
things,    4/1.    instructing    and    con- 
soling  secular   persons,    ib.    a   holy 
society,  487-  had  not  preached  the 
Gospel  to  the  heathen,  ib.  idle,  cor- 
rupt   others,   490.    cause    scandals, 
499.     to    avoid    giving    offence,    to 
labour,  and  be  obedient,  4;'3.  eccle- 
siastical   occupations    and    teaching 
of,    493,  496.   life   holy  and  praise- 
worthy, 493.    employed  in   prayers, 
psalms,  reading,   and    teaching,  ;b. 
their  necessities  to  be  relieved  by  the 
faithful,  ib.  to  have  leisure  tbrougli 
the  gifts   of  the  faithful  for   storing 
the  mind,  ib.  aiming  at  higher  de- 
grees of  holiness,  ib.  duty  of  contri- 
buting to  support,  ib.  gave  all  their 
time  to  ecclesiastical  learning,  496. 
who  have  been  delicately  brought  up 
to  be   borne  with,  497.    not   Evan- 
gelists   nor    Priests,    ib.    giving   up 
their  private  property,  ib.  to  the  use 
of  the   Monastery,  504.  persons  ad- 
mitted without  signs  of  amendment, 
498.  from  class  of  slaves,  peasants, 
mechanics,  ib.  not  to  admit  them  a 
heavy    sin,   ib.    have    become    great 
and    exemplars,    ib.    idle,    condemn 
those  who  work,  499.  kept  stores  of 
provisions,  500.  might  have  dressed 
provisions,    ib.    drawing   water,    ib. 
close  retirements  for  prayer,  501,  2. 
who  have  been  rich  not  compelled  to 
bodily  labour,  505.  none  to  be  idle,  ib. 
lightworks  to  be  found  for,  ib.  chiefly 
from  the  labouring  classes,  ib.  disen- 
tangled from  secular  affairs  to  please 
God,  507,  8.   trusting  for  support  in 
labour   if  able,   without,    if  unable, 
ib.    called    servants    of    God,    508. 
soldiers  of  Christ,  ib.  poor  of  Christ, 
504.  objects  of  the  Bishop's  care,  508. 


T  t2 


644 


INDEX. 


hypocritical  and  vagi;int,  pretended 
ones,  509.  a  device  of  Satan  to  dis!- 
credit  that  life  by  scandal,  508,  9. 
accused  of  wishing  to  be  maintained 
in  idleness,  500.  to  labour  to  coun- 
teract reproach,  ib.  vagrant,  hawking 
pretended  relics,  ib.  false  stories, 
ib.  begging,  ib.  assuming  outward 
maiks  of  sanctity  in  dress,  ib. 
Wearing  long  hair,  512.  life  preferred 
to  Bishop's,  510.  good  ones  accused 
and  unsettled  by  the  idle,  511.  idle 
ones  regarded  as  more  holy,  ib.  wore 
long  hair,  512. 

Monsters,  will  rise  again  with  shape 
coriected,  137.  instance  of  one  in 
the  East,  ib. 

Montanists,  attacked  second  marriages, 
357.  not  first,  ib. 

Montanus,  Holy  Ghost  came  not  in, 
181, 

Moral  government  of  the  woijd,  255. 

Mortificat  on  of  the  members,  what  ? 
270,  271. 

Moses,  taught  the  Name  of  God,  21. 
punished  many,  through  he  bore  with 
sinners,  38.  the  Law  given  by,  156. 
veil  of,  61. "J.  appeared  after  death, 
537. 

Mothers  of  Christ,  who.?  311,  312. 

Mouth  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the 
body,  244,  245,  247.  not  to  be  always 
literally  taken  in  Scripture,  245.  of 
the  heart,  412 —14.  confession  with 
the  mouth  required,  437. 

Multitude,  can  shew  whom  to  attend 
to,  593,  611,  614.  testimony  of 
followed  in  common  life,  594.  must 
be  led  by  steps  to  religion,  601.  is 
believed  concerning  Christ,  610. 
gathered  by  Him  in  the  way  of 
faith,  612.  some  good  in  their  ac- 
knowledging more  than  they  prac- 
tise, 615.  ltd  by  faith  to  approve 
many  good  things,  615,  16.  witness 
of,  against  heretics,  616. 

Mundt,     Mundani,  )S5. 

Murder,  a  deadly  sin,  70. 

Mysteries,  holy,  words  used  in  cele- 
brating, 370. 

Mi/stery'm  the  manner  of  Jacob's  birth, 
192,  224.  to  be  borne  with,  541. 
defence  of,  not  popular,  581.  (see 
Type.) 


N. 


Nabal,  David  right  in  sparing,  445. 

Naboth,  charge  against,  449. 

Name  of  God,  prayer  that  it  be  hal- 


lowed, 154.  eternal,  promiserl  to  the 
eunuchs,  326. 

Nations,  (see  Multitudes,)  blessed  in 
Christ,  6.  come  to  God  by  believing, 
10. 

Nativity,  Eternal,  of  the  Son,  568.  of 
Christ  in  time,  573. 

Naturalists,  of  the  Greeks,  their  error, 
90. 

Nature,  none  contiary  to  God,  21. 
divine  and  human,  in  Christ,  22. 
every,  either  divine  or  created,  90,  1. 
every,  is  good  in  itself,  91.2.  cor- 
ruption of,  what,  92.  of  man,  re- 
ceived grace  in  Christ,  109.  know- 
ledge of,  not  needed  for  happiness, 
90,"  94.  state  of,  before  the  Law, 
156.  all,  is  good,  257.  lust  is  a 
disease  of,  258.  wonders  of,  familiar, 
615. 

Nazarites,  long  hair  a  figure  of  the 
veil  of  the  Law,  613. 

Neighbour,  who  ?  238.  even  an  alien 
is,  438, 

Net,  of  the  Gospel,  takes  bad  .and 
good,  14,  68. 

New  Testament,  (see  Christians, 
Scripture.)  children  in,  not  under 
their  fathers'  sins,  114. 

Novatians,  against  second  marriages, 
357.  dared  not  speak  against  first, 
ib. 

Novices,  Faith  briefly  delivered  to, 
36. 

Nuns,  holy,  deceased,  344. 

Nurses,  believed  as  to  parents,  606. 


O. 


Obedience,  implies  Faith,  56.  required 
for  eternal  life,  56,  74.  implied  in 
Faith,  79.  of  necessity,  little  good, 
168.  strengthens  hope  and  nourishes 
love,  171.  above  continence,  302. 
implies  chastity,  303.  unmurmuring, 
duty  of  Monks,  493.  the  Christian's 
work,  569. 

Objections,  would  be  made  were  things 
otherwise,  169.  various,  to  our  Lord's 
doings  and  sufferings,  ib. 

Old  persons,  why  they  marry,  277- 

Old  Testament,  (see  Scripture.) 

Olibrius,  husband  of  Juliana,  376,  and 
note  e. 

ttpinatio,  604. 

Opinion,  different  from  belief,  383. 
holds  certain  what  is  not  so,  384. 
distinguished   from    knowledge    and 


INDEX. 


645 


belief,  603.  (if  takeu  for  knowledge) 

a   base   thing,    604.     of    faith,    not 

taken   for   knowledge,  not  so,   605. 

several  on  Gen.  i.  28  ;   276,  2/7. 
Ordifiation,   to  be  withheld   from   the 

liusband  of  a  second   wife,   295.    a 

sacrament,  304. 
Original    sin,   remitted    by    Baptism, 

258. 
Our  Lord  had  a  store,  602. 


Pagans,  why  they  hate  Christianity, 
171.  idolatrous  heathen  so  called, 
483,  4S7.  opinions  of  burial,  519. 
philosophers,  520.  soldiers,  ib.  poets, 
ib.  yet  in  their  sins,  576. 

Paint,  not  to  be  used  by  women, 
375. 

Parables,  are  no  lies    455. 

Paradise,  happiness  of,  preparatory  to 
a  higher  state,  102,  148.  was  a  state 
of  grace,  149.  Adam  careless  in,  549. 
how  man  forfeited,  551.  man  deceived 
in,  570.  vision  of,  533.  baptism  ne- 
cessary for  admission  to,  ib. 

Parcee,  qiiod  non  par  cant,  448,  9. 

Pardon,  (see  Sins,)  granted,  implies 
sin,  286.  to  what  granted  by  S. 
Paul,  286. 

Parents,  known  by  testimony,  4.  must 
rot  hinder  ministry,  23.  known  to 
children  by  faith,  605,  6.  yet  love 
due  to,  606. 

Parricide,  Catiline,  of  his  country, 
545.  why  worst  homicide,  550. 

Passion,  foretold  by  same  writers  as 
things  now  seen  fulfilled,  9.  in 
Jewish  Scriptures,  11. 

Passions,  how  attributed  to  God,  543. 

Passover,  mysteries  implied  in,  52. 

Past,  put  for  future,  180. 

Patience,  differs  from  endurance,  267. 
a  great  gift  of  God,  543.  attributed 
to  God,  ib.  in  what  sense,  ib.  of 
man,  544.  defined,  ib.  relieves  from 
evils,  ib.  of  God,  without  passion, 
543,  4.  in  man,  what,  544.  waits 
for  good,  544,  547.  compared  with 
worldly  endurance,  544,  552.  for  ill 
ends  is  no  patience,  545.  truth  of,  is 
in  the  cause,  546.  not  like  science, 
which  is  of  all  who  know,ib.  in  mind 
and  body,  547.  shewn  without  bodily 
pain,  ib.  of  our  Lord  toward  Judas, 
548.    greatest    against    Satan's    as- 


saults, 548,  9.  is  God's  gift,  551,  2. 
being  ficm  love  of  God,  is  from 
grace,  553.  likens  to  God,  554.  her 
words  by  St.  Paul,  ib.  for  Christ  in 
schismatics  how  far  rewarded,  560. 
is  it  God's  gift  ?  ib.  whose  '  perishes 
not,'  5G1,  2.  of  Christ,  569.  of  Job, 
670.  is  not  to  be  for  teinporal  hopes, 
570,  ]. 

Patriarchs,  had  several  wives  for  off- 
spring, 360.  marriages  of,  attacked 
by  Faustus,  369.  fed  cattle,  487. 
ignorant  of  what  befel  the  Jews, 
635. 

Paw^,S('.(seeSaz//,)enforceddiscipline,39. 
Epistles  of,  47.  preached  only  Christ 
crucified,  50.  whom  he  baptized,  ib. 
not  satisfied  with  faith  without  love, 
57.  his  Epistles  misunderstood,  68, 
(;'2.  his  preaching  from  Jerusalem  to 
lUyricum,  72.  Ijis  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  77-  never  meant  to  allow 
freedom  to  sin,  78.  obtained  mercy 
from  his  ignorance,  80.  agrees  with 
St.  James,  126.  really  gives  reason 
for  not  questioning  God'' s  judgments, 
1 45.  good  men  would  not  have  him  go 
to  Jerusalem,  146.  God's  will  that  he 
should  go  and  suffer,  ib.  his  warfare, 
162.  overcame  the  world,  165.  a 
spiritual  man,  ib.  Holy  Ghost  came 
notin,  181.  St.Peter  corrected  by,l 84. 
391,  2.  his  counsels  and  commands 
concerning  marriage  and  virginitv, 
3l6,3l7.what  he"  spared,"  3r8,32b. 
the  Teacher,  354.  '  vessel  of  elec- 
tion,'354.  chose  the  unmarried  state 
as  higher  good,  355.  rightly  allows 
second  marriage,  357.  cared  not  for 
men's  praise,  379.  yet  kept  good  re- 
pute with  care,  ib.  acted  no  lie  in 
circumcising,  390.  his  answer  to  the 
high  priest,  410.  his  oaths,  411, 
418,  425.  right  in  not  '  living  of  the 
Gospel,'  411.  used  sympathy,  not 
falsehood,  424.  charged  by  some 
with  a  lie,  425.  which  would  be  a 
perjury,  ib.  not  compelled  by  want 
■to  preach,  482.  not  using  his  liberty, 
476,  &c.  484,  5.  bearing  with  the 
weak,  483,  4.  condescending,  not  of 
craft,  ib.  sympathising,  483,  4,  6. 
becoming  all  thir;gs  to  all  men,  483. 
did  not  feign  himself  a  Jew  any 
more  than  a  Gentile,  ib.  is  not  under 
the  Law,  ib.  becoming  weak,  putting 
himself  in  their  place,  484.  relieved 
by  distant  Churches,  485.  declined 
gifts  out  of  sympathy  for  the  weak  to 
avoid  suspicion  of  venal  motives, 
484,  5,  6.  laboured  in  temporal  as 
well  as  spiritual  works,  486,  7.  did 
not  work  in  any  dishonest  employ- 


640 


INDEX. 


ments,  487.  his  manual  labour,  ib. 
vrorked  by  day  and  nigbt,  ib.  avoid- 
ing suspicion  of  dishonesty,  491.  re- 
joicing in  the  liberality  of  believers, 
492.  had  special  times  forlabourand 
teaching,  494.  at  Troas,  ib.  at 
Athens,  495.  possibly  did  not  work 
there,  ib.  could  work  by  nigbt  and 
day,  49(3.  strong  in  mind  and  tody, 
ib.  not  receiving  support  was  to 
avoid  offence,  497,  499.  because  his 
ministry  A^as  among  the  Gentiles, 
497.  did  not  blame  thosp  who  acted 
otherwise,  ib.  did  more  than  he  was 
obligL'd  to,  ib.  not  contrary  to  his 
Lord,  502.  used  means  for  self-pre- 
servation, 507-  rapt  into  Paradise, 
537.  saw  Ananias  without  his  con- 
sciousness, 540. 

Paiilimfs,  St.  of  Nola,  enquiries  about 
burial,  517.  bis  opinion,  518.  dif- 
ficult v  about  prayers  for  the  dead, 
ib. 

Peace,  in  heaven  and  earth,  123.  a 
great  '  power  of  godliness,'  183.  the 
prize  of  continence,  257. 

Peasants,  became  IMonks,  498,  605. 
Pelagianism,    noted    by    S.     Aug.    in 
his  book   on  Widowhood,  353,   370 
-372.  dangerous  approaches  to,  372, 
373. 

Pelagians,  think  patience  man's  at- 
tainment, 551.  argument  of,  for  free- 
will, 552,  3. 

Penance,  humility  of,  needed  to  heal 
deadly  sin,  70,  81,  125.  time  for, 
appointed,  \'2b.  often  refused  through 
weakness,  136.  refusal  of,  con- 
demned, 416.  done  openly  in  Church, 
575.  way  of  remission  for  the  bap- 
tized, o76. 

Penitents,  class  of,  in  the  Church,  81. 
order  of,  575. 

Penny,  in  the  parable,  327- 

Pentecost,  day  of,  181. 

Peoples  and  nations,  {see Multitudes,^ 
our  witnesses  to  Christ,  610. 

Perfect,  are  not  even  to  wish  to  lie, 
416. 

Perfecting,  good  and  evil,  260. 

Perfection,  precepts  of,  56,  63.  all 
should  aim  at,  130.  counsels  of, 
157. 

Perjury,  strangely  justified  by  some, 
464.  none  can  be  allowable,  463. 
real  though  not  of  truth,  466.  feared 
even  by  the  adulterous,  468. 

Permissio?i,  not  same  as  cousent,  421. 

Persecution,  flight  from,  507,  8. 

Perseverance,  need  of  grace  for,  380, 
381. 

Persian  fable  of  Manichees,  618. 

Person,  (see  C/irist,)  Divine,  each  seve- 


rally God,  26,  28.  distinetiono  f41 
unity  of,  in  Christ,  111,  12,  19.  God 
and  Man  One  in  Christ,  175. 

Peter,  St.  Epistle  of,  47.  preached 
repentance  as  well  as  faith,  47,  50. 
some  words  of,  not  mentioned,  48. 
wrote  to  correct  misunderstanding 
of  St.  Paul,  as,  78.  confession  of,  59. 
preached  repentance,  72.  erred  not 
from  faith  in  thinking  he  saw  a 
vision,  100.  how  moved  to  repent- 
ance, 136.  called  Satan  when  he 
spoke  against  God's  will,  116.  his 
walkini;  on  ihe  water  beyond  nature, 
178.  his  use  of  the  sword,  182.  as 
penitent  sustains  the  person  of  the 
Catholic  Church,  184.  his  falls,  re- 
storation, and  martyrdom,  ib.  The 
Eock  to  be  seen  in,  185.  his  example 
cited,  300.  his  shadow  raises  a  dead 
man,  231.  simulation  of,  corrected, 
390,  452.  his  denial,  392.  justifying 
him  makes  St.  Paul  a  liar,  425.  de- 
nied only  with  the  mouth,  yet  sinned, 
437. 

Pharisee  and  Publican,  332. 

Pharisees,  righteousness  of,  81.  not 
saved  by  alms  without  faith,  131. 
omitted  justice  while  they  gave  alms, 
132.  tithed  all  herbs,  i.  e.  all  kinds, 
148. 

P/mrao//,  justly  hardened,  144. 

Philip,  how  he  baptized,  48. 

Philosophers,  arguments  of,  24. 

Phineas,  punished  adultery,  38. 

Physician,  hates  sickness,  loves  the 
sick,  557.  best  judge  for  the  sick, 
571. 

Pity,  how  attributed  to  God,  543. 

Pla(j(F,  678. 

Plato,  hidden  meanings  of,  in  amorous 
writing,  595. 

Players,  not  received  to  Baptism,  69. 

Pleasure,  in  holy  labour,  378.  in 
worldly  occupations,  ib.  of  earthly 
things  a  known  motive  to  natural 
will,  558.  thought  chief  good  by 
Epicurus,  5S7. 

Plural  put  for  singular,  114. 

Pontius  Pilate,  named  to  mark  the 
date,  567. 

Poor,  feeding, for  man"s  praise  not  good, 
440.  of  Christ,  monks  so  called,  534. 
patience  of  the,  552.  long  for  the  in- 
heritance, 561.  of  Christ,  to  be  made 
rich,  562. 

Possidius,  his  life  of  St.  Augustine,  95, 
note  h,  353. 

Posture  in  prayer  increases  fervour, 
524. 

Pound,  the,  Csee  Dictinius.) 

Poverty,  of  Christ  our  ensample,  230. 

P(yHw"of  God,  The  Son  called,  18,  19. 


INDEX. 


6*47 


Powers,  Angels  called,  121. 

Prayer,  The  Lord's,  owns  the  Church 
a  daughter,  7.  easy  to  commit  to 
memory,  88.  lighter  sins  daily  re- 
mitted to,  128.  teaches  forgiveness, 
130.  is  for  help  as  well  as  pardon, 
136.  expresses  our  Hope,  151,  ex- 
position of,  154 — 7.  number  of 
petitions  in,  154.  needed  against 
temptation,  371.  does  more  than 
exhortation,  373.  called,  '  The 
Prayer,'  575.  remission  of  lighter 
sins  by,  ib.  to  the  baptized,  570. 

Prayer,  sin  of  infirmity  remitted 
through,  81.  for  all  sorts  of  men, 
148.  of  humble  perchance  saves 
the  proud,  ib.  of  Proba  for  her 
daughter  and  granddaughter,  375, 
381.  spiritual  delight  in,  377t  8. 
helped  by  alms,  378.  of  the  obedient 
heard,  493.  interrupted  for  necessary 
labours,  ib.  for  manual  labour,  ib. 
retirement  for,  502.  posture  at,  in- 
creases fervency,  524.  yet  is  not  ne- 
cessary to  it,  524. 

Prayers,  to  saints,  (see  Saints.)  for  the 
dead,  344.  an  universal  practice, 
517.  at  the  Altar,  519.  authority  for, 
though  not  in  Scripture,  ib.  in  Mac- 
cabees, ib.  profit  of,  depends  on  past 
life,518,19.  not  inconsistent  with  each 
receiving  after  his  deeds,  ib.  do  not 
profit  all,  ib.  profitable  to  the  dead, 
618,523,542.  for  the  dead  to  saints, 
623,  542.  a  duty,  523,  5.  not  to  be 
pretermitted,  ib.  for  all  the  faithful 
departed,  524.  a  duty,  542.  for  our 
departed  friends  especially,  ib.  that 
we  may  be  prayed  for  in  turn,  ib. 

Preacliing,  Christ  of  contention,  39. 
the  Gospel,  reward  of,  482.  without 
necessity  rewarded,  ib.  the  Gospel 
for  support  might  oftend  the  weak, 
484,6.  for  the  sake  of  a  maintenance 
wrong,  505. 

Precepts,  (see  Obedience,)  extreme  in- 
terpretations of,  41. 

Predestination,  75.  unto  life,  123,  380. 
of  the  number  of  saints  in  each  class, 
380. 

Prelates,  preaching  of,  436. 

Pride,  discountenanced  by  Christ's  hu- 
mility, 230.  and  envying,  331.  to  be 
guarded  against,  ib.  of  Pelagians, 
551.  ground  of  false  patience,  552. 
Christ  born  in  lowliness  to  heal, 
667. 

Priesthood,  of  the  Jews  become  vile, 
410. 

Primicerius  Notariorum,  85. 

Principles,  what  taught  in  Baptism, 
52. 

Priscilla,  Holy  Ghost  came  not  in,  181. 


Priscillian,  (see  Priscittianists,)  artful 
praise  of,  431.  himself  detected  with- 
out lies,  436. 

Priscillianists,  enquiries  of  Consentius 
about,  382.  thought  it  lawful  to  deny 
doctrines,  426,  438,  451.  counte- 
nanced by  the  like  practised  against 
them,  4-'7,  431,  2,  451.  examples 
quoted  by,  428.  lies  told  to  detect, 
are  of  worst  kind,  430.  how  a  spy 
would  deal  with,  431.  some  of  their 
notions, 432, 3.  sin  less  than  Catholics 
in  blaspheming,  433,  5,  anathema- 
tise PiiseillJan  in  pretence, 435.  false 
martyrdoms  of,  ib.  heresy  of,  over- 
thrown by  Catholic  Bishops,  435,  6. 
God  can  detect  without  our  sin,  436. 
numbers  of,  ib.  might  as  well  be 
sought  out  by  lewdness  as  by  lying, 
439,  442.  exposed  by  Consentius, 
450. 

Pruha  Faltonia,  mother-in-law  of  Ju- 
liana, 368,  note  a.  381.  grandmother 
of  Demetrias,  a  holy  woman,  375. 

Prohare,  605. 

Prcetextatus,  reception  of,  by  Donatists, 
159. 

Profession,  (see  Yous,)  of  continence, 
not  to  be  forsaken,  361,  2. 

Promises  of  support  do  not  exclude  our 
exertions,  507,  508. 

Property,  question  of  lying  to  save, 
404,  424.  giving  up  of,  a  pattern  to 
us,  503.   management  of,  607. 

Prophecy ,&\'\d.ifface  of,  conclusive,  6 — 8. 
even  for  Gospel  records,  8  — 10. 
of  things  we  see  proves  things  un- 
seen, 11.  notion  of  forgery  refuted, 
ib.    Passion  foretold  in,  ib. 

Prophetic  meaning  of  Patriarch's  care 
for  burial,  522. 

Prophets,  many  had  been  slain  by  the 
Israelites,  73.  in  time  of,  women 
served  God  by  marriage,  360.  God's 
ancient  people  a  prophet,  ib.  mar- 
riages of,  attacked  by  Faustus,  369. 
knew  only  what  God  thought  fit,  537. 
effect  of  their  teaching  on  multi- 
tudes, 616.  disobedient,  (1  Kings  xii.) 
punished  temporallj'  only,  526,  7. 
soul  saved,  ib.  body  cared  for, 
527. 

Proud,  like  birds  lifted  up,  498. 

Providence,  notexcluding  our  exertions, 
507,  508. 

Provision,  for  the  morrow  how  for- 
bidden, 411.  to  be  made  for  the 
future,  502.  promised  to  the  able  in 
working,  to  the  unable  without, 
507,  8.'" 

Psalmody,  a  spiritual  delight,  377,  8. 
no  hindrance  to  work,  493. 

Psalms,  to  be  learnt  by  heart,  493. 


648 


INDEX. 


Puhlivan  and  Pharisee,  332. 

Punishiitent,  eternal,  11.  (see  Judg- 
ment, Fire,  Sin.)  supposed  tempo- 
rary, 76.  this  not  to  be  promised  to 
evil  livers,  79.  of  ungodly  believed, 
not  looked  for,  88.  special,  of  man, 
death,  102.  some  would  have  not 
eternal,  152.  as  surely  eternal  as 
reward,  153.  may  perhaps  be  merci- 
fully mitigated,  ib.  for  sin  inevitable, 
255.  no  sin  to  avoid,  405.  not  escaped 
by  assigning  a  motive,  442.  of  sin 
called  '  sin,'  457-  future,  of  suicide, 
C50,  51.  less  for  schismatics  who 
'suffer  for  Christ,  560. 

Piinitthments,  temporal,  given  some- 
times without  eternal,  125.  may  be 
acts  of  mercy,  129.  degrees  of,  as  of 
sin,  140.  of  reprobate  men  and  angels, 
eternal,  ib.  threatened  to  correct  the 
foolish,  585. 

Purgatory,  (see  Fire,)  note  on  St.  Au- 
gustine's doubtful  opinion  of,  84. 
ignis  purgatorius,  128,  note  1.  St. 
Augustine's  doubtful  opinion  of,  152, 
and  note  a. 

Purijication,  (see  Legal,)  why  ordered 
under  the  Law,  297. 

Purity,  false  notions  of,  23.  need  of, 
for  seeing  divine  mysteries,  32,  33, 
36.  pretenders  to,  really  worldly, 
185. 


Q. 


Queen,  The  Church  a,  7. 
Quick    and    Dead,     who    meant    by, 
25,26,119,573. 


E. 


Raltah,  not  approved  for  lying,  458. 
how  she  might  have  avoided  it,  460. 

Reading,  false,  making  Christ  to  have 
'  wrought  sin,"  1 13.  spiritual  delight 
in,  377,  8.  pursued  to  the  neglect  of 
doing  what  is  read,  494.  profits 
through  doing  what  is  read,  ib.  more 
time  than  is  good  may  be  given  to, 
ib.  three  kinds  of  error  in,  587. 

Reality  of  Christ's  flesh,  264. 

Reason,  office  of,  in  religion,  86,  87. 
use  of,  makes  responsible,  124.  given 
by  St.  Paul  when  he  seems  only  to 
rebuke,  145.  souls  possessed  of,  how 
placed,  167.  natural,  teaches  how  to 
deal  with  things  below  us,  ib.    dis- 


tinguishes man  from  brute,  174. 
Manichees  would  prove  all  by,  578, 
592.  pretenders  to,  should  not  de- 
scend to  commonplace  arts,  580.  not 
enough  to  keep  miCn  from  sin,  585. 
why  not  to  be  lollowed  before  faith, 
598.  good  if  to  be  had,  but  not  to  be 
had  for  all,  601.  why  those  capable 
of,  should  believe  first,  ib.  we  owe  to 
it  what  we  understand,  604.  least  of 
all  able  to  master  religion,  606.  what 
is  rightly  done  proceeds  from,  607. 
right,  is  virtue,  ib.  faith  prepares 
for,  609. 

Red  Sea,  a  figure  of  Baptism,  51.  no 
creed'  given  before,  ib.  implies  re- 
pentance, if  passover  implies  faith, 
52. 

Rejtige,  is  one  seekmg,  to  be  saved  by 
a  lie  V  388,  393,  405. 

Regeneration,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  31. 
laver  of,  some  would  give  before 
change  of  life,  37.  appointed,  because 
our  generation  was  corrupted,  il5. 
Christ  alone  needed  not,  ib.  not  con- 
ferred in  John's  baptism,  116.  none 
free  from  coudenmation  without,  1 1 7. 
remission  of  sin  in,  124.  is  in  order 
to  pleasing  God,  131.  in  Baptism, 
258.  had  we  no  other  birth  we  should 
not  sin,  467.  prayer  for,  for  Cate- 
chumens, 576. 

Relics  of  martyrs  (or  pretended  ones) 
hawked  about,  509. 

Religion,  Hearch  after  true,  implies  care 
for  the  soul,  592.  supposed  case  of 
ignorance  of,  ib.  use  of  testimony  of 
many  in,  593.  free  and  popular, 
though  few  perfect  in,  £95.  autho- 
rity needful  in,  598.  wrong  to  deliver, 
to  the  unworthy,  600.  yet  we  tr  ist 
those  who  come  to  learn,  600,  602. 
most  men  need  steps  to,  601.  two 
classes  of  men  praised  in — those  who 
have,  and  who  seek  the  tiuth,602,  3. 
three  blamed,  603.  faith  specially 
needed  for,  and  why,  606.  search 
for  true,  presupposes  belief  in  God, 
608,  9. 

Rctnission  of  sins,  33.  not  for  the  un- 
forgiving, ib.  of  sin,  likeness  of 
Christ's  Death,  117.  of  sins,  our 
faith  concerning,  124.  granted  in 
the  Church  alone,  125.  not  without 
amendment,  128.  of  lighter  sins  by 
prayer,  ib.  requires  forgiveness  on 
our  part,  129.  of  all  sins  in  the 
Church,  184. 

Repentance,  required  as  well  as  faith, 
47.  some  make  of  uu})elief  only,  ib. 
a  first  principle,  52.  required  for 
John's  baptism,  55.  remedy  for  sin 
after  Baptism,  114,  sin  after  Baptism 


INDEX. 


649 


healed  by,  ib.  measured  by  sorrow 
rather  than  by  lime,  125.  necessary 
to  salvation,  128.  measures  of,  ib. 
in  God,  543.  of  God  without  error, 
544. 

Kcport,  good,  duty  of  keeping,  379. 
evil,  if  uot  incurred  by  fault,  no  loss, 
ib. 

i?es^rrt^/o?i,  of  branches  cut  off,  183,  4. 

Resurrection,  of  Christ,  prophesied,  9. 
of  the  dead,  part  of  same  prophecy 
with  tilings  we  see,  11.  asserted  by 
Apostles,  12.  of  the  body,  real,  15, 
34.  an  article  of  faith,  24.  man 
changed  in,  25.  preached  by  St.  Paul, 
50.  of  judgment  means  damnation, 
75,  7G,  119.  Saints  to  be  made  equal 
to  Angels  in,  104.  of  Christ,  imitated 
in  Baptism,  113,1 18.  of  Christ,  fore- 
shews  ours,  130.  of  the  body,  our  faith 
concerning,  13G,  &c.    is  of  all  men, 

136.  question  of  abortions,  136,  7. 
what  is  wanting  may  be  supplied  in, 

137.  of  monstrous  births,  ib.  diffi- 
culties raised  about  it,  138.  question 
of  stature,  139.  of  the  wicked  to  pu- 
nishment, 140.  questions  about,  ib. 
Kingdom  of  God  comes  in,  154.  how 
not  of  •  flesh  and  blood,'  159,  60.  of 
Christ,  a  remedy  for  fear,  170.  of 
Christ,  in  the  same  body  that  was 
buried,  178.  of  the  flesh,  185.  a  not 
incredible  mystery,  234,  240.  of  the 
body,  515.  without  death,  our  prize. 
569,  70.  of  Christ,  gives  hope,  569, 
576.  Lazarus  died  after,  570,  576. 
of  the  flesh,  576. 

Retreat  of  monks,  for  prayer,  501,  2. 
Revelations,  by  visions,  532,  533.    to 

Prophets  partial,  537. 
Revenge,  forbidden  to  Christians,  129. 
Reward,  of  Christian  soldier,  379.    of 

evangelizing,  482. 
Rkailamanthus,  fable  of,  587. 
Rhetoric,  learned  from  the  few  whom 

the  many  acknowledge,  593,  4. 
Rhone,  ashes  of  martyrs  thrown  into 

the,  523. 
Rhyming  terminations,  543. 
Rich,  the,  humbled  before  the  Church, 

7.   healed  of  pride  in  becoming  poor, 

503.  men,  became  monks,  504,  5. 
Riches,  loved,  though  well  used,  a  loss, 

64.    desire  of,  condemned  in  widows, 

377,  8.  what  men  will  suffer  to  gain, 

544.  of  God,  552. 
Right  ear,  cut   off,  what    it    means, 
"     182,  3. 
Righteousness,  actual,  of  Christians  to 

exceed   Pharisees',    81.     man   may 

live  in,  here  by  faith,  156. 
Right  Hand  of  God,  what  meant  bv, 

25,  179,  379,"  575. 


Right  side,  the  nets  why  cast  on,  179. 

Rising  with  Christ,  what,  270. 

Robbers,  lying  in  v\ait,  385,  6.  en- 
durance of,  54.5. 

Rome,  republic  of,  allowed  divorce,  15. 
the  usage  of,  in  respect  of  divorce, 
282.  love  of  the  commonwealth,  504. 

Root-virtue,  continence,  305. 

Riiffimis,  translated  Eusebius'  Ecel. 
Hist.  523. 

Ride  of  Faith,  the  Creed,  563. 

Rath,  blessed,  though  Anna  more  so, 
366.  continent  widows  may  not  set 
themselves  above,  359.  married 
again  to  be  an  ancestor  of  Christ, 
360.  not  less  blessed  than  Anna,  if 
she  knew  Christ  should  descend 
from  her,  ib. 


S. 


Sabbath,  St.  Paul  discoursed  in  the 
Synagogue  on  the,  495.  not  for  Chris- 
tians, 5*;6. 

Sabel/ianism,  20,  41.  guarded  against, 
172. 

Sacrament  of  marriage,  282,  291,  295, 
304.  of  ordination,  304. 

Sacramenta,  453. 

Sacraments,  not  raarrecl  by  presence 
of  the  bad,  42.  not  to  be  trusted 
in  without  obedience,  83.  good  and 
evil  partook  of,  79.  benefit  of,  regards 
the  life  to  come,  125.  applied  for 
by  Catechumens,  199,  202,  210,  225, 
237.  note  (where  add  to  the  references 
Bingham  Anti(/.  X.  II.  §.  16.)  of 
New  Law,  supersede  the  old,  391. 
Truth  intimated  in,  422 

Sacrifice,  needed  for  man,  107.  under 
the  Law  a  shadow  of  that  of  Christ, 
107,  123.  of  Christ  redeemed  man, 
122,  3.  reconciled  him  to  holy 
Angels,  123.  of  Christ  for  sin,  112. 
sacrifice  called  sin,  ib.  of  the  Medi- 
ator offered  in  the  Church,  151.  of 
the  Altar  profits  not  the  wicked  after 
death,  ib.  (some  perchance  to  lesser 
punishment,  152.)  for  sin,  called  sin, 
457. 

Sacrifices,  legal,  not  for  Christians, 
5i6. 

Sadducees,  our  Lord's  answer  to,  365. 
Saints,  Church  daily  renewed  in,  7.  to 
rise  equal  to  Angels,  104.  do  not 
desire  to  be  worshipped,  120.  live 
without  crime,  124.  Bodies  of,  to 
be  raised  perfect,  139.  mercy  and 
judgment  cleave  to,  hereafter,  141. 
the  Church  made  up  of,  175.  not  so 


C50 


INDEX. 


assumed  as  Christ,  ib.  to  be  at  God's 
right  hand,  179.  why  their  example 
is  proposed  to  us,  199.  ancient,  were 
saved  by  a  prospective  faith,  219, 
223.  were  members  of  the  Christian 
Church,  ■:24.  understood  the  Types, 
225,  229.  in  heaven  cannot  sin,  256, 
260.  differ  in  merits,  327,  in  glory, 
327.  and  joy,  328.  number  of  to  be 
completed,  380.  of  Old  Testament 
acted  prophecy,  389,  451,  2.  of  New 
Testament  do  not  lie,  390,  423,  452, 
3.  not  to  be  imitated  in  faults,  392. 
of  New  Testament  surest  examples, 
410,  4.52.  prayers  to,  538.  prayers  to 
profitable, 51 8,. 523,  &c.  patrons,  523. 
memorial  chapels  of,  518,  623.  to  be 
remembered,  523.  merits  aid  the 
souls  of  the  departed,  524,  539. 
intercession  of,  5J8.  may  be  general, 
ib,  for  those  who  pray  to  them,  ib. 
interposition  of  extraordinary,'  ib. 
how  they  aid  us  mysterious,  ib. 
through  God's  sending  Angels,  ib. 
memorials  of,  the  special  places  for 
obtaining  their  aid,  539.  patience  of 
is  as  their  love,  553.  of  Old  Testa- 
ment saved  by  grace  through  faith, 
556,  7.  general  effect  of  their  ex- 
amples, 616. 

Sal/itsf,  leferred  to,  545, 

Sa/t,  given  to  Catechumens,  237,  note, 
(see  Sacrament.} 

Salvation,  through  fire,  (see  Fire.) 
faith  and  love  needful  for,  57,  58. 
error  of  promising  to  baptism  without 
obedience,  83.  of  a  soul,  supposed 
case  of  lying  for,  4G6,  7. 

Samuel,  apparition  to  Saul,  opinions  on, 
537.  prophesying  when  dead,  ib. 

Safictimoiiialcs,  352. 

Sanctitr/,  how  in  sense  connected  with 
'  sanction,'  31.  treated  o!,  352.  higher, 
sought  in  separation  from  the  world, 
•493. 

Sarah,  her  example  cited,  301.  an  ex- 
ample to  wives,  358.  denied  her 
laughing, 38  •(.truly  called  Abraham's 
sister,  448. 

Satan,  some  delivered  to,  39.  trans- 
formed as  an  Angel  of  light,  122. 
brought  low  after  his  pride,  511, 
tempts  through  or  without  instru- 
ments, 548,  9,  hurt  not  Job  but  by 
God's  power,  549.  tempted  Job,  as 
Adam,  by  woman,  549,  570.  fell  by 
his  own  will,  558.  exorcised  from 
children,  as  the  original  of  sin, 
564.  (see  Exorcism.) 

Saul,  blasphemed   in   ignorance,  466. 

Saul  {King,)  those  who  buried  him 
praised,  528.  seeing  Samuel,  537. 

Scales  of  charity,  351, 


Scandals  to  be  avoided,  515,  16. 

Scars  of  Chri.st,  351. 

Schism,  of  Donatus,41.  .some  abide  in, 
through  shame,  ib.  may  arise  frcm 
attempts  at  purity,  82."  a  breach  of 
charity,  559. 

Schismatics,  claim  the  name  of 
Churches,  33.  are  not  of  the  Church, 
as  wanting  charity,  ib.  are  slaves, 
and  have  their  right  ear  cut  off,  182. 

School,  temptmg  discussions  in,  579. 

Schoolmaster,  the  Law  a,  586. 

Scipio  AfricauHS,  504.  his  daughter 
portioned  by  the  state,  ib. 

Scripture,  Holy,  ( see  Texts.)  sometimes 
names  inseparable  things  separately, 
56.  misinterpreted,  58.  plain  truths  of, 
not  to  yield  to  uncertain  expo-itions, 
60, 62.  testifies  frequently  against  sin 
with  knowledge,  80.  question  what 
may  be  learned  from,  about  hereditary 
punishment,  115.  agrees  not  with 
those  who  think  all  the  baptized  are 
saved,  126.  may  teach  more  on  en- 
quiry, 128.  teaches  man  not  to  glory 
in  himself,  144.  passages  of,  put  for- 
ward by  IManichees,  163,  4.  our  only 
evidence  for  some  things,  176.  uses 
past  for  future,  180.  clear,  misun- 
derstood by  Manichees,  181.  how  to 
be  discoursed  on,  191.  the  two 
Testaments  compared,  195.  frame 
of  mind  of  those  who  read  aright,  ib. 
(see  Jacob:)  a  better  guide  than 
signs,  197.  its  interpretation,  202, 
238.  use  of  its  dark  sayings,  202.  its 
letter  and  spirit  like  soul  and  body, 
202.  statements  all  true,  319,  321. 
forbids  being  over  wise,  354.  wrested, 
481.  to  be  learnt  by  heart,  493. 
practice  of  the  whole  Church  of 
authority  for  what  is  not  written  in, 
519.  cannot  deceive,  559.  creed 
scattered  about  in,  563. 

Scriptures,  cop'es  of,  in  hands  of  Jews, 
11.  use  of,  to  strengthen  believers, 
16.  not  silf-contradictory  about  cre- 
ation, 18.  heathen  know  not,  24. 
mi-staken  by  heretics,  28.  precepts  in, 
both  of  peace  and  of  severity,  42. 
silence  of,  not  always  conclusive,  72. 
must  be  believed  in  things  beyond 
experience,  87.  justly  called  divine, 
ib.  men  soften,  not  daring  to  oppose, 
152.  of  the  Old  Testament  often 
figurative,  ."^89.  records  of,  orf'ered  by 
the  Spirit,  389.  why  contain  exam- 
ples as  well  as  precepts,  409,  10. 
forbid  every  lie,  423.  not  to  be 
tampered  with,  425.  knowledge  of 
praised,  427.  true  interpretation  of,  to 
be  urged,  451.  three  methods  to  be 
used  with,  451,  2.  (see  Testament.) 


INDEX. 


651 


of  Old  Testament  attacked  by  Mani- 
cliecs,  580.  why  hard  to  defend,  681. 
four  fold  sense  of,  582.  thought  by 
Manichees  to  be  interpolated,  583. 
partial  use  of,  585.  how  to  deal  with, 
686,  591.  three  suppositions  about, 
688,  589.  which  really  in  question, 
569,  Church's  belief  about,  690. 
interpretation  of,  not  to  be  sought 
from  enemies,  ib.  falsely  charged 
with  absurdity,  594.  testimony  of 
mankind  to,  ib.  believed  on  the 
Church's  testimony,  611.  folly  of  con- 
demnhig  uninterpreted,  616. 

Seasons,  a  standing  miracle,  615. 

Secw/ar  judgments  imposed  on  Bishops 
by  Apostolical  injunction,  510. 

Sedes,  dwellings  called,  573. 

Senators,  became  Monks,  505. 

Senses,  source  cf  some  knowledge,  87. 
sometimes  deceived,  99.  one  stopped 
supplied  by  another,  377.  some  would 
receive  nothing  but  from,  578.  things 
known  by,  known  without  having, 
608.  Now  known  by  multitudes  not 
to  perceive  God,  615. 

Seplivira,  363. 

Sermon  on  the  mount,  331. 

Serpent,  who  are  the  food  of,  161. 

Servants  of  God,  Monks  so  called, 
508. 

Session,  of  Christ  at  God's  right  hand, 
25.  (see  CArist.) 

Seventh,  age,  will  be  an  age  of  rest, 
219. 

Sexes,  both  honoured  in  the  Incarnation, 
22.  both  honoured  by  Christ,  177. 
how  undistinguished  in  Christians, 
514. 

Shame,  natural,  is  against  often-repeat- 
ed marriage,  366. 

Side  by  siile,  the  walk  of  the  mariied, 
275. 

Sick,  may  they  be  deceived  for  their 
health  r"  388.  object  of  love  and  hatred 
to  physician,  557. 

Sickness  of  the  soul,  what,  258. 

Sight,  arrived  at  by  living  well,  87. 
absence  of,  common  to  Faith  and 
Hope,  89. 

Signacida,  422. 

Signs,  not  known  without  the  thing, 
607,  8. 

SingtilarUy,  of  things  that  stand  chief, 
294. 

Silence,  mav  involve  betrayal,  407, 
408. 

Similes,  easy  weapons  to  find,  580. 

Simon,  his  example  cited,  342. 

Sin,  (see  Baptism,  Faith,  Remissioji,) 
all  have,  in  this  life,  but  not  all 
alike,  33.  remission  of,  ib.  reigns 
by  habit,  not  nature, 34.  all,  comes  of 


love  of  the  world,  51.  agains'.  the 
Holy  Ghost,  66.  none  shi  uld  think 
he  has  not,  in  this  life,8l.  ditierences 
of,  ib.  some  remitted  through  daily 
prayer,  ib.  must  be  forsaken  by  those 
who  would  be  saved,  60.  three  sins 
allowed  deadly,  70.  others  thought 
to  be  atoned  by  alms,  ib.  doubtful 
even,  to  be  avoided,  71-  past,  remitted 
in  Baptism,  not  future,  permitted,  72. 
persevered  in,  parts  from  God,  74. 
God  willing  to  pardon,  on  repentance, 
ih.  wilful,  worse  than  unbelief,  76. 
abiding  in,  after  Baptism  is  like  re- 
turning to,  80.  wcrse  with  knowledge 
than  without,  ib.  worse  to  do  than  to 
sufler,  96.  this  life  not  past  without 
some,  101.  original,  in  all  naturally 
propagated,  102.  original,  why  not 
in  angels,  103.  free-will  lost  by,  105. 
slavery  to,  ib.  guilt  of  original,  taken 
away  by  regeneration,  108.  man  jus- 
tified from,  by  same  grace  whereby 
Christwas  without  sin,  109.  original, 
Christ  far  from,  1 12.  Christ  sacrificed 
to  wash  away,  ib.  Himself  hence 
called  '  sin,'  ib.  Christ  falsely  said  to 
have  'wrought,'  113.  of  Adam  in- 
cluded many  sins,  114,  15.  several 
specified,  114.  after  Baptism  healed 
by  repentance,  ib.  original  not  barred 
by  wedlock,  115.  taken  away  through 
Christ  only,  ib.  came  by  one,  taken 
away  by  (5ne,  1 16.  least  punishment 
where  none  but  original,  140.  degrees 
of,  ib.  all  remitted  in  Baptism,  124. 
not  every,  a  crime,  ib.  great,  may  be 
pardoned  on  repentance,  125.  pu- 
nished in  this  life,  though  remitted 
for  the  future,  ib.  persisted  in  ex- 
cludes from  the  kingdom,  126.  alms 
help  remission  of,  128.  Christ  took 
away  more  than  Adam  brought  in, 
116.  original,  of  itself  condemns, 
106,  144.  Christians  dead  to,  117-  of 
infirmity  remitted  to  daily  prayer, 
128.  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  136. 
not  pardoned  while  loved,  132.  shared 
by  permission,  135.  is  of  ignorance 
or  of  weakness,  ib.  not  overcome 
without  God's  help,  ib.  to  be  weighed 
by  God's  judgment,  133.  some  venial, 
ib.  some  heavier  than  we  might  think, 
134.  come  to  be  thought  little  of  by 
habit,  ib.  knowledge  of,  through  the 
law,  155,  6.  sole  cause  of  our  weak- 
ness, 168.  how  man  shoul  feel  con- 
cerning, 218.  remitted  tothe  faithful 
in  Baptism,  258.  spiritual  men  not 
exempt  from,  266.  is  lusting  against 
Christ,  ib.  venial  and  deadly,  281, 
285.  from  which  we  are  spared,  is 
forgiven,    341,    350.    none  are   free 


652 


indp:x. 


from,  347.  creeps  on  a  man,  348. 
not  justified  by  comparison,  389.  not 
to  be  committed  to  save  life,  393,  &c. 
not  to  be  screened  by  falsehood,  404. 
all,  is  spoken  by  the  heart,  414.  con- 
fession of  required,  416.  wrongly  es- 
timated by  carnal  men,  419.  some 
less  violent  as  bad  as  murder,  420. 
slight,  is  no  sin  if  to  avoid  something 
wrong  to  allow,  421.  of  others  not  to 
be  prevented  by  our  own,  423,  444. 
not  to  be  done  to  detect  sin,  427. 
against  conscience,  434.  not  justified 
by  motive,  441.  yet  made  less,  442, 
458.  venial  not  allowed,  443.  alterna- 
tives of,  443,  447.  of  ignorance  or 
infirmity,  447,  4-59,  485.  none  can  be 
'  just,'  457.  sacrifice  called,  457. 
forgiven  for  subsequent  good  works, 
458.  remitted  through  alms,  ib.  comes 
of  our  earthly  birth,  467.  is  the  sting 
of  death,  468.  impossible  to  God,  564. 
original  in  children,  ib.  law  made  to 
restrain  fools  from,  585.  every  action 
not  rightly  done  is,  607. 

Singing  at  work,  493. 

Singular,  put  for  plural,  113. 

^/w^ze;*,  to  protect  a,  is  not  to  aid  sin, 405. 
not  to  be  despaired  of,  405.  unknown 
as  it  were  to  Christ,  454. 

Si>t7icrs,  are  earth,  the  devil's  food,  161. 
punished  though  good  come  of  their 
deeds,  167.  many  compared  with  the 
number  of  the  good,  221.  learn  hu- 
mility of  Christ,  336. 

Sins,  put  for  sin  in  infants,  113,  14.  of 
parents  visited  on  children  in  the  old 
covenant,  114.  question  how  far  this 
law  extends,  115.  we  commit,  here, 
and  here  ask  remission  of,  154.  con- 
fession of,  350.  forgiveness  of,  in 
Baptism,  675.  none  to  be  despaired 
of,  ib.  those  we  cannot  live  without 
are  venial,  ib.  lighter,  remitted  by 
daily  prayers,  ib,  warning  against 
such,  as  cut  off,  ib.  penance  done  for 
greater,  ib.  remitted  three  ways  in 
Church,  ib.  all  imply  Baptism,  ib. 
Catechumens  still  under,  576. 

Sister,  a  near  kinswoman  truly  called, 
448. 

Sitting  in  Churches,  210.  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  what,  513. 

Sije  ages,  to  precede  an  age  of  rest,  219. 
defined  by  S.  Augustine.  228,  29. 

Siocty -fold-fruits  of  widowed  life, 
345. 

S/ai'e*,  many,  but  one  master,  294.  freed 
to  become  Monks,  498.  trusted  by 
masters,  602. 

Sleep,  abstinence  from,  545. 

Smoke,  Mauichean  notion  about,  618. 

Society,  founded  on  faith,  5. 


Sofloni,    type    of  the  state  of  sin,  _i80. 
justified    in    comparison   of  Israel, 
389.  Lot's  conduct  in,  395,  443,  5. 
men  of,  smitten  with  blindness,  461. 
Soldiers   of  Christ,    Mouks  so   called, 
608.  mark  of,  not  repeated  after  de- 
sertion, 576. 
Solomon,  commanded  to  build   God   a 
temple,  574'.  built  of  earthly  materials, 
ib. 
Son,  The,  (see  Word,  <^-c.)  anointed  by 
The  Father,  6.  God  made  all  things 
by,    18.    Only-begotten,   called   the 
Word,  ib.  not  made,  19.    nor  begot- 
ten  in    time,  20.    nor   unequal,   ib. 
Light   of    Light,    21      is    God,   26. 
Image  of  the  Father,  23.  hath  Being 
of  the  Father,  ib.    thought  unequal 
by  heretics  mistaking  Scripture,  ib. 
owes  to  The  Father  the  being  equal 
to  Him,   29.    meaning  of  the  term 
illu-;trated     by    examples.    111.     of 
God    uncreate,     1"3.     no    creature 
though    He    suffered    in    the   flesh, 
1  77,  8.    only  assumed  the  creature, 
178.    said  to  suffer  because  His  hu- 
manity suffered,  ib.    of  God  is  God, 
505.    of  man  is  man,  ib.    of  God  is 
Almighty,    ib.    why  Only   Son,   ib. 
has  one  will  with   the    Father,   ib. 
doth  what  He  will,  566.    One  God 
with   the    Father,  ib.    doth  all   the 
Father  doth,  567-    of  God  suffered 
and  died,  567,  8.  begotten  before  all 
times,  5t;8. 
Song    of    the    Three    Holy    Children, 

352. 
Sons,  (see  Mankind.)  sons  by  adoption 
as  well  as  nature,  112.  sons  of  hell 
and  the  kingdom,  ib. 
Sold,  (see  Spirit,)  how  defiled  by  the 
body,  23.  definition  of,  34.  part  of, 
resists  the  spirit,  34.  should  obey 
the  spirit,  ih.  death  and  corruption 
of,  35.  intermediate  state  of,  151. 
intercession  for,  ib.  sacritice  and  alms 
for,  ib.  sickness  of,  hinders  taste  of 
God's  sweetness,  168.  a,  assumed  by 
the  Eternal  Truth,  174.  acts  in  the 
head  especially,  175.  may  be  defiled 
though  the  tongue  is  not  moved,  244. 
meaning  of,  in  Scripture, 252.  purity 
of,  more  than  that  of  the  body,  394, 
422,3.  Priscillianists  in  error  about, 
432,  3.  is  what  we  keep  by  patience, 
546,7.  Lucretius  say  b  the,  is  uf  atoms, 
587.  good  of,  sought  in  religion, 
592.  liable  to  error,  592.  seems  made 
to  know  truth,  597.  filthy,  cannot 
use  reason.  614. 
Souls,  infant,  what  food  for,  .580.  pure, 
God  dwells  in,  590.  of  the  faithful 
departed,  at  rest,  522,  525,  6.  bene- 


INDEX. 


653 


fitted  by  prayers,  518,523.  obtain 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  523. 
rest  of,  not  afteeted  by  the  condition 
of  the  body,  520 — 25.  nor  by  tlie 
events  of  the  world,  5;-:5,  36.  (see 
Dead.)  some,  free  from  all  sutlering, 
636.  some  souls  suffering,  ib. 

'  Spare  yoii,^  meaning   of  the  phrase, 
318,  320,  322,  23. 

Specimen  of  how  S.  Augustine  cate- 
chized, 215-2.37.  another,  238-242. 

Spectacles  of  a  brutal  kind,  denounced, 
2ir. 

Speech,  true,  produces  an  imnge  of  the 
mind,  19.  inward, heard  by  God, 413. 

Spirit,  Holy,  the  Apostles'fiUed  with, 
12.  Son  of  God  born  by,  22.  not  in- 
ferior, 26.  His  peculiar  property  not 
yet  fully  discussed,  29.  called  The 
Gift,ib.  not  begotten  of  The  Father, 
ib.  nor  the  Son's  Son,  ib.  hath  the 
Being  of  the  Father,  30.  double  pro- 
cession of,  30,  n.  why  caUed  '  Sanc- 
tus,'  31.  faith  and  good-will  first- 
fruits  of,  34.  perfection  of,  to  follow 
God,  ib.  Christ  the  Head  of,  ib. 
of  love,  wen  by  earnest  faith,  73. 
asked  and  received,  7-4.  sheds 
abroad  love,  ib.  grace  of,  sets  us  free 
from  condemnation,  77.  refusal  of, 
after  Baptism  lets  in  Satc.n,  80.  The, 
called  Ho'iness,  172,  3.  is  no  crea- 
ture, nor  inferior  to  The  Son,  173. 
union  of  Father  and  Son  in  The,  ib. 
His  appearance  in  the  form  of  a 
dove,  176.  why  not  bora  of  a 
dove,  177.  all  things  made  known  to 
Apostles  by,  180.  came  not  in  St. 
Paul,     Montanus,    or    Manichaus, 

1 81.  coming  of,  clearly  marked  in 
Scripture,  ib.  foretaste  of  God  by, 
1G8.  inebriation  by,  ib.  gives  liberty, 

182.  called  the  '  Finger  of  God,' 
225.  continence  the  gift  of  God's,  253. 
signified  by  men's  actions  what  they 
knew  not,  3S9.  heareth  all  things, 
413.  the  fire  of  Divine  Love,  554. 
hence  the  source  of  patience,  554, 
557.  consubstantial  and  coequal, 
573,  4.  called  '  Love,'  574.  God,  as 
dwelling  in  Temple,  ib.  said  to  have 
come  in  Maiiichaeus,  584, 

Spirit,  God  is  a,  31.  rational,  dis- 
tinguishes men  fiom  brutes,  22. 
assumed  by  The  Son,  ib.  body  sub- 
ject to,  spiritual,  24,  spirit  and  soul 
named  in  one,  33.  is  rational  part 
of  soul,  ib.  brutes  have  not,  ib. 
and  flesh,  their  union,  263.  their 
oppo.sition,  266,  7.  of  man,  not  to 
be  elated  or  indiscriminating,  359. 
unclean,  makes  an  evil  will  frantic, 
558. 


Spiritual,  preferable  to  human  kindred, 
309.  and  carnal  things  mutually 
supplied,  492. 

Spiritual  desire  of  the  old  Fathers, 
293,  296,  306. 

Spi/,  supposed  practice  of,  431,  2. 

Spies,  (see  Raliah.) 

Standing  in  Church,  210. 

Stars,  devils  are  not  in  region  of, 
162. 

StaiNc,  recast,  like  the  body  rising, 
138. 

Stephanas,  household  of,  baptized  by 
St.  Paul,  50. 

Steward  of  the  Church  must  have  one 
wife,  295 

Stewards,  trusted  though  slaves,  602. 

Stoics,  wrong  in  making  all  sins  equal, 
457. 

Stone  tables  of  the  Law  represent  the 
Jewish  heart,  225. 

StifdioKSfiess,  matter  of  praise,  598,  99. 

Stfl/stance,  Divine,  not  to  be  thought 
of  as  material,  27.  numerical  unity 
of,  28,  n.  unity  of,  28,  41.  whether 
Godhead  is,  32.  Holy  Spirit  is,  ib. 
ever}-  thing  in  God  is,  ib.  not  to  be 
judged  of  as  if  bodily,  172.  unity  of, 
in  God,  133.  none  but  what  God 
begot  or  created,  618. 

Succession,  Apostolic,  616. 

Suffering,  for  good  faith  and  humanity, 
praiseworthy,  408. 

Sufferings,  endured  for  worldly  objects, 
544.  (see  Patience.) 

Suicide,  threat  of,  may  not  move  ns  to 
sin,  393,  Sec.  Job's  example  against, 
550.  of  Donatists,ib.  not  even  Job's 
wife  suggested,  ib.  worse  than  par- 
ricide, ib.  false  claim  of  martyrdom 
by,  551. 

Sun,  adored  as  a  god,  23.  rays  of,  not 
defiled  by  what  they  touch,  ib.  devils 
are  not  in  region  of,  162.  rays  of, 
pure,  though  shining  through  filth, 
174.  surpasses,  not  chides,  the  stars, 
359.  weak  eyes  cannot  gaze  on,  467. 
creation  of  the,  5G4.  temple  not 
to  be  built  to,  574.  worshipped  by 
Manichees,  590. 

Supererogavit,  457. 

Supererogation,  330. 

Superstition,  in  observing  times  sinful, 
134. 

Surgeons,  men  bear  pain  from,  for 
good,  546. 

Susanna  and  Anna,  284,  306,  320,  321. 

Suscipere,  607. 

Suspiciousness,  what  is,  698,  99. 

Swearing,  instances  of,  in  New  Testa- 
ment, 411.  all  '  Cometh  of  evil,'  418. 
rash,  of  David,  445.  false,  excused 
by  some,  464. 


054 


INDEX. 


Siiwrd,  spiritual,  takes  the  place  of 
visible,  38.  put  for  evil  tongue, 
182. 

Sipnbol,  (see  Creedi)  form  of,  delivered 
in  Baptism,  71. 


Talle,  of  the  Lord,  preparation  for, 
44. 

Talents,  parable  of,  68. 

Talking,  lust  of,  leads  to  lying,  402,  3. 

Taniar,  falsehood  of,  not  to  be  imitated, 
457. 

Tares,  in  God's  field,  41,2.  such  as 
contemn  correction,  45.  sow'ing  of, 
to  baptize  the  unreformed,  66.  mixed 
with  wheat  in  the  Church,  81,  2. 
borne  with  till  harvest,  548. 

Teacher,  The,  St.  Paul  called,  354. 
worth  travelling  to  fimi,  594. 

Teaching,  all  implies  some  faith,  693. 
multitude  may  shew  where  to  find, 
594,611.  Catholic,  origin  of,  598. 
ordinary  way  of,  uses  belief,  605. 
all  requires  a  master,  616. 

Temple,  (see  Church,)  human  image 
of  God  not  to  be  placed  in,  25. 
Christian  heart  a,  ib.  for  God  only, 
574.  Holy  Ghost  hath,  ib. 

Temptation,  (see  Prai/er,)  counsel 
against,  from  the  aged,  375.  hope  of 
gratification  a,  377- 

Tempting  God  by  not  avoiding  danger, 
.508. 

Terenliamts  Mavrus,  not  to  be  read 
without  expositors,  594. 

Tertiillian,  unwisely  attacks  second 
marriage,  357.  dared  not  condemn 
first,  ib. 

Testaynents,  two,  signified  by  Abra- 
liam's  sons,  4 10.  Old,  food  for  infant 
souls,  580.  agrees  with  New,  582, 
586.  passages  that  seem  to  condemn 
it,  585.  veil  of,  removed,  586.  what 
the  charge  against,  589.  St.  Au- 
gustine's belief  about,  590.  St.  Am- 
brose's exposition  of,  597-  charges 
brought  against,  617- 

Testimoni/,{fiee  Belief,  Faith,}  parents 
known  by,  4.  trusted  in  human  af- 
fairs, ib.  of  the  multitude  how  use- 
ful, 593,  4. 

Texts,  a  hard  one  in  Genesis  i., 
276.  in  the  Colossians  illustrated, 
270.  quoted  by  the  Manichees  met 
by  others,  262.  quoted  against  the 
Manichees,  264. 
Thabenna,  Honoratus  Bishop  of,  577- 


Thagasta,  Firinus,  Bishop  of,  406,  7. 

Theatre,  applause  of,  courttd  by  poet3, 
594. 

Theatres,  (see  Spectacles,)  by  whom 
frequented,  2.36. 

Thecla,  mentioned,  344. 

Theft,  not  lawful  because  useful,  101. 
from  rich  not  lawful,  403.  though  to 
feed  the  poor,  441.  is  '  from  the 
mouth'  of  the  heart,  414.  some  think 
too  much  of,  as  compared  with  sins 
of  luxury,  420.  is  less  sin  than  lewd- 
ness, 442,  3.  one  worse  than  another, 
4 12    3. 

Thigh,  signification  of  putting  the  hand 
under,  297. 

Thirti/-ful(l  fruit  of  marriage,  344,  5. 

Thouahf,  sins  of,  244,246.  goes  before 
woi-ks  246,  47.  sin  of  thought,  244, 
45.  of  intention,  246.  cannot  go  un- 
punished, 255.  a  mystery,  255,  56. 
why  man  is  free  to,  256.  though  not 
practiced  remains  to  be  mortified, 
271.  beautiful  picture  of  purity  in, 
ib. 

Thought  and  language  contrasted,  or 
remarked  upon,  189,  203,  205. 

Three  Holy  Children,  the,  352.  their 
song,  ib. 

Time,  shifting  course  of,  376.  to  be  set 
apart  for  labour,  493.  for  learning 
Scripture  by  heart,  ib.  Christ  is 
before  all,  568. 

Times,  specially  assigned  to  different 
employments,  494,  5.  change  of, 
582. 

r?wo///j/,S(;.  his  example  cited,  298.  cir- 
cumcised by  St.  Paul,  390,  91.  to 
keep  strength  for  bodily  work,  488. 

Tithes,  paid  by  the  Pharisees,  132. 

TjY^w.S^  not  circumcised,  and  why,  391. 

Tobias,  commended  for  burying  the 
dead, 

Tongue,  the,  a  member,  and  its  words 
acts,  440.  not  to  be  yielded  to  sin, 
442. 

Torture,  to  obtain  testimony,  406,  545. 
question  of  lying  to  escape,  407.  to 
be  borne  with  love,  410. 

Trades,  honest,  practised  by  St.  Paul, 
487.  honestly  practised,  good,  ib. 
manual,  suitable  to  preachers,  488. 

Tradition,  explainssome  things  implied 
in  Scripture,  49. 

Trance,  vision  in,  532.  for  several 
days,  ib. 

Transfiguration,  beyond  nature  of 
body,  as  what  Christ  did  w^hen  risen, 
178,9. 

Travel,  in  search  of  instruction,  594,  5. 
to  Holy  Land,  595. 

Tribulation,  attends  marriage,  318, 
323. 


INDEX. 


655 


Tribute,  whv  paid  bj-  Christ,  22/. 

Trinity,  The  Holy,  One  God,  26,  32, 
41.  siijiiified  by  '  of,'  '  in,'  and 
'  through,'  26,  32.  not  Three  Gods, 
27,  32.  illustrated  by  Fountain, 
Kiver,  and  Draught,  and  by  Root, 
Trunk,  and  Boughs,  ib.  faith  in, 
required  in  Baptism,  72.  doctrine  of 
The,  90.  works  of,  ascribed  to  the 
Holy  Ghost,  111.  doctrine  of  The, 
172.  silent  contemplation  of  the  mys- 
tery, one  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  235. 
doctrine  of  The,  5/'3,  4. 

Tri(/ieisiii,  172. 

Troas,  breaking  bread  at,  the  Eu- 
charist, 494,  5. 

Troid/es,  (see  Tribulation.) 

Truth,  The  Son  called  The,  18.  Holy 
Gliost  leads  to,  31.  beauty  of,  96. 
spoken  with  lying  intent  is  a  lie,  97. 
not  to  be  despaired  of,  99.  none  can 
know, Wiiile living  wickedly,  172.  The, 
may  not  be  thought  to  have  lied, 
178.  knowledge  of,  to  be  increased 
as  we  grow  in  love,  186.  of  every 
statement  in  Scripture,  3i9.  excess 
in  loving,  safer,  383.  may  be  spoken 
in  order  to  deceive,  385.  comprises 
every  eternal  good,  395.  eternal, 
distinguished  from  ordinary,  403, 
+19,  421.  notion  of  keeping  '  in  the 
heart,'  412,  13,  438.  love  of,  allows 
not  false  witness,  417.  must  be  in 
the  moiith  for  man,  417,  428.  in 
doctrine  injured  by  a  lie,  421.  union 
with  the  Eternal,  ib.  intimated  in 
words  and  Sacraments,  422.  may  be 
preferred  to  every  thin?  external 
422,  463.  not  to  be  wronged  in  de 
fending  it,  427.  every  lie  contrary  to 
429.  to  be  kept  with  those  without 
438.  some  to  be  concealed  from 
aliens, 439.  nothing  against  it  'just, 
457.  children  of  the  Church,  chil 
dren  of,  AGO.  provoked  by  systema 
tised  falsehood,  464.  supremacy  of, 
involuntarily  acknowledged,  ib.  can 
not  teach  lying,  465.  defended  by 
examples  of  chastity,  466,  7.  as  the 
sun,  gives  chastity  her  light,  467. 
weak  eyes  see  not  beauty  of,  ib.  what 
He  says  of  Himself,  567.  St.  Aug.'s 
early  love  of,  578.  not  measured  by 
sen.«es,  ib.  easy  to  claim,  hard  to 
find,  ib.  belief  prepares  for  behold- 
ing, 578,581,  6)0.  search  after,  592, 
&c.  suppose  claimed  by  some,  593.  if 
with  few,  hard  to  find"  them,  593,  4. 
itself  believed  by  the  blessed,  605. 
lovers  of,  believe  authority,  ib.  op- 
posed by  attacking  science  or  faith, 
ib.  wliy  made  hard  to  discover,  608. 


God  is,  612.  state  of  mind  needful 
for  seeking,  618. 

Tullius,  (see  Cicero.) 

Tumult,  speech  of  the  heart  called, 
413. 

Twins,  often  taken  for  each  other,  99. 

T)/pe,  the  ark  a  type  of  the  Cross,  222, 
'239.  the  "  sacrament  of  the  flood," 
ib.  the  flood  exhibits  the  final  judg- 
ment:  the  ark,  the  Church:  Noah 
and  his  family  the  setting  free  of  the 
saints,  222.  .Tacob,  a  type  in  the 
manner  of  his  birth,  192',  224.  the 
Jewish  people  clearly  prefigured  the 
future  Church  of  Christ,  223.  the 
flood,  and  the  crossing  the  Red  sea, 
a  type  of  baptism,  224.  Moses'  rod 
a  type  of  the  cross,  'z24.  the  passover 
typical  of  Christ's  passion,  224,  225. 
the  Jewish  Law  all  typical,  225. 
understood  by  the  ancient  saints,  ib. 
the  land  of  promise  full  of  typical 
teaching,  226.  Babylon  typical, 
226^  227.  the  70  years'  captivity 
typical,  227.  the  old  Law  and  Pente- 
cost, a  type  of  the  new,  231.  appli- 
cation of  the  Three  Holy  Children, 
352.    woman,  of  what,  575. 

Typical,  meaning  of  many  wives,  295. 
one  wife,  ib.  view  of  impurity,  297. 


U. 

Unbelief,  not  the  only  sin  of  the  Jews, 
73.  leaves  men  without  an  advocate, 
75.  may  be  spared  if  impenitence 
may,  76. 

Un:/iastiti/,  a  deadly  sin,  70.  manifest, 
if  continued  in,  a  bar  to  baptism,  ib. 

Uncircumcision  not  to  be  feigned,  483. 

Unclean,  who  are,  131. 

Understanding,  quick,  God's  gi't,  565. 
faith  goes  before,  566.  distinguished 
from  belief  and  opinion,  603.  is  by 
reason,  C94.  now  known  by  multi- 
tudes to  be  the  way  of  knowing  God, 
615. 

Unions,  three  spoken  of  by  the  Apostle, 
263. 

t7«/ify, numerical, of  Divine  Essence  hard 
to  illustrate,  28,  n.  of  the  Church, 
broken  by  some  in  hasty  zeal,  41. 
'  power  of  godline.ss'  lies  much  in, 
183.  in  Godhead  illustrated  by  that 
of  souls  united,  665.  but  imperfectly, 
since  they  are  still  many,  5'j6. 

Unity  of  communion,  how  severed,  201 . 

Unmarried,  may  mean  widows,  354, 
persons,  '  think  of  things  of  the  Lord.' 


056 


INDEX. 


357.  should   give    Christ  what  tliey 
reserve  from  a  consort,  874.  exiiorted 
to  forbear  marriage,  380. 
Unwilling  continence  estimated,  334. 


V. 


Valentinian,  St.  Ambrose  on  death  of, 
141,  note  p. 

F*"/!!  of  Scripture,  195.  of  Moses,  of  the 
Nazarite,  513.  done  away  in  Christ, 
586. 

Veils,  men  not  to  wear,  514.  why,  515. 

Vengeance,  less  kingly  than  forbear- 
ance, 647,  8. 

Venial,  (see  Sin.) 

Ventilare,  585. 

Vice  can  use  the  instruments  of  virtue, 
546. 

Vine,  Christ  compared  to,  575. 

Violence,  not  consented  to,  corrupts  not, 
394,  446.  lying  to  escape,  wrong, 
394.  not  to  be  evaded  by  sin,  397. 
one  suffering,  should  refuse  pleasure, 
421. 

Virgil,  quoted,  89,  91,  94,  99,  113. 
619,  587,  595.  a  better  poet  than 
Luean,  89.  grammarians  expected 
to  find  good  strnse  in,  591.  Alexis  in 
Bucolics  of,  some  expound  allego- 
rically,  595. 

Virgin,  (see  Mary.)  God  most  fitly 
born  of  a,  6.  birth  of  a,  not  Christ's 
only  distinction,  185,  how  we  know 
Christ  was  born  of  a, 1 75,6.  blessed, her 
perpetual  virginity,  229.  the  blessed, 
284.  the  blessed,  a  type  and  paltern, 
3J9.  what  was  her  highest  blessed- 
ness, 309,  311.  had  vowed  virginity, 
310.  was  born  of  Christ,  311.  liow 
both  a  Mother  and  a  Virgin,  311. 
Virginal  chastity  above  marriage,  320. 
Virginifi/,  some  placed  on  a  level  with 
marriage,  41.  preferred  to  marriage, 
275,  302,  320.  (see  Continence.)  is 
angelic,  283,  315.  of  the  impious 
inferior  to  the  marriage  of  the  just, 
284.  the  greater  of  two  goods,  302. 
to  be  guarded  by  humility,  306.  that 
of  the  blessed  Virgin,  310.  should  be 
free,  ib.  a  good,  for  the  sake  of  the 
future  life,  315,  316,  320,  323.  a 
higher  state  than  marriage,  320.  is 
the  surmounting  the  good  of  mar- 
riage, 322.  its  joys  in  heaven.  327, 
328.  the  gift  of  God,  341.  its 'fruits 
hundred-fold,  344.  inferior  to  mar- 
tyrdom, 346.  preferred   by  St.  Paul 


to  conjugal  faith,  35.5.  goodness  of, 
makes  not  marriage  evil,  356.  of 
children,  a  compensation  to  parents, 
361,  368.  forsaking,  after  profession 
i.^  sinful,  361,  2.  of  the  Church,  364. 
hard  questious  about,  369.  rank  of, 
ib.  St.  Aug.'s  book  on,  369,  381. 
vow  of  recommended,  375,  4.  of 
St.  Mary  ever  enduring,  287. 

Virgins  brought  to  Christ  every  where, 
7.  all  holy  ones  are  Mothers  of 
Christ,  311.  rich,  how  they  may  give 
birth  to  members  of  Christ,  i3I3. 
distinguished  from  sacred  Virgins, 
314,  no  ''  command'  co.icerning, 
.316.  have  peculiai-  joys  in  heaven, 
327,  328.  follow  the  Lamb,  328,  329. 
need  humility,  331.  unfeigned, -344, 
their  grounds  for  loving  God,  340, 341, 
may  be  less  fit  than  married  women 
for  martyrdom,  314.  humbled  by  the 
thought  of  martyrdom,  346.  en- 
couragement to,  350.  cautions  to, 
ib.  should  love  the  fairness  of  Christ, 
351.  must  spend  their  love  on  Christ, 
ib.  ought  to  love  greatly,  352.  dis- 
tinguished from  the  '  unmarried,' 
354.  induced  under  the  term,  355. 
before  widows  in  the  kingdom,  374. 
special  song  of,  375. 

Virtue,  what  patience  is  a,  544.  in- 
struments of,  not  to  be  yielded  to 
vice,  546. 

Virtues  of  the  soul  may  exist  unseen 
in  habit,  298,  299. 

Visible  and  invisible  creation,  564. 

Visions,  sometimes  mistaken  for  reali- 
ties, 99.  caused  by  Angels,  121.  of 
the  waking,  532.  (see  Apparitions.^ 
in  trances,  ib.  (see  Apparitions.)  of 
the  unseen  world,  533. 

Volnsianus,  letter  of  S.  Aug.  to,  188. 

Vow,  freely  made,  makes  what  was 
lawful  unlawful,  357.  wrong  to  desire 
to  revoke,  362.  marriage  after,  is  not 
adultery,  363,  4.  but  j-et  is  worse, 
3S4.  of  continence  recommended, 
373.  a  protection,  377.  marriage  to 
Christ  by,  363.  more  laudable  be- 
cause not  required,  364. 

Voivs  of  continence,  330. 


W. 


Wages,  paid  for  service,  not  given,  150- 
Want  of  necessaries  does  not  break  the 

spirit  of  the  good,  522. 
Warfare  of  the  Christian  life,  250. 260, 

2til. 


INDEX. 


657 


Washing,  once  for  all  in  Baptism, 
daily,  in  prayer,  675. 

Watchings,  use  of,  378. 

Wafer,  river,  fountain,  and  draught, 
one,  27.  one  in  three  cups,  28.  (see 
Birds.)  changed  into  wine,  612. 

Weakness  of  man,  taken  on  Him  by 
the  Son  of  God,  169. 

Wedlock-,  (see  Marriage.) 

Wells,  those  called,  who  know  Christ, 
79. 

Whirling  about  by  false  doctrine,  514. 

Wicked,  (see  Sinners,  Sin,)  to  be  se- 
parated from  in  spirit,  14.  men,  left 
to  punish  themselves,  165.  enume- 
ration of,  236.  their  lives  prolonged, 
238. 

Wickedness,  part  of  God  in  grave  of, 
according  to  Manichees,  163.  is  in 
action,  what  error  is  in  knowledge, 
172.  excludes knowledgeof  the  truth, 
172. 

Wicked  persons,  must  be  endured  in 
the  Church,  199,  241.  (see  Church.) 

Widowed  chastity,  above  marriage, 
320. 

Widowed  continence,  its  rank,  345. 

Widowhood,  forsaking,  after  profession 
is  a  sin,  361,  2.  this  not  adultery,  but 
worse,  363,  4.  long  and  early,  greater 
test  of  continence,  366,  7.  prayer 
and  fasting  make  better,  367.  hard 
questions  about,  369.  rank  of,  ib. 

TT^/(/o7t'5,  marrying  again  not  adulterous, 
185.  their  continence,  345.  Fourth 
Council  of  Carthage  forbade  (pro- 
fessed widows)  to  marry  again,  353. 
may  be  called  '  unmarried,'  354. 
better  among  the  members  of  Christ 
than  married  women,  355.  may  marry 
again,  as  Kuth,  356.  more  blessed  if 
not,  as  Anna,  356,  366,  373.  not 
therefore  better  than  Ruth  herself, 
359.  do  better  in  not  marrying  now 
Christ  is  come,  360.  having  family, 
have  no  good  reason  to  marry,  361. 
what  they  should  do  according  to 
their  ability,  362.  desiring  to  marry, 
why  blamed  by  St.  Paul,  ib.  merits 
of,  in  different  cases  compared,  366, 7. 
luxurious  living  of,  condemned,  367, 
377.  humility  an  ornament  to,  367, 
370.  alms  help  their  prayers,  378. 
to  draw  others  to  like  profession, 
380. 

^^^>fe,  (see  Husband,)  may  be  a  tempter 
to  sin,  64.  why  the  Apostle  sets  be- 
fore her  no  pattern,  263.  (see  Mar- 
riage.) why  created  out  of  husband, 
276.  many  allowed  once,  why,  294, 
295.  only  one  belongs  to  a  steward 
of  the  Church,  295.  and  woman, 
Greek  word  ambiguous,  476. 


Will,  (see  Mind,  Freewill,)  an  evil, 
cannot  produce  good  works,  94. 
makes  lying  worse  than  most  errors, 
96.    to   deceive,   essential   to   a  lie, 

101.  of  mutable  beings  cause  of  evil, 

102.  free,  man  gifted  with,  ib.  will 
required  for  faith,  hope,  and  charity, 
106.  insufficient  without  mercy  of 
God,ib.  good,  precedes  not  the  grace 
that  gives  it,  ib.  of  man,  can  be 
changed  by  God,  143.  of  God,  loved 
Jacob  freely,  hated  Esau  justly,  143, 
4.  of  the  creature,  made  to  fulfil  the 
Creator's,  145,  6.  good  or  evil  may 
concur,  or  not  with  God's  good,  146. 
man  created  with  free,  148.  will  be 
free  when  it  cannot  turn  to  ill,  149. 
of  God,  done  in  Heaven  and  Earth, 
154.  there  must  be,  to  do  wrong, 
167.  of  man,  the  cause  of  sin,  168. 
of  man,  created  free,  ib.  of  man,  ad- 
monished and  healed  by  grace,  371. 
free,  made  too  much  of,  by  some, 
372,  3.  if  man  works  on,  much  more 
does  God,  3/3.  God  net  lost  but  by, 
549.  free,  of  man,  gets  not  patience 
by  itself,  551.  why  it  produces  hard- 
ness, yet  not  true  patience,  552,  3. 
evil,  made  frantic  by  devilish  incite- 
ment, 558.  the  devil  became  devil 
by  his  own,  ib.  pleasure  in  creature 
a  known  motive  to,  ib.  has  not  love 
of  God,  but  by  His  gift,  559.  of  God, 
always  done,  564.  true  submission  of, 
to  God,  571. 

m'//5,  forgery  of,  441. 

Wisdom,  God  The  Son  called,  18.  or- 
dereth  all  things,  19.  assumed  rea- 
sonable soul  as  well  as  body,  22. 
unchangeable,  29.  our  Lord  calUd, 
86.  Christ  is,  not  merely  partaker  of, 
175.  of  God,  took  Man's  nature,  613. 
Book  of,  misinterpreted,  74.  Chris- 
tian, 85.  all,  is  from  God,  86.  is  piety, 
ib.  none  in  refusing  assent  to  what 
is  certain,  100.  is  God's  gift,  343, 
311.  patience  handmaid  of,  546.  true 
and  false,  true  from  God,  552.  to  be 
found  in  true  religion,  592.  implies 
knowledge  concerning  God  and  man, 
606.  he  who  has  not,  knows  not,  608. 
prayer  to  God  for,  612. 

Wise,  who  are,  606.  fools  must  follow 
them,  607.  how  are  fools  to  find 
them,  607,  8.  are  brought  near  to 
GoJ,  612. 

Witchcraft,  not  to  be  detected  by 
witchcraft   469. 

Witness,  fa:se,  forbidden,  388,  404, 
407.  question  if  lawful  to  save  life, 
397.  about  God  or  Christ,  397,  404. 
definition  of,  404,  5.  incompatible 
with  love  of  truth,  417-    implies  one 


U  II 


658 


INDEX. 


who  has  a  right  to  hear,  ib.  false, 
might  seem  expedient  at  times,  441. 

fVolves,  in  sheep's  clothing,  436.  sheep 
not  to  wear  theirs,  437.  to  be  known 
by  their  fruits,  ib. 

Woman,  honoureJ  in  the  Blessed  Vir- 
gin, 22.  glorified  in  Christ's  birth, 
170,  177.  how  we  know  Christ  was 
born  of  a,  176.  insult  offered  to  the 
sun  by  a,  590. 

Women,  kow,  compared  to  the  holy 
women  of  old,  293,303.  accompanied 
and  supported  the  Apostles,  •1'76.  and 
our  Lord,  476,  477.  figure  the  con- 
cupiscential  part  of  the  mind,  575. 

Wood,  root,  trunk,  and  branch,  one,  27. 

"Word,  The,  all  things  created  by,  18. 
Son  so  called,  as  making  known  the 
Father,  19.  of  God  begotten,  not 
like  ours  made,  ib.  assumed  entire 
Man,  22.  assumed  body  by  means  of 
Soul  and  Spirit,  23.  thus  more  se- 
parate from  frailty,  ib.  The,  equal 
with  the  Father,  lOS.  He  who  duly 
'  receives,'  loves  truth,  418. 

Words,  meant  to  convey  knowledge, 
101.  (see  Life,  Mouth.)  are  the  be- 
ginning of  works,  244,  246.  are 
deeds,  440.  use  of  Greek,  582. 

Work,  (see  Action,)  evil,  not  made 
good  by  motive,  441.  to  refuse,  as 
wrong  an  error,  496. 

Working,  understood  of  Inbouing  in 
spiritual  things  erijoined  by  the  Apo- 
sth',  471. 

Works,  good,  some  severed  from  faith, 
37.  dead,  condemned,  48,  Go.  good, 
follow  justification,  57.  of  man,  not 
able  to  restore  men,  104.    good,  of 


believers,  105.  future,  not  excluded 
from  the  ground  of  God's  love  to  His 
Saints,  143.  eternal  life  the  reward 
of,  150.  not  rightly  done  unless  done 
through  love,  157.  are  preceded  by 
thoughts,  246,  247.  and  Faith,  271. 
good,  a  better  portion  than  children, 
375,6    precede  not  election,  655,  57. 

World,  pollution  of,  to  be  shunned,  79. 
renounced  in  words  by  all  at  Bap- 
tism, 83.  put  for  mankind,  102.  the, 
not  called  Son  of  God,  111.  how 
formed  according  to  Manichees,  162. 
love  of,  is  wickedness,  J  72.  neither 
desire  nor  fear  of,  consistent  with 
'perfect  love,'  186.  spirit  of  this, 
puffs  up,  371.  cares  of,  lower  married 
holiness,  374.  passing  away,  a  reason 
against  marrying,  376.  waits  for  the 
number  of  Saints,  380.  trials  of,  re- 
quire patience,  547.  love  of,  produces 
worldly  endurance,  553,  555,  557. 
lust  comes  of,  but  also  of  man's  will, 
655.  name  of,  includes  man,  ib. 
Apostles  were  once  of,  ib. 

Wounds  of  Christ,  351. 

Wrath,  in  God  no  passion,  543. 

Writers,  three  ways  to  err  in  using, 
587.  sense  of,  often  hard  to  see 
clearly,  589. 


Z. 


ZacchcBiis  and  Goliath  compared,  302, 
3.36. 


INDEX   OF  TEXTS. 


GENESIS. 


1 !U. 

I.      1. 

27. 

28. 

31. 

ii.    1 — 3, 

3. 

21,22. 

iii.    5. 

14. 

19. 

vi.   ;. 

22. 

vii.    8,  9. 

ix.  10. 

xvii.    4. 

xviii.    4. 

15. 

20. 

xix.    2. 

5— II. 
8. 
26. 
XX.    2. 
12. 
xxi.  10. 
12. 
xxii.  12. 
18. 
xxiii. 
xxiv. 

2-4. 
XXV.  .'),  6. 
9,  10. 
26. 
xxvi.  7. 
xxvii.  16 — 19. 
19. 


564 
191 
229 
276 
91 ,  165,  197,  3r)9 
218 
221 
275 
20 
161 
ib. 
222 
'228 
82 
521 
228 
122 
388 
135 
122 
461 
395, 443 
80 
448 
ib. 
660 
303,  560 
296 
5,8 
521 
448 
297 
561 
521 
192, 224 
448 
450 
388 

u  u  2 


xxxii.  24. 
xxxviii.  14 — 18, 

27—30. 
xlii. 

xlvi.  27. 
xlvii.  30. 


EXODUS. 


Jii 
xii 


17—20. 
19,  20. 
14 


7. 
15. 
xiv.  21,  22. 
xviii.    2. 
xix.     1  — IG. 
XX.     1 — 17. 
3—5. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
xxiv.  12. 
xxxi.  18. 
xxxii.    4. 
31. 
xxxiii.  19. 
xxxiv.  33. 


122 
456 
224 
449 
252 
521 


458 
388 
21 
231 
52 
ib. 
51 
114 
231 
51 
53 
417 
330,  407 
157,  330 
404 
388,  404,  407 
226 
ib. 
114 
ib. 
657 
613 


LEVITICUS. 


xix.  18. 


393 


xix.  11. 

298 

xxi.    7.  LXX. 

113 

XXV.    5—8. 

38 

DEUTERONOMY. 


V. 

9. 

Tl. 

4. 
5. 

xxiii. 

24, 

25. 

XXIV. 

1. 

XXV. 

6- 

-10 

XXIX. 

5. 

XXXIV. 

5. 

114 
26 
33 

501 

283 
300,  360 
225,  277 

537 


JOSHUA, 


11. 

?i.  2&. 


JUDGES, 
ix.    8—15. 

1  SAMUEL. 

xxi.  13. 
XXV.  22—35. 
xxviii.  11 — 19. 

2  SAMUEL. 

ii.    6. 
xvi.    5—12. 


1  KINGS. 

ii.  38.  LXX. 
xiii.  21,  22. 


2  KINGS. 

X.  31. 

xxii.  18—20. 


458 
ib. 


455 


449 
446 
537 


628 
547 


573 
526 


429 
535 


ii.    9.ib. 
10. 

571 

.550,  572 

vii.    1.  LXX. 
xiv.    1. 
XXV.    4. 
xviii.  28. 

86, 

340,  347 

107 

347 
LXX.  243. 

PSALMS 

i.    1. 

613 

2. 

493 

3. 

168 

ii.    7. 

9, 

116,  181 

8. 

9,  181 

11. 

340 

iv.    8. 

9 

V.    3. 

26 

5. 

392, 

417,557 

6. 

389,  392, 

407, 

416, 427 

7. 

417,  427 

vi.    7. 

445 

viii.    4. 

657 

8. 

162 

ix.  18. 

551,561 

24. 

512 

X.    3. 

134, 

512,  545 

xi.    6. 

61,  132 

xiii.    6. 

493 

xiv.    1. 

246 

6. 

552 

XV.    2. 

412, 

428,  438 

xvi.    2. 

652 

4. 

57 

xviii.  13. 

162 

44. 

454 

xix.    3, 

4. 

13 

7. 

343 

9. 

338 

XX.    8. 

192 

xxii.    1. 

572 

16, 

17,  18. 

9 

27; 

28. 

ib. 

xxiii.    6. 

106 

XXV.  15. 

341 

xxvii.    1. 

136 

4. 

339 

9. 

ib. 

10. 

636 

12. 

456 

XXX.    6, 

7. 

273 

xxxi.  19. 

153 

22. 

454 

xxxiv.     8. 

168 

14. 

257 

.J^^A  VI J*     AfCr* 


xxxvui. 
xxxix. 

xli. 


xlii. 
xliii. 

xlv. 


xlvi. 

xlviii, 

1. 

li. 


liv. 

Iv. 

Ivi. 

Iviii. 

lix. 


Ixii. 

Ixv. 
Ixvi. 
Ixix. 

Ixxi. 

Ixxv. 
Ixxvii. 
Ixxix. 

Ixxxii. 
Ixxxiv. 

Ixxxv. 

Ixxxviii. 

xc. 

xciv. 

xcvi. 


9. 
3. 

4. 

6—8. 

9,  10. 

1. 

1. 

1,  Vulg. 

2. 

6—17. 
13. 

8. 

1. 
15. 

5. 
10. 
17. 

1. 
18. 

5. 

7.  LXX. 

1. 

9. 
10. 
11. 

5. 

2. 

4. 
21—23. 

4. 

6. 

7. 

9. 

2,3. 
11. 

6. 

2. 

4. 
12. 

5. 

9. 
19. 

1. 


ci.    1. 

ciii.    2. 

3. 

cviii.    5. 

cxi.    2.  Vulg. 
cxiii.    3. 

11.  Vulg. 

cxv.    3. 

cxvi.  11. 

12. 

15. 

cxviii.  22. 

cxix.    4 — 6. 

133. 


125 

609 

74,  258 

9 

ib. 

168 

119 

328 

314,  337,  374 

6 

374 

9 

45,  283 

507 

115, 337 
105 

125,  213 
119 
215 
445 
556 
180 
350 

106, 133 
12, 557 

552,  559 

251 

2/2 

11 

552 

652,  559 
571 
152 
520 
215 
26 
339 
459 
249 
157 
107 
267 
327 
330 

141,  534 
258 

258,  266 

10 

145 

120 

148 

141,  148 
467 
668 

460,  520 
232 
342 
253 


CAAiVllI 


O.    ij^V-A.. 


6. 
cxxxix.  7. 
cxli.  3. 
4. 
8. 
2. 
5. 


cxlvi. 
cxlviii. 


332 
339 

243,  254,  342 

244,  ib.  ib. 

343 
121 
219 


PROVERBS. 

iii.ll,  12. 

651 

viii.  22. 

20 

35.  LXX. 

106, 149 

xix.  21. 

212 

XX.    9. 

347 

xxix.  27.  LXX. 

Vulg. 

418, 
460,  467 

xxxi.27.  LXX. 

82 

ECCLESIASTES. 
iii.    5.  289,  361 

SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


i.    3. 

7,508 

4. 

608 

ii.    2. 

14 

ISAIAH. 

ii.    3. 

498 

V.    7. 

135 

20. 

92,  98 

vii.    9.  LXX. 

16, 172 

14. 

6,8 

xi.    2. 

569 

xiv.  12. 

184 

xxvi.  18.  LXX. 

338 

xviii.  16. 

232 

xl.    3. 

116 

6—8. 

216 

liii.    2. 

374 

7. 

225 

8. 

569 

Ivi.    2. 

340,  349 

4. 

324,  326 

5. 

324,  326,  330 

Ixiii.    8. 

569 

16. 

535,  536 

Ixvi.    2. 

340,  349 

* 


660 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


NUMBERS. 


Ti.    5.  513 

xiv,  33.  225 

xix.  11.  298 

xxi.    7.  LXX.  113 

XXV.    5—8,  38 


DEUTERONOMY. 


V.    9. 

Ti.    4. 

5. 

xxiii.  24,  25, 

xxiv.    1. 

XXV.    6—10. 

xxix.    5. 

xxxiv.     5. 


114 

26 

33 

501 

283 

300,  360 

225,  277 

537 


JOSHUA, 


II. 
vi.  25. 


JUDGES. 
ix.    8—15. 

1  SAMUEL. 

xxi.  13. 
XXV.  22—35. 
xxviii.  11 — 19. 

2  SAMUEL. 

ii.    6. 
xvi.    5—12. 


1  KINGS. 

ii.  38.  LXX. 

xiii.  21,  22. 


2  KINGS. 

X.  31. 

xxii.  18—20. 


458 
ib. 


455 


449 
445 
537 


628 
54.7 


573 
526 


429 
535 


vn 

xiv 

XXV 


JOB. 

8.  298 
21.  Lat.  from  LXX.  570,  1 

9.ib.  571 

10  650,572 

.    l.LXX.  340,347 

1.  107 

4.  347 


xxviii.  28. 


86,  LXX.  243. 


PSALMS. 


IV. 
V. 


VI. 

viii. 
ix. 

X. 

xi, 

xiii. 
xiv. 

XV. 

xvi. 

xviii. 

xix. 


XX, 

xxii, 


1. 

2. 
3. 

7. 

8. 
11. 

8. 

3. 

5. 

6.  389,  392, 

7. 

7. 

4. 

8. 
18. 
24. 

3. 

5. 

6. 

1. 

6. 

2. 

2, 

4. 
13. 
44. 

3,4, 

7. 

9.     ■ 

8. 

1. 

16,  17,  18. 
27,  28. 


xxiii. 

6. 

XXV. 

15. 

xxvii. 

1. 

4. 

9. 

10. 

12. 

XXX. 

Q,7 

xxxi. 

19. 

22. 

XXXIV. 


14. 


613 
493 

168 
9, 116,  181 
9,  181 
340 
9 
26 
392,  417,  557 
407,  416,  427 
417,  427 
445 
557 
162 
551,561 
512 
134,  612,  545 
61,  132 
493 
246 
652 
412,  428,  438 
652 
67 
162 
454 
13 
343 
338 
192 
572 
9 
ib. 
106 
341 
136 
339 
ib. 
635 
456 
273 
153 
454 
168 
257 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


661 


xxxvi, 


XXXVII. 

xxxviii, 

xxxix, 

xli. 


xlii. 
xliii. 

xlv. 


xlvi. 

xlviii. 

1. 

li. 


liv. 

Iv. 

Ivi, 

Iviii. 

lix. 


Ixii. 

Ixv. 
Ixvi. 
Ixix. 
Ixxi. 

Ixxv. 
Ixxvii. 
Ixxix. 

Ixxxii. 
Ixxxiv. 

Ixxxv. 

Ixxxviii. 

xc. 

xciv. 

xcvi. 

ci. 
ciii. 

cviii. 

cxi. 

cxiii. 

cxv. 
cxvi. 


cxviu 
cxix 


3. 

7—9. 

9. 

11. 
23. 

9. 

3. 

4. 

6—8. 

9,  10. 

1. 

1. 

1,  Vulg. 
2. 
6—17. 

13. 

8. 

1. 
15. 

5. 
10. 

17. 
1. 

18. 

5. 

7.  LXX. 

1. 

9. 
10. 
11. 

5. 

2. 

4. 
21—23. 

4. 

6. 

7. 

9. 

2,3. 
11. 

6. 

2. 

4. 
12. 

5. 

9. 
19. 

1. 

8. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

6. 

2.  Vuls. 
3. 

11.  Vulg, 

3. 
11. 
12. 
15. 
22. 

4—6. 
133. 


473 
168 
658 
350 
342 
125 
509 


U\Ji7 

74,  258 


314,  337, 


ib. 

168 

119 

328 

374 

6 

374 

9 

45, 283 

507 

115,  337 
105 

125,  213 
119 
215 
445 
556 
180 
350 

106,  133 
12, 557 

552,  559 

251 

272 

11 

552 

552,  559 
571 
152 
620 
215 
26 
339 
459 
249 
157 
107 
267 
327 
330 

141,  534 
258 

258,  266 

10 

145 

120 

148 

141,  148 
467 
568 

460,  520 
232 
342 
253 


cxix. 

142. 

457 

cxxi. 

2. 

67 

cxxiii. 

4. 

551 

cxxvii. 

1. 

341 

cxxxviii. 

3. 

LXX. 

276 

6. 

332 

cxxxix. 

7. 

339 

cxli. 

3. 

243,  254,  342 

4. 

244,    ib.     ib. 

cxlvi. 

8. 

343 

cxlviii. 

2. 

121 

6. 

219 

PROVERBS. 

iii.  11,  12.  551 

viii.  2C.  20 

35.  LXX.  106,  149 

xix.  21.  212 

XX.    9.  .347 

xxix.  27.  LXX.  Vulg.  418, 

460,  467 
xxxi.  27.  LXX.  82 


ECCLESIASTES. 
iii.    5.  289,  361 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

1.    3.  7,508 

4.  508 

ii.    2.  14 


ISAIAH. 


ii.   3. 

498 

V.    7. 

135 

20. 

92,  98 

vii.    9. 

LXX. 

16,  172 

14. 

6,8 

xi.    2. 

559 

xiv.  12. 

184 

xxvi.  18. 

LXX. 

338 

xviii,  16. 

232 

xl.    3. 

116 

6- 

-8. 

2J6 

liii.    2, 

374 

7. 

225 

8. 

569 

Ivi.    2. 

340,  349 

4. 

324,  326 

5. 

324,  326,  330 

Ixiii.    8. 

569 

16. 

535,  536 

Ixvi.    2. 

340,  349 

062 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


JEREMIAH. 

xvi.  19. 
20. 
xvii.    5.                      154, 
XXV.  12. 

xxix.    5 — 7. 

9,  30 

10 

251,552 

227 
226 

EZEKIEL, 

xviii.    2. 

4. 

xxvi.  26, 

114 

444 

448 

DANIEL. 

ii.  47. 
iii.  29. 
vi.  26. 

226 
ib. 

ib. 

HOSEA, 

iv,    8. 
vi.    6. 

112 
213 

JOEL, 


ii.  32. 


JONAH. 


311. 


222 


HABAKKUK, 
ii.    4.  16,  99,  156,  556 

ZEPHANIAIJ. 
ii.  11.  10 

ZECHARIAH, 
i.    9.  121 

MALACHL 
i,    2,3,  143 


TOBIT. 


ii.    7. 

521 

xii.  12, 

ib. 

WISDOM 

, 

i.    1, 

169 

6- 

=-11. 

393,  413 

11, 

389, 

393,  412 

ii.  23, 

168 

vi.  24. 

86 

vii.  16. 

373 

27. 

18 

viii.    1. 

19 

21. 

243, 

269,  372 

ix.  15. 

124, 

139,  261 

xi.  17. 

17 

20. 

104,  156 

XV.    2. 

74 

ECCLESIASTICUS, 


i.    1. 

86 

ii.    1—5. 

551 

14. 

650 

iii.  18.            306, 

331, 

333 

343 

22. 

541 

30. 

213 

X.  12, 

35 

XV.  20. 

128 

six.    1. 

463 

xxvii.    5. 

127 

XXX.  23,  Vulg. 

131 

xxxvii.  16.  LXX. 

244 

xl.  1. 

125 

xlvi.  20. 

537 

SONG  OF  THE   THREE  HOLY 
CHILDREN. 


ver.  65, 


352 


SUSANNA. 


ver.  22. 
23. 


284 
284,  321 


BEL  AND  THE  DRAGON, 

ver.  41.  226 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


ms 


•2   MACCABEES 

viii.  19,  20. 

349 

29. 

59 

xii.  34. 

519 

ix.  11. 
13. 
15. 

16,  17. 

336 
ill. 

311 
44 

ST.  MATTHEW 

X.  7—10. 

i77 

10. 

412 

i.  17. 

229 

11. 

67 

I  ^— 25. 

UG 

IG. 

232 

,437 

20. 

no,  121 

19,  20. 

473 

23, 

6 

22. 

273 

,  376 

ii.  20. 

114 

23. 

507 

iii.  0'. 

116 

28.    178,393 

51 9,-525,528 

7.8. 

55 

28—30. 

520 

12. 

'iiS 

29,  30. 

167 

13. 

116 

33, 

435 

16. 

176 

40—42. 

506 

iv.  19. 

(.8 

xi.  12. 

73 

V.  3—10. 

329 

18. 

•299 

3. 

331 

19. 

29i> 

.  300 

8. 

33, 186 

21. 

'  141 

10. 

548 

25—29. 

335 

11.  12. 

379 

27,  28. 

349 

20. 

81 

28. 

176 

22,  23. 

134 

9. 

32*,  335 

27. 

157 

30. 

186 

32. 

281 

xii.  1,2. 

501 

34. 

411,  418 

3,4. 

.582 

37.  96,101 

,174,389,411.459 

33. 

94 

39. 

410 

35. 

92 

40. 

134 

39,  40. 

584 

44. 

107,  129 

45. 

80 

272 

vi.  9. 

7 

46—50. 

309 

9—12. 

129 

48. 

23 

9—13. 

154 

xiii.  8. 

346 

12.    81, 

101,134 

,136,253, 

9. 

14 

256,258,266,347,575 

25. 

70 

13. 

136, 

268, 371 

29. 

40 

14. 

130 

30. 

40 

.548 

15. 

33,  130 

39. 

67 

19—22. 

506 

47—50. 

14 

24. 

507, 565 

55. 

487 

25—34. 

471 

xiv.  3,  4. 

71 

26—30. 

167 

25. 

178 

26. 

162, 

500,  502 

29. 

lb. 

30. 

574 

30. 

184 

31. 

411 

XV.  11. 

245 

34. 

411, 

502,  507 

16—20. 

414 

fVi.    1. 

180 

17—20. 

245 

2. 

182 

22—28. 

332 

6. 

40 

27. 

65 

7. 

107,  155 

28. 

66 

8. 

609 

svi.  16,  17. 

59 

15. 

437 

18. 

675 

16. 

94, 437 

19. 

184 

18. 

94 

23. 

146 

21,  22. 

236 

xvii.  2. 

178 

iii.  5. 

332 

3. 

537 

8. 

336,  612 

26,  27. 

227 

9. 

612 

xviii.  1—3. 

333 

10. 

332 

7. 

340 

11. 

307 

15—18. 

40 

6(34 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


xviii.  16. 

81 

i.  32. 

170 

xix.    8. 

283,  582 

34. 

310 

9. 

38,2/7,317 

35. 

110 

10—12. 

324 

42. 

148 

11. 

243,  362,  380 

ii.  36. 

366 

12. 

290,  299,  300.  309, 

37. 

284,366 

313,  330,  337,  380 

iii.    4. 

116 

16-21. 

63 

6. 

251 

17. 

56,  83 

12—14. 

55 

17—19. 

61 

13. 

73 

19. 

551 

22. 

116 

21. 

345,  503 

vi.  30. 

134 

26. 

178 

vii.    6,  7. 

332 

XX.    9,  10. 

327 

36. 

340 

21,  22. 

333 

37. 

336 

22. 

344 

38. 

336,  338 

xxi.  31. 

336 

47. 

338, 340 

xxii.  10. 

67 

viii.    1—3. 

476 

27. 

132 

8. 

346 

29. 

365 

21. 

21 

30. 

24,  185,  365 

45. 

454 

37. 

33,  132 

ix.    3. 

412 

37—40. 

51,  230,  241 

X.    1—7. 

477,  497 

39. 

33,  393 

4. 

412 

40. 

74,  157,  194 

7. 

ib. 

xxili.    2. 

81 

27. 

132 

3. 

81,  511 

30—35. 

329 

9. 

23 

30—37. 

- 

438 

15. 

.   80,  212 

35. 

330,  476,  497 

26. 

132,  245 

39. 

210 

37. 

142,  205 

xi.    2. 

154 

xxiv.  12. 

340 

20. 

225 

31. 

347 

27,  28. 

309 

XXV.    4. 

343 

37—41. 

130 

14—30. 

68 

41. 

129, 130 

21. 

167 

42, 

132,  148 

26,  27. 

213 

xii.    4. 

178,519,520,525,529 

32. 

119 

7. 

620 

33. 

26,  119,  179 

35,  36. 

257,  327 

34. 

218,673 

xiii.  28—30. 

450 

34—36. 

128 

29. 

548 

41. 

61,  218,  573 

xiv.  16. 

66 

41—43. 

128 

XV.  11—32, 

455 

44. 

61 

24. 

124 

46. 

61,  153 

xvi,    3. 

489 

XX  vi.    7—13. 

522 

19     22. 

521 

41. 

371 

22. 

537 

49. 

548 

24—29. 

536 

52. 

182 

xvii.  21. 

73 

75. 

184 

xviii.  10 — 14. 
11—14. 
13. 

338 
332 
336 

ST.  MARK. 

xix.    2 — 8. 

ib. 

41. 

329 

i.  24,  25. 

59 

XX.  36. 

366 

ix.  44. 

161 

36. 

104,123,235,240,365 

xxi.  18. 

519, 

520,  647 

19. 

546 

ST.  LUKE. 

xxii.  61. 

136 

xxiii.  34. 

11,329 

i.27. 

284 

xxiv.  28. 

454 

28. 

109,  284 

39. 

15,  139, 

178,264 

30. 

109 

49. 

181 

INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


665 


ST. 

JOHN. 

xix.  26,  27. 

38. 

23 
622 

i.    1. 

29 

,  108,  173 

41. 

24 

3. 

19,  111 

,  168,  173 

XX.  17. 

29 

9. 

21,147 

26. 

178 

12. 

351 

xxi.    6—11. 

179 

14.     2C 

,  108,  109, 

169,  173, 

15. 

559 

251,  337 

17. 

184 

16. 

160 

17. 
29. 
32. 

156 

337 
176 

ACTS  OF  THE 

HOLY 

47. 

460 

APOSTLES. 

ii.    2. 

277 

4. 

22,  173 

i.  11. 

26 

7—9. 

612 

ii.    1—11. 

181,  231 

19. 

120 

2—4. 

584 

iii.    6. 
6. 

81,  128 
31 

4. 
38—41. 

31,  238,584 
47 

8. 
13. 

167 

179 

39. 
40. 

498 
72 

18. 

76,  180 

44. 

232,  345,  489 

21. 

36. 

iv,  24. 

417 

107,  153 

31 

46. 
iv.  32—35. 
32.     294, 

345, 

497 

232 

489,  504,  566 

34. 

329 

34. 

232,  497 

V.  14. 
19. 

72 
567 

v.  15. 
vii.  47,  48. 

231 
674 

28,  29. 

76 

viii.    1,  4. 

232 

vi.  38. 
67. 

338 
207 

20. 
35—38. 

112 

48 

vii.  24. 

180 

ix.  12. 

540 

viii.  23. 

555 

25. 

507 

36. 

105 

xi.  28—30. 

411,500,502 

44. 

252 

xii.    9. 

99 

X.  30. 

29,  108 

xiii.    2. 
33. 

497 

xi.    7—9. 

6J2 

9 

34. 

454 

XV.    9. 

131 

xii.    6. 

411, 

502,  648 

xvi.    1 — 3. 

391 

31. 

160 

xvii.  17,  18,  21 

496 

xiii.    1—17. 

333 

xviii.    1 — 3. 

ib. 

5. 

338 

4. 

ib. 

16. 

349 

XX.    7. 

494 

23. 

266 

33—35. 

486 

29. 

648 

xxi.  10 — 12. 

146 

xiv.    1. 

612 

xxiii.    3. 

410 

2. 

327 

6. 

18, 

130,  374 

9. 

29 

ROMANS 

28. 

29,  108 

XV.    2, 

233 

i.    1. 

602 

12. 

393 

3. 

111,  168 

13. 

158,  393 

9. 

34 

15. 

180 

17. 

16 

99,  104,  156 

xvi.  12. 

180, 447 

23. 

25 

13. 

31 

25. 

565 

15. 

567 

26,  27. 

287 

23. 

507  1 

30. 

206 

33. 

161 

ii.    4, 

207,  238 

xvii.     2. 

261  j 

5. 

207 

3. 

74 

11. 

207 

xviii.  22,  23. 

410 

12. 

75 

xix.  23,  24. 

9 

25. 

390,  483 

66e 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


iii.  7. 

427, 4G7  ! 

X.  10.   16, 

151,  429, 

437, 563 

8. 

57, 

427,  458 

H. 

88 

19. 

145 

xi.  5,  6, 

555 

20. 

108, 

248, 251 

17,  18. 

308 

28. 

57 

20. 

338 

,  39, 343 

iv.  4. 

655 

23. 

184 

15. 

76,  24b 

36. 

26 

,32,172 

17. 

104 

xii.  1. 

265 

Y.  3—5. 

166 

3. 

354, 365 

5.   30 

.  67, 

7^, 

155,  157, 
553,  559 

4— 'J. 
10. 

355 
347 

6. 

556 

12. 

559 

8,9. 

131 

16. 

228,  343 

8—10. 

31,  193 

xiii.  ]. 

252 

9,  10. 

107 

-   1—7. 

227 

12. 

102,  114 

10. 

68 

73,  193 

16. 

131 

xiv.  3. 

180 

16—18. 

116 

5. 

429 

20.  57, 

117, 

156, 

248,  33G 

9. 

157 

vi,  1—3. 

117 

21. 

41 

3, 

118 

23. 

268 

4. 

lb. 

XV,  3. 

338 

4—11. 

117 

4. 

193 

6. 

50 

19. 

72, 487 

9. 

363, 

570,  572 

25—27. 

490 

12. 

246, 

249,  272 

27. 

498 

13. 

246, 

249, 

272,  442 

xvi.  18. 

485 

14. 

24-9,  252 

19. 

86 

23. 

150,  262 

vii.  7. 

76,  248 

8. 

76 

17. 
18. 

247 

,259 

270 
,  260,  262 

1  CORINTHIANS 

*• 

22,  23. 

248 

23. 

262 

i.  13. 

266 

25. 

34,  259 

14—16. 

50 

viii.  3. 

112 

20. 

85 

10, 

261 

24. 

18,  173 

12. 

249 

25. 

23 

13. 

249,  252, 3 

27—29. 

498 

14.  107 

,124,24^ 

•  ,253,270 

30. 

266,  556 

15. 

31 

,  339,  561 

31. 

144, 

273,  556 

18. 

544 

ii.  2, 

49 

22. 

34 

3. 

339 

23—25. 

547 

9. 

190,  218 

24,  25. 

89 

12. 

370 

31. 

122 

14. 

34 

,   32. 

122,  193 

iii.  1,2,3. 

266 

35—39. 

554 

3. 

252,  379 

ix.  1. 

411 

5—10. 

472 

2. 

559 

7. 

373 

5. 

192,  226 

9. 

228 

7,8. 

560 

11. 

87,  126 

11—13. 

143 

11—15. 

38,69 

14. 

341 

12. 

126 

14—16. 

143 

13—15. 

127 

15,  16. 

557 

16. 

. 

120, 420 

16 

106 

17. 

420,  576 

17—21. 

144 

22,  23. 

32 

18. 

143 

iv.  3. 

379,511 

21. 

150 

5. 

157,  295 

X.  3. 

192 

,  248,  341 

7. 

341,  370 

4. 

556 

16. 

50 

J 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


667 


V. 


•VI. 


Vll, 


1  -5.  39 

4,  5,  81 

8.  62 
9—13.  39 
1—7.  133 
4—6.                                 610 

9,  10.  54,  60,  66,  69,  126 
II.  54,60 
15.  37,51,120,264,355,358 

19,  120,288,358,574 

20.  358 
1.  157 
4.  278,  281,  304 
6.  133 

6.  133,  269,  290,  356 

7.  243,  28i>,  341,  356 

8.  354,  355,  357,  361 

9.  185,286,  293,  299,308, 
313,  361 


10,  11. 


14 
15 

18 

18. 

25, 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29- 
29. 
32. 
33. 
34. 

35. 
36. 
37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 
ix.  1- 
6- 
7. 
7- 
7- 
9. 

11. 

12 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16, 

19- 

20. 

22. 

24. 

26, 

X.  1- 

4. 

11. 

12. 

13. 


282,304,  317 


288 

64 

—20.  390 

483 

105,  315,  316 

247,  315,  316,  320,  322 

317 

286,288,295,317,319, 

320,  321,  322 

-34,  65,  286 

315,  361 

127,  305,  323,  338,  344 

127,  323 

288,  301,314,323,  355, 

358,  373 

357 

286,  288,  295 

330 

319,  322,  358 

320,  356,  365 
319,  356,  358,  365 


-7.  475 

-12.  496 

489,  509 

-10.  479 

-15.  476 

167 

490 

— 15.  480 

412,  480 

496 

48 i,  496 

17, 18.  482 

-21.  483 

453 

205,  423,  453, 484 

330 

27.  164 

-11.         410,  584 

448 

193,  360 

340 

346,  371,  425 


X.32. 
33. 

xi.  1. 

3. 

4. 

12, 

14. 

16,  17. 
28,  29. 
31,  32, 
xii.  4. 

7-10. 
11. 

12. 
18. 

24—26. 
24. 
31. 
siii.  2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

7. 

8. 
11. 
12. 
18. 
XV.  3,  4. 
15. 
19. 
26. 
28. 
33. 

36—38. 
39,  40. 
41. 
42. 
44. 
50. 

50—53, 
51.  Vulg, 
52. 
53. 

53—56. 
54. 
XV.  65. 
56. 
xvi.  1 — 4. 


487 

379 

164 

28,  29,  32 

513 

264 

513 

512 

44 

125,  267,  627 

637 

639 

341,541 

264 

265,  327 

265 

574 

345 

38,  58,  60 

61,  560 

331,337,  553 

337 

553,  559 

283 

514 

33, 123, 190 

283 

50 

404 

324 

247 

29,  330 

300 

574 

35 

317,327,359 

317,327 

24,  139,  140,  259 

15,  35,  139 

185 

25, 166 

25,  34,  36,  166 

34,  327 

467 

36,  259,  515 

36, 247 

248 

502 


2  CORINTHIANS, 

i.  12.  379 

19.  174 

22.  168 

ii.  14.  165 

15.  463 

16.  424,  463 
iii.  6.  252 

6.  586 

10.  513 

16.  513, 586 


668 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


iv.  16. 

7 

,467,614 

17. 

544 

18. 

326 

V.  6. 

167 

7. 

235 

10. 

151,518 

13, 

14. 

205 

20, 

21. 

112 

vi.  7, 

8. 

379 

10. 

504 

16. 

54 

.'iii.  1- 

-21. 

490 

10. 

329 

21. 

379 

ix. 

491,  492 

7. 

205 

X.  12. 

305,  348 

xi.  2. 

309 

, 315,  364 

7. 

476 

7- 

-12. 

485 

9. 

488 

14. 

122 

26. 

39 

33. 

507 

xii.  4. 

537 

6. 

301 

21. 

81 

GALATIANS. 

i.  10. 

379 

20. 

411,  425 

ii.  3, 

4. 

391 

9. 

497 

12. 

390 

13. 

390,  452 

14. 

391, 

425,  452 

16. 

252 

20. 

270 

24. 

340 

iii.  11. 

16 

24. 

586 

27. 

614 

28. 

170,514 

iv.  4. 

300 

5. 

2] 

11, 

134,  135 

19. 

311 

22. 

585 

22- 

-24. 

410 

25. 

226, 

389, 459 

26. 

24,119,226,459,560 

30. 

560 

31. 

78 

V.   1.  VulR 

ib. 

2. 

391 

4. 

585 

6. 

57,62,73 

,90,100, 

126, 155 

,313,561 

13. 

78 

16. 

257, 

260,  265 

V.  16—18. 

250 

17. 

139,  156, 

247, 257. 
262, 265 

19—21. 

60,69 

,  250,  269 

22,  23. 

250 

24. 

118,251 

vi.  1. 

447,  453 

4. 

418 

6. 

412,  489 

14. 

50 

15. 

105 

EPHESIANS. 

i.  5. 

21,24 

10. 

123 

ii.  2. 

164 

3. 

34, 

107,  143 

6. 

180 

8,  9. 

556 

8—10. 

105,  341 

iii.  7,  8. 

31 

17. 

63, 186 

18,  19. 

186 

iv.  13,  14. 

514 

21—24. 

515 

22—24. 

44 

25. 

389 

428,  438 

28. 

47, 

441,  487 

V.  8. 

162 

12. 

283 

22—28. 

263 

24. 

265 

25—28. 

262 

29. 

269,  262, 

267,  526, 
542,  547 

vi.  12. 

162 

21. 

164 

PHILIPPIANS. 


i.  8. 

411 

15- 

-18. 

39,  439 

23. 

292 

29. 

559 

ii.  3. 

347 

6. 

20,  29,  109 

6- 

-8. 

205 

7. 

20,  29,  109,  331 

8. 

24,  331,  333 

12. 

339,  659 

13. 

106,269,339,659 

16. 

503 

21. 

504 

iii.  14. 

106 

15, 

16. 

369 

20. 

164 

iv.  7. 

123 

8, 

9. 

379 

12. 

299 

INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


669 


COLOSSIANS. 

15. 

173 

16. 

121 

18. 

120,  192 

19,  20. 

123 

3. 

336 

15. 

161 

1,2. 

271 

1     4. 

118,270 

5. 

165,  270 

6. 

271 

7. 

ib. 

8. 

272 

9,  10. 

44,  615 

1  THESSALONIANS. 

ii.  5—7.  484 

6.  496 

7.  205 
7—9.  486 
9.  487 

iv.  6.  290 

17.  276 


2  THESSALONIANS. 


Ill, 


6—12. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
12. 
13. 
14,  15. 


474 

480, 487,  496 

480 

471 

488,511 

ib.    512 

39 


111. 
iv. 


1  TIMOTHY. 

,    2.  488 

5.         157,191,193,285,312 

9,  10.  289 

9—11.  65 

10,11.  66 

13.  80,  337,  436,  466 

20.  39,  434 

1,  2.  227 

1—4.  148 

4.  142,  508 

5.  115,  150, 175 
,    2.  295 

4.  41 
8.  326 

5.  367 

6.  289,  334,  367,  377 

11.  334, 362 

12.  ib.      ib. 

13.  ib.    499 


14. 

15. 
20. 
23. 
10. 

18,  19. 


185,  285, 361 

361 

40 

298,  488 
161 
606 


2 

TIMOTHY. 

ii.   3- 

-6. 

489 

4. 

499,  508 

8. 

264 

13. 

664 

19. 

207 

25. 

136,  342 

iii.    5. 

183 

Ti.     7, 

8. 

160 

TITUS. 


i.    6. 

296 

16. 

23, 131 

iii.  13,  14. 

486 

HEBREWS. 

i.    5. 

9,  116 

13. 

121 

ii.  11. 

21 

V.    6. 

9,  116 

14. 

255,  465 

vi.    1,  2. 

52 

X.  38. 

16 

xi.    1. 

89 

xii.    3. 

232 

xiii.    4. 

283 

JAMES. 

i.    5. 

343,  372 

14. 

258 

17. 

332, 

341,  377,  552 

ii.  14. 

59,  60 

,  62,  126,271 

17. 

59, 126 

19. 

59,  73,  90 

20. 

73 

iii.    2. 

134 

15. 

552 

iv.    6. 

336,  344 

V.  11. 

670 

{)70 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


1 

PETEK 

• 

ii. 

16. 

78 

21. 

205, 

328 

3-29 

22. 

329 

iii 

1- 

-7. 

289 

6- 

-7. 

358 

9. 

351 

21. 

60 

iv. 

1, 

2. 

60 

V. 

8. 

448 

2  PETER. 

ii.  4. 
13.  14 
17-22. 
19. 

iii.  ll~ls 

121 

79 

78 

105,  156 

58 

m 


ii.  15. 
16. 
21. 

I. 

4. 

9. 
16. 
23. 

8. 
10. 
16. 
18. 
20. 


ver.  12. 


51,  553 

553,  555 

458,  459,  464 

31 

457 

467 

193,  351 

74 

157,  349 

193,  557 

31,  32,  157,  554 

31,338 

61 


JUhE. 


79 


REVELATION. 


1  JOE 

N. 

i.  8. 

•26 

ii.  11. 

140 

•-> 

467 

V.  5 

448 

8. 

124,  266,  167 

xiv.  1 — 5. 

328 

s — 10. 

348 

3,4. 

375 

9. 

46/ 

4. 

304,  348 

1.2. 

75,  348 

6, 

348,  460 

3,4. 

74 

XX.  6,  14. 

140 

THE  END. 


RAvrrU,  PI-TNTER,  OXFOKD. 


ERRATA. 

Page     1".  line  \5.fijr  the»e  r^'f// there 
35.  iiiite,  for  Eccles  read  Ecc'us. 
185'  line  3t.  mnr.  ad  I  1  Cor.  15,  52. 
ib.  34.  mnr.  «//  I   Cor.  lo,  50. 

283.  8  from  oiid,  far  vanity  (twice)  read .civwUy 

3f?0.  10  an  i  \1.ft>r  sensual  re7'/ ssxua! 

4^'l.  6  IVoni  eiitl  fiir  thus  .'v^.'/  VtiU 


LIBRARY    OF   THE    FATHERS. 


PUBLICATION  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  TEXTS. 

The  plan  of  publishing  some  at  the  least  of  the  originals  of  the  Fathers, 
whose  works  were  translated  in  the  "  Library,"  has  been  steadily  kept  in 
view  from  the  first,  and  Collations  have  now  been  obtained,  at  considerable 
expense,  at  Rome,  Paris,  Munich,  Vienna,  Florence,  Venice,  and  the 
Editors  have  materials  for  the  principal  works  of  S.  Chrysostom,  for 
S.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  S.  Macarliis,  Tertullian,  and  S.  Augustine's  Homilies 
on  the  Psalms.     Collations  are  also  being  made  for  S.  Gregory  of  Nyssa. 

Of  these,  they  have  begun  with  S.  Chrysostom  on  St.  Paul,  the  Rev. 
T.  T.  Field,  M.A.  Trin.  Coll.  Cambridge,  having  united  with  them  in  this 
great  task.  He  has  already  edited  the  Homilies  on  the  '2d  Ep.  to  the  Cor., 
is  now  carrying  through  the  press  those  on  the  1st  Ep.  (some  of  the  materials 
for  which  arrived  at  a  later  period,)  and  then  intends  to  proceed  to  the 
Homilies  on  the  Ep.  to  the  Rom. 

All  the  best  MSS.  known  in  Europe  have  been  collated  for  this  edition, 
and  the  text  has  been  considerably  improved,  as  that  of  the  Homilies  on 
S.  Matthew  had  already  been  by  the  same  Editor  *.  There  is  then  every 
prospect  that  the  English  Edition  of  S.  Chrysostom  will  be  again  the  best 
extant. 

All  the  extant  European  IMSS.  have  likewise  been  collated  for  S.  Cyuil 
of  Jerusalem  and  Tertullian.  Of  these  S.  Cyril  is  nearly  ready 
for  the  press. 

The  publication  of  Tertullian  has  been  delayed,  because  it  was  discovered 
that  the  result  of  the  collations  would  be  to  make  the  text  more  genuine,  yet 
more  difficult  than  before.  M.  Heyse,  who  was  collating  for  the  Editors 
at  Rome,  being  requested  to  search  for  the  MS.  or  MSS.  which  F.  Ursinus 
alleged  that  he  had  used,  discovered  the  original  papers  of  Ursinus,  ia 
which  it  appeared  that  the  readings  which  Higaltius  adopted  from  him, 
were  in  fact  only  ingenious  conjectures  by  Ursinus  himself,  which  he  gave 
out  as  collations  of  MSS.  The  Editor  of  the  treatises  of  Tertullian  already 
translated,  being  thus  thrown  back  upon  the  older  text,  found  reason  to  think 
that  in  those  cases  the  readings,  which  Ursinus  had  corrected,  although 
at  first  sight  obscurer,  were  (he  believes  with  one  exception)  the  more 
genuine. 

^Vith  regard  to  S.  Augustine,  there  seemed  reason  to  think  that  there 
was  very  little  or  nothing  left  to  be  done  for  the  improvement  of  the  text 
after  the  admirable  labours  of  the  Benedictines.  Some  collations  which 
the  Editors  obtained,  through  their  laborious  Collator,  from  very  ancient 
I^LSS.  of  his  Epistles  at  Monte-Cassino,  confirmed  this  impression.  And 
this  is  again  renewed  by  some  Collations  on  the  Psalms,  which  the  same 
Scholar  has  made  for  them  from  a  very  ancient  Codex  rescriptus  in  the 

*  Mr.  Field's  edition. of  the  Homilies  on  S.  Matthew  is  supplied   to  Subscribers  to  the 
Library  at  the  same  reduced  rate  as  the  other  volumes. 

A 


Vatican.  Still,  besides  the  improvement  of  the  text  of  any  Father,  if 
possible,  the  Editors  had  the  distinct  object  of  making  single  valuable 
works  accessible  to  Clergy  who  could  not  afford  to  purchase  his  whole 
works.  They,  therefore,  propose  to  publish  S.  Augustine's  Homilies  on  the 
Psalms,  since  they  are  not  only  a  deep  and  valuable  Commentary  on  a 
portion  of  Holy  Scripture,  which  forms  so  large  apart  of  our  public  devotions, 
but  contain,  perhaps,  more  of  his  practical  theology  and  hints  as  to  the 
inward  spiritual  life,  than  most  of  his  works.  Besides  the  above 
Vatican  MS,  Collations  are  being  made  of  some  of  the  Bodleian  MSS, which 
liave  not  been  used,  since  even  an  occasional  improvement  of  the  collocation, 
or  still  more  occasional  of  the  text  itself,  is  not  without  interest  in  a  work 
of  such  exceeding  value. 

Large  Collations  had  been  made  for  S.  Macarius,  and  it  seemed  almost 
ready  for  publication,  when  their  indefatigable  Collator,  M.  Heyse,  disco- 
vered in  the  Vatican  an  entirely  different  recension.  In  accordance  with 
the  rules  of  the  Vatican,  access  was,  upon  this,  denied  them  to  all  MSS, 
whatever  of  S.  Macarius,  and  the  edition  has  consequently  been,  for  the 
time,  suspended. 

For  S.  Grkgory  of  Nyssa  considerable  preparations  have  been  made, 
although  nothing  is  yet  ready  for  the  press. 

For  these  undertakings,  the  Editors  have  only  their  private  resources, 
(any  profits  from  the  translations  having  been  much  more  than  absorbed 
by  the  Collations.)  The  present  number  of  Subscribers  to  the  original 
texts  is  only  388.  Works  printed  in  England  have,  owing  to  the  expense 
of  labour  here,  but  a  limited  circulation  abroad.  If  then  it  is  wished  that 
the  publication  of  the  originals  should  proceed  more  rapidly,  there  must  be 
additional  Subscribers. 


S.  EPHRAEM, 

The  last  sheets  and  Indices  of  a  volume  translated  from  the  Syriac 
works  of  S.  Et'iiraem  were  in  the  press,  when  a  sorrowful  event  happened, 
not  anticipated  by  the  Editor,  whicli  made  it  necessary  to  withdraw  it  from 
the  Library  of  the  Fathers.  The  volume  had  been  submitted,  sheet  by 
sheet,  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Pusey,  who  is  responsible  for  it. 

Having  been  withdrawn  from  the  Library  under  these  circumstances, 
the  Publisher  proposes  to  send  it,  at  the  usual  reduced  price,  to  such  of  the 
Subscribers  to  the  Library,  as  will  signify  to  him  their  wish  to  have  it. 


DEDICATED  (BY  PERMISSION) 
TO    HIS   GRACE   THE    LORD    ARCHBISHOP   OF   CANTERBURY, 


A 

LIBRARY  OF  FATHERS 

OF    THK 

HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH, 

ANTERIOR    TO    THE    DIVISION    OF    THE    EAST    AND    WEST. 


TRANSLATED    BY    MEMBERS    OF    THE    ENGLISH    CHURCH, 

WITH    NOTICES    OF    THE    RESPECTIVE    FATHERS,    AND    BRIEF   NOTES    BY    THE    EDITORS, 

WHERE    REQUIRED,    AND    SUMMARIES    OF    CHAPTERS    AND    INDICES. 


EDITED    BX 

The  Rev.  E.  B,  PUSEY,  D.D. 

Itcg'ms  Prn/essor  of  Hebrew,  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  late  Fellow  of  Oriel  ('dlege. 

The  Rev.  JOHN  KEBLE,  M.A. 

Professor    of  Poetry,    late    Fellow    of   Oriel   College. 

The  Rev.  C.  MARRIOTT,   M.A. 

Fellow  of  Oriel  College. 


A  Publication,  answering  to  the  above  title,  appeared  to  the  Editors 
calculated  to  answer  many  and  important  ends,  and  to  supply  considerable 
wants,  some  peculiar  to  our  own  (Church  and  times,  others  more  general. 

Their  chief  grounds  for  thinking  it  very  desirable  were  such  as  the  fol- 
lowing:— 

1.  The  great  intrinsic  value  of  many  of  the  works  of  the  Fathers,  which 
are,  at  present,  inaccessible,  except  to  such  as  have  large  libraries,  and  are 

familiar  with  the  languages  in  which  they  are  written  ;  and  this  the  more, 
since  a  mere  general  acquaintance  with  the  language  v.'ill  not  enable  a 
person  to  read  with  ease  many  of  the  Fathers.  E.  g.  Knowledge  of 
Latin  alone  will  not  suffice  to  read  Tertullian:  and  in  cases  less  strong, 
ecclesiastical  language  and  peculiarity  of  style  will  often  present  consider- 
able difficulties  at  first. 

2.  The  desirableness  of  bringing  together  select  works  of  different 
Fathers.  Many  who  would  wish  to  become  acquainted  with  the  Fathers, 
know  not  where  to  begin  ;  and  scarcely  any  have  the  means  to  procure  any 
great  number  of  their  works.  Editions  of  the  whole  works  of  a  Father, 
(such  as  we  for  the  most  part  have,)  are  obviously  calculated  for  divines, 
not  for  private  individuals  :  they  furnish  more  of  the  works  of  each  Father 
than  most  require,  and  their  expense  precludes  the  acquisition  of  others. 

3.  The  increased  demand  for  sacred  reading.  The  Clergy  of  one  period 
are  obviously  unequal  to  meet  demands  so  rapid,  and  those  of  our  day  have 
additional  hindrances,  from  the  great  increased  amount  of  practical  duties. 
Where  so  much  is  to  be  produced,  there  is  of  necessity  great  danger  that 

A  2 


much  will  not  be  so  niatare  as,  on  tbcse  subjects,  is  especially  to  be  desired. 
Our  occupations  do  not  leave  time  for  mature  thought. 

4.  Every  body  of  Christians  has  a  peculiar  character,  which  tends  to 
make  them  look  upon  the  system  of  faith,  committed  to  us,  on  a  particular 
side ;  and  so,  if  they  carry  it  on  by  themselves,  they  insensibly  contract  its 
limits  and  depth,  and  virtually  lose  a  great  deal  of  what  they  think  that 
they  hold.  While  the  system  of  the  Church,  as  expressed  by  her  Creeds 
and  Liturgy,  reaiains  the  same,  that  of  her  members  will  gradually  become 
contracted  and  shallow,  unless  contirmally  enlarged  and  refreshed.  In 
ancient  times  ibis  tendency  was  remedied  by  the  constant  living  intercourse 
between  the  several  branches  of  the  Catholic  Church,  by  the  circulation  of 
the  -aritings  of  the  Fathers  of  the  several  Churches,  and,  in  part,  by  the 
present  method — translation.  We  virtually  acknowledge  the  necessity  of 
such  accessions  by  our  importations  from  Germany  and  America;  but  the 
circum.stances  of  Germany  render  mere  translation  unadvisable,  and  most 
of  the  American  Theology  proceeds  from  bodies  who  have  altered  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Sacraments. 

5.  The  peculiar  advantages  of  the  Fathers  in  resisting  heretical  errors, 
in  tliat  they  had  to  combat  the  errors  in  their  original  form,  before  men's 
minds  were  familiarized  with  them,  and  so  risked  partaking  of  them;  and 
alsoi  n  that  they  lived  nearer  to  the  Apostles. 

6.  The  great  comfort  of  being  able  to  produce,  out  of  Christian  antiquity, 
refutations  of  heresy,  (such  as  the  different  shades  of  the  Arian  :)  thereby 
avoiding  the  necessity  of  discussing,  ourselves,  profane  errors,  which,  on  so 
high  mysteries,  cannot  be  handled  without  pain,  and  rarely  without  injury 
to  our  own  minds. 

7.  The  advantage  which  some  of  the  Fathers  (e.  g.  St.  Chrysostom) 
possessed  as  Commentators  on  the  New  Testament,  from  speaking  its  Ian- 


gun  s;e. 


8.  The  value  of  having  an  ocular  testimony  of  the  existence  of  Catholic 
verity,  and  Catholic  agreement;  that  truth  is  not  merely  what  a  man 
troivelh  ;  that  the  Church  once  was  one,  and  spake  one  language;  and 
tl.iat  the  present  unhappy  divisions  are  not  necessary  and  unavoidable. 

9.  The  circumstance  that  the  Anglican  branch  of  the  Church  Catholic 
is  founded  upon  Holy  .Scripture  and  the  agreement  of  the  Universal  Church; 
and  that  therefore  the  knowledge  of  Christian  antiquity  is  necessary  in 
order  to  undei stand  and  maintain  her  doctrines,  and  especially  her  Creeds 
and  her  Liturgy. 

10.  The  importance,  at  the  present  crisis,  of  exhibiting  the  real  practical 
value  of  Catholic  Antiquity,  wliich  is  disparaged  by  Romanists  in  order  to 
make  way  for  the  later  Councils,  and  by  others  in  behalf  of  modern  and 
private  interpretations  of  Holy  Scripture.  Th.e  character  of  Catholic  anti- 
quity, and  of  the  scheme  of  salvation,  as  set  forth  therein,  cannot  be  ap- 
preciated through  the  broken  sentences  of  the  Fathers,  which  men  pick  up 
out  of  controversial  di\inity. 

1  I.  The  g-reat  danger  in  which  Romanists  are  of  lapsing  into  secret  infi- 
delity, not  seeing  how  to  escape  from  the  palpable  errors  of  their  own 
Church,  without  falling  into  the  opposite  errors  of  Ultra-Protestants.  It 
appeared  an  act  of  especial  charity  to  point  out  to  such  of  them  as  are  dissa- 
tisfied with  the  state  of  their  own  Church,  a  body  of  ancient  Catholic  truth, 
free  from  the  errors,  alike  of  modern  Rome  and  of  Ultra- Protestantism. 

12.  Gratitude  to  Almighty  God,  who  has  raised  up  these  great  lights 
in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  set  them  there  for  its  benefit  in  all  times. 


EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  PLAN  OF  THE  WORK. 

I.  The  subjects  of  the  several  treatises  to  be  published  shall  mainly  be,  Doctrine, 
Practice,  Exposition  of  Holy  Scripture,  Refutation  of  Heresy,  or  History. 

8.  The  Editors  hold  themselves  responsible  for  the  selection  of  the  several  treatises 
to  be  translated,  as  also  for  the  faithfulness  of  the  translations. 

II.  The  originals  of  the  works  translated  shall  be  printed*.  It  would  be  well, 
therefore,  if  Subscribers  would  specify,  if  they  wish  for  the  originals,  either  with  or 
without  the  translations. 

12.  It  is  understood  that  subscriptions  continue,  until  it  be  intimated  that  they  are 
discontinued,  and  that  they  extend,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  to  the  end  of  each 
year. 

14.  Not  more  than  four  volumes  to  appear  for  each  year :  the  price  to  Subscribers  not 
to  exceed  9i\  for  a  closely  printed  8vo  of  400  pages;  to  the  public  it  will  be  raised 
one-fourth.     When  old  Translations  are  revised,  the  price  will  be  diminished. 

*  The  object  of  puhliihirig  the  originals  has  been  steadily  liept  in  view,  though  delayed  by 
difficulties,  inseparable  from  the  covimencement  of  such  an  vndertaking,  as  well  as  In  .wrroujul 
dispensations,  Collutions  of  MSS.  at  Rome,  Paris,  Munich,  f  ienna,  Florence,  Venice,  have 
now  been  in  part  obtained,  in  part  are  being  made,  for  S.  Chrysostjm''s  Homilies  on  S.  Paul,  on 
the  Statues,  S.  Cyril  of  Jeriaalem^  Macarius,  Tertidlian,  S.Greg.  Nyss.  S;c. 

RIVINGTONS,    LONDON.    J.  H.  PARKER,  OXFORD. 


AIHANA.SIU.S.S. 


Works  already  puhlished. 

.On    the    Nicene    Det\jiitioii,  J 


On  the  EpLstle  to  the  Romans, 
tCorinthiaiis,Galatians,Ephe- 
sians,  Philippians,  Colossians. 
Thessaloniaus,  1  and  2  Timo- 
thy, Titus,  and  Philemon. 


\ 


against  tlie  Allans 

Historical  Documents Rev.  i\I.  Atkinson,  M..4.  Felloir  of  Lincoln. 

AUGL'STINF.,  S Confessions Old  Traii.skilion,  revised  by  E.  B.  Piisei/,   D.D. 

^ZHul'^lIt  ^.'!  ''.'"'.""  i  ^<"''-  ^  G.  Macmnllen,  M.A.  Fellow  ofC.C.C. 

Practical  Treatises  ]  1^"-  il'  ''■  Corvisk   ^T  4.  Fellow  of  Ereter. 

IBec.  H.  Browne,  M.A.  St.  Peter  s  Coll.  Camb. 

Ci  RIL.S.OFJERUSALEM  Catechetical  UiscourfP-^^    Rex\  H.  If.  C/ttirch,  M.J.  Fellow  of  Oriel- 

CyPRIAN.  S.     , Trearises, lute  lieu.  C.  Thornton,  ^J.A.  Christ  C/uirch. 

Epistles .Rev.  II.  Carpy,  M.A.  Worcester Colleg,e, 

CHRYS03T0.M,  S Homilies onStMatthew,Partsl,2.i?t;i;.&>  G.  Prevosl,  M.J.  Oriel. 

Keo.  J.  E.  Morn's,  M  A    Fellow  of  Exeter. 
Hev.  J.  Medley,  M.A.  {now  •  d.  li/j.  of  Fredericfon.) 
Rev.  H.  K.  Cor/ii'^li,  -)/  A.  lute  FuUti  of  Exeter. 
Tlce  late  C.  U'oud,  M.A.  0,  iel. 
"Rev.  IK  J.  Copeliind,  B  D.  FeUo---  of  Trinity. 
Rev.  fV.  a.  Cotton,  M.A.  .Staneut  o/  Ch.  (It. 
Rev.  J.  A.  Ashworlh.  M.A.  Fellow  of  Brase-nose. 
.    Rev.  J.  Tweed,  M.A.  C.C.C.  Camb. 
Homilies  on  the  Statues Rev.  E.  Bvdge. 

GREGORY,  3.  THE  GREAT  iMagna  Moralia,  P.  I.  II. 

PACIAN,  S Epp.  to  Srmpr. ;  on  Repentance )  „       ,.    „  „„  ,,  ,    „     .         ,„     „ 

and  Baptism    .     .     .   ■.     .    \  Rev.  C.  H.  Cvlbjns,  M.A.  Student  of  Ch.  Ch. 

TERTULLIAN Apologetic    and    Practical?  j}^„   n   n   i  ar  ^   7  ,    c,    /     ,    m^   f,. 

i  realises  C  Dodgson,  M.A.  late  Student  ofCh.  Ch> 

In  the  Press. 

AUGUSTINE,  S On  the  Psalms 

CHRYSOSTOM,  S On  .St.  Matthew,  Vol.  3 Rer.  Sir  G.  Prevost,  M.A.  Oriel. 

On  2  Corintliian.s Her.  J.  A  Asliworth,  M.A.  Fellvwof  Brasenose. 

GREGORY,  S.  TIIEOLO- ?^  „        „    ^  „,.,  „,.,., 

GUS.  Of  N  AZIANZUM  \  *""'<"'« ^f'-  «•  F.  TlUson,  M.A.  Oriel. 

ORIGINALS. 

AUGUSTINE,  S Confessiones   Rev.  E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 

CHRYSOSTOM,  S Hom.  in  Ep.  2.  ad  Cor Rev.  T.  T.  Field,  M.J.  Trinity  CoU.  Cumb. 

In  the  Press. 
CHRYSOSTOM,  S Hom.  in  Ep.  1.  ad  Cor.. Rev.  T.  T.  Field,  M.A.  Trinity  Coll.  Camb. 


6 


Preparhig  fur  Publication. 


>  Eev.  C.  Daman,  liJ.A.  Fellow  of  Oriel. 


1CTS  of  early  MARTYRS  .  .  (Genuine) 

fiMUROSE,  S ..On  the  Ps^|n)a 

On  .St .  Luke .partly  btj  the  lata  S.  f.  If'uod,  31. ji.  Oriei. 

Ooctiinal  Tientises 

Kpistles .partly  by  the  late  S.  F.  Wood,  M.A.  Oriei. 

ATHANASIUS,  S.  ......  .  Tracts  on  the  Incarnalion  and 

II  .Ij  Spirit. 

M;GUSriNE,S Anti-Celacian  Tracts   

Anti-Doualist  Tracts  ....... 

HoniiliesonSt.John'sGofpel .  .John  G.  Shcppard,  lil./i   Scholar  of  IVudham, 

Virsl7 

K|iistle    .    .  5 

—  the  Psalms    ....  Anonymous. 

F.pisilcs  Brv.  H.  IF.  ffilberforce,  M.A   Oriel. 

City  of  God  f)ld  Trunslathn  revised. 


E?ASII,.S.THE  GREAT 


^mu'le's^'"''"'''  ''"''   """}««"•  ■^«-  miliums,  M.J.  Fellotc  o/Trimty. 


CI1K.YSOSTOM,S flomilic?  on  St.  I„hn Bee.  G.  T.  Stvpart,  M.A.  Fellow  of  Exeter. 

llie  Acis Bev.  T.  Slieppard.  M.A.  Oriel. 

■  the  Hebrews Rev.  T.  hehle,  M.A    late  Fellow  of  C.  V.  C. 

Select  Homilio-s     Rev.  C.  D.  Pearscn,  M./l.  Oriel. 

On  the  IMesihoorl     The  lute  i:p.  Jehb,  finished  hy  Rer.  J.  Jebli,  M.. 4. 

Epistles  Rev.  E.  Chmton,  M.A.  Christ  Church. 

;;LEWKNT,  S.  of  ALE.X-   I  Pa,(i,„npns. 
ANURIA ^  t^<Ba..,ngi,s. 

JVRIL,  S.  OF  ALEXAN'-)    ,    ,.,^,  ^,     ,     . 
DRIA     J  Against  N.Monns     

bUSEBlUS Ecclesiastical  History Rev.  E.  A.  Dayman,  M.A.  late  Fellow  of  Exeter. 

5REGORY,  S.  OF  NY"SSA  ..Sermons  ar.d  Commentaries.. 

GREGORY,  S.  i  1!E  GKLAI  -^  ;yj,g„,  Moralia,  Vol   .%  .  .  .  Anonymous. 

HILARY',  S On  the  Trinity Rev.  A.  Short,  M.A.  late  .Stiirlevtof  Christ  Chunjhi 

I'.salms.  G.  G.  Ilayter,  B  A.  late  S\kular  of  Oriel. 

On  St.  Matthew. 

IRENjEUS,  S Against  Heresy     Rev.  J.  Keble,  M.A. 

JEROME,  S Epis'.les  Ree.  J.  Mo-tley,  M.A.  Felloy  qfMaffdalen. 

lUSTlN.M Works Ven.  Archdeacon  Manmng,M.. 4.  late Fellou- of  Mert. 

LEO,  S.  THE  GREAT Sermons  and  Epi.-.lle3     

nT  «/-.  ADiTTo   o                           w     1  .  S  Old   Translation   revised  by   Rev.    C.   Marriott,   M.A. 

MACAR1US,S Works   |     FeUowofOnel. 

OPTATHS,S On  the  Douatist  Schism 

ORIGEN  Against  Celsus      Rev  T.  Mozley,  M  A.late  Feiliiif  of  Oriel. 

TERTULLIAN Works         Rev.  C.  Dodgson,  M.A.  tale  i'tudent  of  Ch    Ch. 

THEODORET,  &c Ecclesiastical  History     Rev.  C.  Marriott,  M.A.  Fellotr  of  Oriel. 

Compendinm    of      Heresies  >   „        t>    „     ,^    nr    i    r^  i,         j-  r,    ,i-  i 
and  Dialognes }Rev.R.  Scott,  M.A.  Fellotv  of  BallioL 

St.  Clement  of  Alex.     "  Qnis  1 
dives    salvettir?"      Ep.   ad  V 


.MISCELLANIES, 


Hip- 


Diognetnm  ;   Tracts  of  \ 
polytiis. 

S.  Basil  and  S.Ambrose,  Hex--) 
aemeion,  S    Gr'a.   Nyss.   rie  / 

llcin.  Opitirjo.  Nemesius  and  V. /?ep.  E.  Mnrshnll,  M.A.  late  FcUon'  of  C.C.C 
Meleiiiis  de  Nat.  Hem.  Iheci- (  W.  A.  Greeiihill,  M.U.  Trin.  fvll. 
doret  dc  I'roviileniia    Lactan- \ 
tius  de  Opif.  Dei.  J 

♦,*  This  list  was  never  meant  to  be  final,  and  it  has  been,  from  time  to  lime,  enlarged.  It  might 
then  save  waste  of  labour,  if  per.=ons  contemplating  the  translation  of  works,  not  set  down,  wouM 
enquire  of  the  Editors,  whether  ihej  are  included  in  the  plar>. 


SUBSCRIBEES. 


Those  marked  with  an  *  are  subscribers  to  both  tlie  Texts  and  the  Translations. 

'J'hose  marked  t  to  the  Texts  only. 

Those  not  marked,  to  the  Translations  only. 


*His  Grace  The  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

His  Grace  The  Lord  Archbishop  of  Yorh. 

Right  Hon.  and  Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  London. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Lincoln. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Bangor. 

Hon.  and  Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford. 

*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Rochester. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Exeter. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  AVorcester,  dec. 

^Right  Rev,  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Chichester,  dec. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Lichfield. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Worcester. 

*R.ight  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph. 

Right  Rev.  The  Loi'd  Bishop  of  Rij)on. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Barbados. 

*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Aberdeen. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Ross  and  Argyll. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  North  Carolina,  2  copieff. 

*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  New  Jersey. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Ohio. 

Right  Rev.  Bishop  Luscombe,  Paris,  dec. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Guiana. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Tasmania. 

Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Fredericton. 

Abbiss,  Rev.  J.  fAckland,  T.  S.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coli. 

*Aberdeen  Diocesan  Library  Camb. 

A.    B.   Theological     College,   Illinois,  Acklom,  J.  Esq.  Downing  Coll.  Camb. 

N.  A.  Acland,  L,  Esrj.  Killerton 

Abraham,  Rev.  C.  J.  Eton  Coll.  *Acland,  T.  D.  Esq.  j\l.  P. 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Acland,  P.  Leopold,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 
Acland.Arth.H.Dyke,  Esq.  Dorchester 
Adams,  Rev.  H.  G.  Dunsford,  Devon 
Adams,   Rev.  D.  one  of  the  Vicars  of 

Bampton 
"Adams,  John,  jun.  Esq. 
Adams,  T.  Esq.  Halifax 
Adams,  Rev.  W.  Merton  Coll. 
Adcock,    Rev.    Halford    H.    Scraptofl, 

Leicestershire 
Addison,  Rev.  W.  F.  Macclesfield 
Addison,    Rev.    Berkeley,    St.   John's, 

Edinburgh 
Agnevv.Rev.  J.  R.Wootten,  nearWood- 

slock 
Agnew,  Mrs.  Western  Pavilion,  Brighton 

Ainslie,  Murray,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 

Airey,  Rev.  W.  Hexham 

Ailken,     Rev.    R.     Walcot     Terrace, 

Kensington  Road 
Aitchison,  Rev.  D.  Glasgow 
Alexander,  Rev.  John,  Edinburgh 
Alger,  Owen  T.  Esq. 
Allen,  A.  Esq.  Clifton 
Allen,  E.  J.  Esq.  Jesus  Coll.  Cambridge 
Allen,  Rev.  Jas.  Castle  Martin,  Pem- 
brokeshire 
Allen,  Rev.  Joseph,  Athy,  Ireland 
Allen,  Rev.  P.  Westbourn,  Susses 
Allen,  R.  B.  Esq.  Walthamslow 
^Allies,  Rev.  T.  W.  Wadham  Coll. 
AUom.  Mr.  Bookseller,  York 
*A11  Souls  College  Library,  Oxford 
Ambr£y,Mr,  C.  Bookseller,  Manchester 
Amphlett,  Rev.  M.  Mavesyn,  Ridware 
Anderson,  G.  W.  Esq.  Bombay 
"Anderdon,  John  L.  Esq. 
•♦Anderdon,  W.  H.  Esq.  University  Coll. 
Anderson,  George,  Esq.  Inverness 
Anderson,  Rev.  John,  Metton  Coll. 
Anderson,  Rev.  Philip,  Gateshead 
Anderson,  Hon.  Mrs.  Brighton 
Anderson,  Rev.  Sir  C.  Bart.  Lea 
Andrew,    Rev.     John,     Worsborough, 

Barnsley,  Yorkshire 
Aiidiewes,  Rev.W.  Sudbury 
Andrev?s,  Mr.  Geo.  Bookseller,  Durham 
Andrews,  Mr.  W.  Bookseller,  Bristol 
Anstey,  Rev.  George,  Acomb  Hall 
•*Anstice,  Mrs.  Joseph 


Anihon,  Rev.  Henry,  D.D.  New  Yorli 
Anlrobus,  Rev.  John 
*Appleton  and  Co.  New  York 
Archer,  C.  Rev.  Ball.  Coll. 
Arden,  Rev.  G.  Powderham 
Armstrong,  Rev.  J.  H.  Dublin 
Armstrong,  Rev.  J.  Dmder,  Somerset 
Armstrong,    Rev.    C'.    E.    Hemsworth, 

Yorkshire 
Armstrong,  Rev.  J.  Wallsend 
*Arnold,  Rev.T.  K.  Lyndon,  Rutland 
Ashby-de-la-Zouch  Theological  Library 
Ashington,  Miss,  Little  Saxham 
Ashworth,  F.  H.  Esq. 
Ashworth,  Rev.  J.  H.  East  Woodhay, 

Hants 
*  Ash  worth.  Rev.  J.  A.  Bras.  Coll. 
tAtkinson,  Rev.  M.  Lincoln  Coll. 
Attwood,  Rev.  E.  W.  Jesus  Coll. 
Aubin,  Rev.  Philip,  Jersey 
*Audland,  Rev.  W.  F.  Queen's  Coll. 
Au.'-tin,  Mr.  S.  Booksellei,  Hertford 
Austin,  Rev.  J.  T.  Aldworth,  Berks 
*Awdry,  Rev.  C.  Worthen,  Shropshire 


*Bacon,R.  W.  Esq.  King's  Coll.  Camf>. 

Badeley,  E.  Esq.  Temple 

*Bagge,  Rev.  James,  Lincoln 

Bagot,  G.  T.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 

Baillie,  Rev.  Evan,  Trinity  Coll. 

Bain,  Mr. Bookseller,  Hay  market,  Londori 

Baker,  C.  F.  Rev.  Exeter  Coll. 

Baldwin,  Rev.  C.  F.  Hampton,  Mid- 
dlesex 

Ballas,  Rev.  J. 

Bamplon,  A.  H.  Esq.  Plymouth 

tBandinel,Rev.Bulkeley,  D.D.  Bodleiaii 
Librarian 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


9 


•Baring,  Rev.  C.  CIi.  Cli. 

Barker,  Rev.  H.  Raymond,  I\lert.  Coll. 

Barker,  Rev.  C.  Raymord 

*  Barker,  Rev.  F.  Raymond,  Oriel  Coll. 

Barling,  Rev.  J.  Halifax 

Barlow,  Rev.  T.  Noithampton 

Barnes,  Rev.  J.  W.Trinity  Coll.  Camb. 

Barnes,  Venerable  .Archdeacon,  Sowton, 

E,\eter 
Barnstaple  Clerical  Book  Club 
Barrett,  Rev.  W.  Stratford-on-Avon. 
*Barrovv,  Rev.  John,  Queen's  Coll. 
Barter,  Rev.  W.  B.  Burghclere,  Hants 
Bartholomew,  Alfred,  Esq. 
Bartholomew,  Rev.  Canon,  Exeter 
Bartholomew,  Rev.  C.  C.  Lympstone, 

Devon 
Barton, Rev.J.H.  Wicken,  Northampton 

Batcheller,  !Mr.  Bookseller,  Dover 
•Bates,  Rev.  W.  Christ's  Coll.  Camb. 
Bath  Clerical  Society 

Bather,    Hev.    E.    jun.    Meole    Brace, 
Shrewsbury 

Bathurst,  Rev.  L.  C.  Wells  Theological 
Coll. 

Bathurst,  Rev.  S.  Merton 

Baxter,  Rev.  Arthur,  Croydon 

Bayldon,  Rev.  J, 

Bayley,  W.  R.  Esq.  Bath 

Bayliff,  Rev.T.L.  King's  Walden, Herts. 

'Bayly,  Rev.  W.  H.  R.  Stapleton,  near 
Bristol 

Bayne,   Rev.  Thos.    Vere,   Broughton, 
JManchester 

Beadon,  Miss,  Clifton 

•Beadon,  Rev.    H.   W.    Latton,   near 
Cricklade 

Beadon,  Rev.  Rich,  a  Court,  Cheddar, 
Somerset 

"Beaufort,  Rev.  D.  A. 

Beaumont,  Rev.  J.  A.  St.  Mary's,  Leeds 

Beaven   James  J.  Esq. 

Beckwilh,  Rev.  H.  \V.  Bishop's  Wear- 
mouih,  Durham 

Bedford,  Rev.  H. 

Begbie,  — •  Esq.  Pemb.Coll.  Camb. 

Beitch.Rev.  W.  D. 

Bell,  Rcv.  Henry,  Ruddington 

Bell,  Rev.  John,  Oullon 

Bell,  W.  W .  E?q.  Civil  Service,  Bombay 


Bellairs,  Rev.  W.  Bed  worth 

]^ellairs,Rev.  H.  W.  Buckley,  Flin'shire 
*Bellamy,  Rev.  J.W.  JMerchant  Taylors' 
School 

Bellasis,  Edward,  Esq. 

Belli,  Rev.  C.  A.  Southweald,  Essex 
*Bellingham,  Rev.  J.  G.  Farmington, 
Gloucestershire 

Bennett,  Rev.  E.  Leigh,  Long  Sutton, 
Lincoln 

Eennef,  Rev.  W.  B.  Sandnel! 

Bennett,  Rev.  W. 

Benning  and  Co.  Messrs.  London 

Bentley,  Rev.  T.  R.  Manchester 

Berkeley, Rev. G.C. South  Minster, Essex 

Berry,  Rev.  P.  Cork 

Bethune,  Rev.  G. 

*BevaD,  Beckford,  Esq.  16,  Devonshire 
Place 

Bevan,  R.  Esq.  Rougham 

Beveiidg<5,  Mr.  Thos.  Gordon,  Abeidcfii 

Bickersteth,  Rov.  E.  Walton,  Herts 

Biggor,  D.  E-;q. 

Birchmall,  T,  Esq.   Park   Lane,  Mac- 
clesfield 

Bird,  Rev.  C.  Warden  Hexham,  North- 
umberland 

Bird,  Rev.G.  Great  Wiiborough,  Essex 

Biron,  Rev.  Eduin,  Hyihe,  Kent 

Birtwhistle,  ^Jr.  W.  Halifax 

*Bishops'  College,  Calcuit » 

Blackburn,  Rev.  P.  Steeple  Langford, 
Heytesbury 

Blackburn,  Rev.  J.  Royston 

Blackwell,  Rev.  Wm.  Morden,  Surrey 

Blackwood  and  Sons,  Edinburgh 

Blandy,  Charles,  Esq.  Reading 

Blandy,  Rev.   PVancis  J.  Netheravon, 
Aniesbury,  Wilts 

*Elew,  Rev. W.J.  Milton, nr.Gravesend 

*Blis5,  Rev.  James,  INIarsden,  Devizes 

Bliss,  Rev.  \V.  Bath 

Blower, —  Esq.  Wolverhampton 

Bloxam,  Rev.  J.  R.  Magd.  Coll. 

Boissier,  Rev.  P.  E.  Malvern  Wells 

Boissier,  Rev.  G.  R.  Pensliurst 

Bolton,  Lord 

Bond,  F.  II.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 

Bond,  Rev.  N.  Holme  House,  Dorset 

*Bonney,  Rev.  Thos.  Rugeley 


10 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Bcnney,  Yen.  Archdeacon,  King's  Cliff, 

Oundle 
Bonwell,  Rev.  J.  Childvvall,  Liverpool 
Boodle,  Rev.  R.  G.   Compton  Dando, 

near  Bath 
tBorrodaile,  Rev.  A.  Holyu'cll  Street, 

Westminster 
Bosanquet,  Rev.  E.  (Chrysostom) 
*Bosanquet,  Eev.  R.  W. 
Bosanquet,  James,  Esq. 
Bosanquet,    S.    Esq.    East    VVoodhay, 

Newbury 
Bosanquet,  W.  H.  Esq. 
Bosanquet,  S.  Esq.  Montagu  Place 
Boteler,  Mr.  Northampton 
Bourke,  Rev.  S.  G. 
Bourne,  Geo.  Esq.  Bath 
Bowden,  Mrs.  17,  Grosvenor  Place 
Bowdler,  Rev.  T.  Sydenham 
Bowles,  Rev.  H.  A.  St.  John's  Coll. 
Bowles,  Rev.  F.  A.  Graffham,  Sussex 
tBowstead,    Rev.    J.    Greetham,   near 

Horncasile 
*Bowyer,  Rev.  W.  A. 
Boyle,  Rev.  John,  Brighouse,  Yorkshire 
Bradford,  Rev.  C.  Vicar  of  Arlington, 

Sussex 
Bradshaw,  Rev.  J. 
Bradbhavv,  J.  Esq,  Nottingham 
Braithwaite,  Rev.  ¥.  London 
Braithwaite,Rev.Wm.  St. Peter's, Jersey 
Bray,  late  Rev.  Dr.  Associates  of,  5  copies 
Bray,  Rev.  E.  A. 
Brereton,  Chas.  Esq.  New  Coll. 
Brerelon,  Rev.  John,  New  Coll. 
Brett,  Mr.  Stoke  Newington 
Brett,  Rev.  Stamford 
*Brewer,  Rev.  J.  S.  Queen's  Coll. 
"■'Brewster,    Rev.  VV.  Hawarden,   near 

Chester 
tBridges,  Rev.  A.  II.  Beddinglon  House, 

near  Croydon 
*Bridges,  Rev.  A.  H.  Horsham,  Sussex 
Bridges,  Rev.  C.  Old    Newton,  Stow- 

market 
*Brine,  Rev.  James  G.  Great  Baddom, 

Essex 
Bristol  Library  Society 
Broadbcnt,  Rev.  C.  F.  Wui field,  Shrop- 
shire 


tErockman,  Rev.  T.  St.  Clement's, 
Sandwich,  Kent 

Brodie,  W.  Esq.  of  Biodie,  near  Forres, 
N.  B. 

Brogden,  Rev.  James 

Brooksbank,  Rev.  C.  Ch.  Ch. 

Broughton,  H.  V.  Esq.  St.  Peter's  Coll, 
Cambridge 

Bioughton,  Rev.  B.  S.  Washington, 
Durham 

Broughton,  Mr.  Thos.  K.  Boston 

tBrowell,  Rev.  W.  R.  Pembroke  Coll. 

Brown,  Messrs.  Booksellers,  Leicester 

Brown,  Mr.  Charlotte  Street,  London 

Brown,  Rev.  E.  Leeds 

t Brown,  Rev.  Henry,  Chichester 

Brown, Rev.  W.L.  Wendlebury, Bicester 

Brovi'n,  Rev.  J.  L.  Ashwellthorpe,  Wy- 
mondham,  Norfolk 

*Browne,  Rev.  E.  G.  Bawdsey  Wood- 
bridge,  Suffolk 

*Browne,  Rev.  R.  W.  King's  Coll. 
London 

Browne,  Eev.  E.  H.  Emmanuel  Coll. 
Camb. 

Browne,  Rev.  T.  C.  Fendowne,  Wel- 
lington, Somerset 

Browne,  Rev.  \V.  R.  Harlingtoii, 
Hounslow 

Browne,  Rev.  J.  Ilaxey 

Brownrigg,  C.  C.  Esq.  Port  Louis- 
Mauritius 

Bruce,  Rev.  W.  Duflfryn,  near  Cardiff" 

Brymer,  \'en.  Archdeacon,  Pulteney 
Street,  Bath 

*Buchanan,  Mrs.  Dursley,  Gloucester- 
shire 

Buck,  —  Esq.  Jersey 

*Buckerfield,  Rev.  F.  H.  Little  Bedwin 

Buckle,  W.  H.  Esq.  Ramsgate 

Buckley,  Mr, 

*  Buckley,    Rev.    Joseph,    Badminton 

Gloucestershire 

*  Buck  ley,  W.  E.  Esq.  Brasenose  t'oll. 
Buckley,    W.    H.    G.    Esq.    Bradford, 

Yorkshire 
Bukett,  T.  Esq.Malton 
Bull,  Rev. John,  D.D.  Canon  of  Ch.Ch, 
"Buller,  Rev.  A.  INIary  Tavy,  Tavistock 
I'uller,  John  Edw.  Es(|. 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


11 


Bulky,  Rev.  1\ Magdalen  Coll. 

Bullock,  W.  Esq.  Kilburn 

Bunting,  Rev.  E.  S. 

Bunyon,  Robert  J.  Esq. 

Burlton,  Rev.  J.  F. 

Burnaby,  Rev.  Robt.  Leicester 

Burney,  Rev.  C.  Magdalea 

Burns,  Rev.  Manchester 

*Burrows,  Rev.  H.N.  Yarmouth, Norfolk 

Burton,  Rev.  R.  C.  Peckham 

Burton,  T.  Esq.  St.  Peter's  Coll.Camb. 

*Bute,  The  Marquis  of 

Butler,  Rev.  D.  Clergy  Orphan  School, 
St.  John's  Wood 

Butler,  Rev,  I.  lokpen,  Newbury 

Butler,  Rev.  Jas.  York 

Butler,  Rev.  T.  Magdalen  Coll. 

Butler,  Rev.  W.  A.  Professor  of  Moral 
Philosophy,  University  of  Dublin 

Buttemer,  Rev.  Mr.  Aldham 

»Butterfield,Rev.  John,  Bradford,  York- 
shire 

Butterworth,   Rev.   J.    H.    All    Souls, 
Marylebone,  London 


'Caldwell,  Captain 
Caldwell,  Rev.  R.  Madras 
Cambridge  Union  Society 
Campbell.  Rev.  S.  C.  St.  Nicholl's,  near 

Cardiff 
Campden,  Viscount 
Campion,  Rev.  Hesketh,  Albournc 
Canham.  A.  J.  Esq.  Tenterden 
Canterbury  Clerical  Book  Society 
Capes,  Rev.  J.  M.  Shipton  le  Moyne 
Capper, Re v,D.  Huntley, Gloucestershire 


Capper,  Rev.  George,  Wherstead 

*Capper,  S.  J.  Esq.  Leyton 

Garden,  Rev.  Lionel,  English  Bicknor, 

near  Coleford,  Gloucesteishire 
Carey,  E.  L.  Esq.  Philadelphia 
Carey,  Rev.  C. 
Carlyon,  Rev.  E. 
Carlyon,  Rev.  Philip,  Colchester 
Carrighan,  Rev.  G.  Plymoulh 
Carter,  Rev.  W.  Eton  College 
Carter,  Rev.  John,  Frenchay,  Bristol 
'•Carter,   Rev.  T.   T.    Cluver  Rectory, 

Windsor 
Cartvvright,  Rev.  J.  B. 
Carwardine,    Rev.    C.    W.    Tolleshunt* 

Knights,  Essex 
tCary,  Isaac  Preston,  Esq. 
Case,  G.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll. 
Case,  Rev.  James,  Liverpool 
Casvvall,  Rev.  E.  Stratford  Sub.  Castle, 

near  Salisbury 
Cator,  Mr.  Lwunceston 
Cator,  Rev.  John,  Wakefield 
Caulfield,  Rev.  W.  Pallas,  Kerry 
*Cavendish,  Hon.  Richard 
*ChafFers,  Rev.T.  Brasen-cose  Coll. 
Chambers,  J.  D.  Esq. 
Clambers,  O.  L.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll. 
*Chambers,  Rev.  J.  C.  Deacon  of  the 

Church,  Sedbergh 
Champernowne,  H.  Esq.  Trinity  Coll. 
Champernowne,  Rev.  R.  Ch.  Ch. 
Chandler,  Rev.  J.  Witley 
Chanter,  Rev.  Mr.  Ilfracombe 
Chapman,  C.  Esq.  Trinity  Coll. 
Chapman,  Rev.  J.  M.  Tendring,  Esses 
♦Chase,  D.  P.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll. 
Cheetham  Library,  Manchester 
*Chepmell,  Rev.  H.  L.  M.  Pemb.  Coli, 
*Che9syre,  Rev.  W.  J.  Canterbury 
Chester,  Rev.  Anthony 
Cheyne,  Rev.  P.  Aberdeen 
Chichester,  Dean  and  Chapter  of 
Chichester,  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of 
Childers,  Mrs.  A.W.  Cantley,Doncaster 
Christie,  A.  J.  Esq.  Fellow  ot  Oriel  Coll. 
Christie,    Rev.    F.    Badgeworlh,    near 

Cheltenham 
•Christ's  College  Library,  Cambridge 
*Church,  Rev.  R.  W.  Oriel  Coll. 


12 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Churpl),  W.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham 
*Chuiton,     Rev.    Edw.   Crayke,     near 

Easinj^vi'old 
Cirdeaux,  Rev.  J.  Whiston 
Clarke,  Rev.E.W. Great  Yeldham.Er^sex 
Clarke,  Rev.H.  Danvers,  Exeter  Coll. 
Clarke,  Rev.  S.  Mortlake,  Surrey 
Clark,  G.  N.  Esq.  Newca<;tIe-on-Tyne 
Clark,  Mr.  Wtn.  iMaiicheiter 
Clark,  Rev.  John,  Leeds 
Clark,  Rev.  J. Dixon,  Belford, Newcastle 
Clayton,  —  Esq.  Twickenham 
Claxson,  Uev.  B.  S.  D.D.  Gloucester 
Cleaver,  jMr.  W.  J.  Bookseller,  Raker 

Street,  London 
Clement,  Rev.B.P.  Canon  of  W  inchesler 
•Cleoburey,     Rev.    C.    Steeple    Aston, 

Oxon. 
Clerke,     Yen.    C.    C.   Archdeacon    of 

Oxford 
*Clerke,  Rev.  Wm.  Melton  IMowbray 
•  Clissold,  Rev.  A.  Stoke  ]Sewingto:i 
*Clutterbuck,  Rev.  H.  Exeter  Coll. 
Cockin,    M.    Esq.    Rangeworthy,   Iron 

Acton 
Cocks,  Hon.  and  Rev.  J.  S.  Worcester 
tCocks,  Rev.  Charles 
*Codd,    Rev.   E.   T.    St.  John's  Coll. 

Cambridge 
*Codrington  College  Library,  Barbados 
Coffin,  Rev.  R.  A.  Ch.  Ch. 
Colt,    Rev.   T.    D.     President   of    the 

Transylvanian  University,  U.  S. 
Cole,  Geo.  Edw.  Esq. 
*Coleridge,  Hon.  INIr.  Justice 
Coleridge,  Rev.  E.  Eton  Coll. 
Coleridge,  F.  G.  Esq.  Oitery  St.  Mary 
tColeridge,  Rev.  Derwent,  Chelsea 
Coleridge,  Rev.  'J'heodore,  Exeter 
*Coles,  Rev.  G.  Croydon 
fCollege  of   Doctors  of  Law,   Doctors' 

Commons 
Collett,  W.L.  Esq.  Quetn's  Coll. 
CoUey,  Rev.  James,  Shrewsbury 
fColiins,  Rev.  C.  M.  Chudleigh,  Devon 
Collinson,  Mr.  R.  Mansfield 
*Collis,  Rev.   J.   D.    Head    Master   of 

Bromsgrove  School 
Coliison,      Rev.     F.     W.     St.    John's, 

Carub. 


■^Collyns,  Rev.  Chas.  Henry,  Ch.  Ch. 
Coltman,      Rev.       George,     Stickney, 

Lincolnshire 
tColson,  C.  Ksq.  Cambridge 
Cclvile,  Rev.  Frederick  L.  Leamington 
Colville,  James  W.  Esq. 
Comljc  and  Crossley,  Leicester 
Combs,  John,  Esq. 
Compigne,  D.  Esq.  Gosport 
Conipton,  Rev.  J.  JMinesteud 
Conway,  \V.  F.  Esq. 
Cooper,  Rev.  E.  P.  Vicarage,  Burf'ord. 

Oxon.  (Tr.  of  S.  Chrys.) 
Cooper,  Rev.  G.  M.  Wilminpfon,  Lewes 
Cooper,  Rev.  R.  Howe,  Norfolk 
Copeland,  Rev.  \V.  J.  Trinity  Coll. 
Coplestone,  Rev.  R.  E.  Barnes,  Surrey 
tCojJeston,    R,ev,     W.    J.    Cronihall, 

Glouces'ershire  (Chrysostom) 
Corbelt,  Ven.  .S.  Archdeacon  of  York 

Wortley,  Sheffield 
*Cornish, Rev. Dr. King's  School,  Gttery 

St.  Mary 
Cornish,    Rev.    Hubert    K.    Bakewell, 

Derbyshire 
Cornish,  Rev.  C.  L.  Litllemore 
*Cornthwaite,  Rev.  T.  Hornsej' 
Cosens,  Rev.  Rol)ert,  Dorchester 
Cosserat,   Rev.   G.  P.  Graham,  Exeter 

Coll. 
Cotes,  Rev.  Peter,  Litchfield,  Hants 
*Cotton,  Rev.  \V.  C.  New  Zealand 
(.^otton,  ^^  illiam,  Esq.  Bank  of  England 
Couitenay,  Lord,  Powderham  Castle 
*Courtenay,  Rev.  Francis,  Extter  Coll. 
Cowie,  Mr.  St.  John's  Coll.  Cambridge 
tCox,  Rev.  W.  H.  St.  Mary  Hall 
*Cox,  Rev.  J.  Walgrave 
Cox,  F.  H.  Esq   Pembroke  Coll.Camb. 
Coxson,  Rev.  Mr.  Davenham,  Cheshire 
Coxwell,  G.  S.  Esq.  Newcastle-on-Tyne 
Cragg,  Rev.  Richard,  Wjmnndham 
Crimp,  \V.  I'sq.  Camberwell 
Crawley,  C.  Esq.  Littlemore 
(Jrewe,  Lord,   I'lustees  of, 
*Crichlow,    Rev.    H.   I\L    Pcundstock, 

Cornwall 
Ciipps,   Rev.    J.    M.    Novington,  near 

Lewes 
Croft,  Archdeacon,  Saltwood,  Hythe 


SUBSCKIBERS. 


i:j 


Crompton,     Rev.    J.     L.    Trin.    Coll, 

Camb. 
Cross,  J.  E.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 
tCuieton,  Rev.  W.  British  Museum 
Currer,  Miss,  Eshton  Hall,  Yorkshire 
»Currey,  Rev.   G.  St.   John's  College, 

Cambiiilge 
Currie,  Rev.  Horace  G.  Milford 
*Currie,  Rev.  James 


Dale,  Rev.  H.  Bristol 
tDalgairns,  J.  D.  Es.|.  Exeter  Coll. 
*Dalton,  Rev.  W  .  Lloyd  House, Wolver- 
hampton 
Daltoii,  Rev.  W.  Little  Binstead,  Essex 
*Dalton,  Rev.  C.  B.  Wadham  Coll. 
Dalton,  Mr. 

♦Daman,  Rev.  Charles,  Oriel  Coll. 
Dauby,  T.  B.  Esq.  Kendal 
♦Dansey,  Rev.  Wm.  Donhead  St.  An- 
drew, Wilts 
*Darby,  Rev.Chiistopher,  Knocktopher 
Darnell,  Rev.  W.  Stanhope,  Durham 
*Darling,  Mr,  James,  22,  Little  Queen 

Street,  London 
Darling,  Rev.  Thomas  St.  John's  Coll. 

Cambridge 
Darwall,  Rev.  L.  Criggion,  near  Shrews- 
bury 
Davie,  Rev.  G.  J.  Brasted,  Kent 
Davies,  Mr.  John,  Bookseller,  Shrews- 
bury 
Davis,  Rev.  E.  Hereford 
Davies,  Rev.  J.  Abbenhall,  Gloucester- 
shire 
Davies,  Rev.  W.  L.  Elizabeth  College, 
Guernsey 


Davison,  Mrs.  College  Green,  Worcester 
Dawson,  Rev.  G.  Exeter  Coll. 
*Da\vson,  J.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 
Dawson,     Rev.    I.     Massey,    Abinger 

Rectory,  near  Dorking 
Day,    Rev.   John    D.    Gorwyn    Vaur, 

Wrexham 
Dayman,     Rev.    E.    A.  .  Shillingston, 

Dorset 
tDayman,  A.  J.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 
•Deacon,  Rev.  G.  E.  Ottery  St.  Mary, 

Devon 
Dealtry,  Rev.  Dr.  Clapham 
•Dean,  Rev.  W.  S.  Abdon 
Dean,  Rev.  E.  B.  All  Souls  College 
Deane,  Rev.  H.  Gillingham,  nr.  Shaftes- 
bury 
Debrisay,   Rev.    J.  T.  St.   Margaret's, 

Leicester 
Deck,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Catr.bribge 
Deedes,  Rev.  Gordon 
Delafosse,  i\Irs.  Additcombe 
Demain,  Rev.  Henry,  Hertford 
Deroerara  Cleiical  Library 
Denny,  Rev.  A.  JMauiitius 
Denton,    Rev.    Henry,    Great    Hford, 

Essex 
De   Teissier,    Rev,    A.    P.   Barfreston, 

Kent 
•De  Teissier,  G.  Esq.  C.C.C. 
De  Vere,  Aubrey,  Esq.  Currah  Chase, 

Limeiick 
•De  Watleville,  Edw.  Esq.  St.  Alban 

Hall 
Dew,  Lieutenant 

Dewi;ii>t,  Rlr.  Bookseller,  Huddersfield 
Dewhurst,  Rev.  John 
♦Dickinson,  F.  H.  Esq. 
tDisiiey,  Rev    J.  Moy,  Ireland 
*Diuisdale, Charles, Esq. Essendon  f  lace, 

Herts. 
Dingwall,  Charles,  Esq. 
Dixon,  Rev.  James,  Sheffield 
Dixon,  Rev.  Robert,  King  Wm.  Coll. 

Isle  of  Man 
•Dobson,  —  Esq.  Liverpool 
Dodd,  Rev.  W.  Newcastle-on-Tyne 
*Dodgson,  Rev.  C.  Croft,  Yorkshire 
*Dodsworth,  Hev.  William 
tDonkin,  W.  F.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll. 


14 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Donne,  Rev.  Jas.  Bedford 

Uornford,  Rev.  J.  Plymtrec,  Devon 

Douglas,  Rev.  H.  Whickham,  Durham 

Dovvnes,  Rev.  J. 

*Downing,  Rev.  H. 

Drummond,  Henry,  Esq.  Albury  Park, 

Guildford 
Drummond,  Rev.  Arthur,  Charlton 
Drummond,  Rev.  Spencer  R.  Brighton 
Drummond,  Rev.  R.  Peering 
Drummond,  Colonel,  Brighton 
Dry,  Rev.  Thos.  Forest,  Walthamstead 
Duffield,     Rev.     R.     Frating,     near 

Colchester 
*Dugard,  Rev.  Geo.  Manchester 
tDukes,  R.  M.  Esq.  Lincoln  Coll. 
Dundas,  Wm.  Pitt,  Esq.  Edinburgh 
tDunn,  John, Esq.  Advocate,  Aberdeen 
Dunraven,  Earl  of, 
*Dunster,  Rev.  Rlr.  Tottenham 
Durnford,  Rev.  Francis,  Eton  College 
Dyer,  Rev,  J.  H.  VValtham,  Essex 
*Dyke,  Rev.  Henry,  Cottisford,  Oxen. 
Dymock,  Rev.  J.  Rector  of  Roughton 
Dyne,  Rev.  J.  B.  Highgate 
•Dyson,  Rev.  C.  Dogmersfield 
Dyson,  Rev.  F.  Tidworth 


Edmonstoue,  Rev.  C.  St.  Mary's  Marl- 
borough, Wilts 
Edwardes,  Stephen,  Esq.  Streaiham 
*Edwards,  Rev.  A.  Magd.  Coll. 
Edwards,  \V.  E.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll. 
Eedle,  Rev.  Edward  Brested,  Bognor 
Eland,  Rev.  H.  G.  Bedminster,  Bristol 
Elder,  Rev.  Edward,  Balliol  Coll. 
Eldridge,  Rev.  J.  A .  Bridlington,  Yorkshire 
Eley,  Rev.  H,  Aldham,  Es.sex 
Ellacombe,  H.  N.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll. 
tEllicott,  C.  J.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll. 
Ellison.Rev.N.T.HuntspilljBridgewater 
Ellon  Episcopal  Chapel  Library 
*Ellon,  Rev.  Mr.  G.  N.  B. 
Elwes,  C.  C.  Esq.  Bath 
Elwes,  J.  M.  Esq. 
Elphin,  Ven.  Archdeacon  of,  Ardcarnes 

Boyle,  Ireland 
Elton,  A.  Esq.  Clevedon 
Emmanuel  College  Library,  Cambridge 
*Erskine,  Hon.  and  Rev.  H.  D.  Kirby 

Underdale,  Yorkshire 
Eslcourt,  T.  G.  Bucknall,   Esq.  M.P. 

Estcourt,  Gloucestershire 
Estcourt,  Rev.  E.  E.  Cirencester 
Ethelston,  Rev.  C.  W.  Uplyme,  Lyme 

Regis 
Etough,  Rev.  Dr.  Claydon,  Ipswich 
*Evans,  Herbert  N.  M.D.  Hampstead 
Evans,  Rev.  W.  Burlton  Court 
*Evans,  Rev.  T.  S.  Brompton 
Evans,  Rev.  Hugh,  Durham 
Evetts,  T.  Esq.  C.  C.  C. 
Ewing,   Rev.    A.   St.   John's    Chapel, 

Forres 
Exeter,  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  of 
Ewing,  Rev.  VV.  Lincoln  Coll. 


East,  Rev.  E.  Magdalen  Hall 
Eaton  and  Sons,  Booksellers,  Worcester 
Eaton,  W.  Esq.  Merton  Coll. 
Eden,  Rev.  R.  Rochford,  Leigh,  Essex 
Edge,  Rev.  W.J.  Waldringfield,  Wood- 
bridge 
Edgell,  Rev.  E.  East  Hill,  Frome 
Edinburgh,  University  of 
Edmonstone,  Sir  Archibald,  Bart. 


*Faber,   Rev.   F.  W.    Elton   Rectory, 
Stilton,  Huntingdonshire 


SUBSCRIBEUS. 


Ij 


Fdber,  Rev.  J.  C.  Ciicklade,  Uindon, 

Wilts 
Fallow,  Rev.  T.  M, 
*Faiebrotlier,    Rev.    Thomas,     Aston, 

Birmingham 
*Farrer,  James  William,  Efq. 
Fawkes,  Mrs.  the  Terrace,  Putney 
Faulkner,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Doncaster 
Fawcett,  Rev.  .las.  Leeds 
Fearon,  Rev.  D.  R. 
Felix,  Rev.  Peter 

Fellowes,  Rev.  C.  Shottesham,  Norfolk 
Fellows,     Mrs.     Money    Hill     House, 

Rickmansvvorth,  Hertfordshire 
Fenton,  Rev.  G.  L.  Lilleshall,  Shiffnal, 

Salop,  (Aiigiistine) 
Fenwick,  Rev.  M.  J.  Donegal 
Fernley,    John,    Esq.    Stanley    Grove, 

near  Manchester 
Few,  Robert,  Esq. 

Field,  Rev.  S.  P.  High  Beech,  Essex 
tField,  T.  Esq.  B.A.  St.  John's  CoH. 

Carab. 
Fielding,  Rev.  H.  near  Horncastle 
Finch,  Miss  C. 

*Fisher,  Rev.  W.  A.  Hilmore,  Cork 
Fitzgerald,  Rev.  A.  Cailovv 
Fitzgerald,  C.  R.  Esq. 
Fitzherbert,    Rev.    Alleyne,    Ashbourn, 

Derbyshire 
Fitzroy,  Rev.August.  Fakenham,  Suffolk 
Fleming,  J.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll.  Camb. 
Fletcher,  Rev.  C.  Southwell 
Fletcher,  Sir  Henry,  Bart.  Ashley  Park, 

Walton  on  Thames 
"Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  K.  Bombay 
Floyer,  Rev.  T.  B.  Oldershaw,  Lichfield 
Foley,  Henry,  Esq.  Worcester 
Forbes,  the  Hon.  Walter,  Lord  Forbes, 

residing  at  Castle  Forbes,  N.  B. 
Ford,  Rev.  J.  Bailey,  near  Exeter 
Ford,  Wm.  Esq. 
*Ford,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Islington 
Forester,    Hon.    and     Rev.    Orlando, 

Brazeley,  Shiffnoll 
*Formby,  Rev.  R.  Brasenose  Coll. 
Forster,Rev.C.Gaddesby  Hall, Leicester 
Forster,Rev.  H.  B.  Stratton,  Cirencester 
*  Forsyth,  Dr.  Aberdeen 
Fortescue,  Rev.  R.  IL  Bideford,  Devon 


Foskett,  Rev.  T.  M.  Enfield,  Middlesex 

Foster,  Rev.  J.  Great  Haseley 

Foster,  William,  Esq. 

Foulkes,  Rev.  H.  P.  Balliol  Coli. 

Fowler,  Rev.  H.  Liskeard,  Cornwall 

Fox,  Rev.  Charles,  Bridport 

Fox,  Mr. 

Fox,  Rev.  W.  Marsh  Chapel,  Louth, 

Lincolnshire 
Eraser,    Rev.    Robert,    St.    Stephen's, 

Canterbury 
Freeland,  F.  E.  Esq.  Chichester 
Freeman,  Rev.  H.  Peterboro' 
Freith,  F.  H.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham 
Froude,  Ven.R.H. Archdeacon  of  Totness 
Fulford,  Rev.  F.  Croydon,  Arrington, 

Camb. 
Fulford,  Rev.  J.  Exeter  Coll. 
*Furlong,  Rev.  C.  J.  Warfield,  Berks 
Fursdon,    Mrs.    Fursdon    House,    near 
Exeter 


*Gace,  Rev.FrederickAubertjMagdalen 

Hall 
*Garden,  Rev.  Francis 
Gardner,  Rev.  W.  Rochford,  Essex 
Garratt,   John,    Esq.   jun.    Farringdon 

House,  near  Exeter 
Gathercole,  Rev.  M.  A.  North  Brixton 
•Gaunt,  Rev.  C.  Isfield,  near  Uckfield 
Gaye,  Rev,  C.  H. 
*Gawthern,  Rev.  Francis  Seeker,  Exeter 

Coll. 
*Gepp,  Rev.  Geo.  Edw.  Ashbourn 
Gibbings,  Rev.  Rich.Trin.  Coll.  Dublin 
•Gibson,  J.  Esq.  Jesus  Coll.  Camb. 
*Gibson,  Rev.  W.  Fawley 
Gilbertson",  Rev.  L.  Llangorwen,  near 
Aberystwith 


1« 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Gillet,  Rev.  G.  E. 
Gilpin,  Rev.  E.  Cirencester 
Gladstone,  Rev.  John,  Liverpool 
Gla-dstone,  John,  Esq.  Fasque,  Fetter- 

cairne,  Kincardineshire 
Gladstone,  William  Ewart,  Esq.  M.P. 

Ch,  Ch.  2  copies 
Gladwin,  Rev.  C.  Liverpool 
Glanville,  Rev.  Edward  F.  Wheatfield 

Rectorj',  Tetsworth 
Glasgow,  Univeri^ity  of, 
*Glencross,  Rev.  J.  Balliol  College 
Glossop,  Rev.  Hen.  Vicar  of  Isleworth 
Glover,  Rev.  F.  A.  Dover 
Glynne,   Rev.    II.   Hawarden   Rectory, 

Flintshire 
Godfrey,  Rev.  W.  Tibberton,  Worcester 
Golding,    Rev.    Edward,     Hesseaford, 

Cornwall 
Goldsmid,  Nathaniel,  Esq.  M.A.  Exeter 

Coll. 
Gooch,    Rev.    J.    H.   Head   Master   of 

Heath  School,  Halifax 
Goodford,  C.  O.  Esq.  Eton  Coll. 
*Goodlake,  Rev.T.  W.  Pembroke  Coll. 
Goodwin,H.  Esq.Caius  Coll.  Cambridge 
Gordon,  Rev.  Osborne,  Cb.  Ch. 
Gordon,  C  S.  Esq.  Exeter 
Gordon,  H.  Esq.  Kendal 
Gother,  Rev.  A.  Chale  Rectory,  Isle  of 

Wight 
Gough,  Rev.  H.  Carlisle 
tGoulburn,  H.  Esq. 
Gould,  Rev.  R.  J.  Earnham  Royal 
Graham,  Rev.  W.  H. 
Graham,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Oxford 
Grantham  Clerical  Library 
Grant  and  Bolton,  iMes^rs.  Cooksellers, 

Dublin 
Grant  and    Son,    Messrs.    Booksellers, 

Edinburgh 
*Grant,  Rev.  Anth.  D.C.L.  Romford 
Grant,  Rtv.  James  B.  Dublin 
*Granville,  Rev.  Court,  Ma^field,  near 

Ashbouin 
Grape!,  Mr.  W.  Liverpool 
Graves,    Rev.  John,  Ashperton,  Here- 
fordshire 
Gray,  Rev.  R.  Old  Park,  Durham 
Green,  Rev.  H.  Cople,  Bedfordshire 


tGreen,  Rev.  J.  H.  Swepstone 
Green,  Rev,  M.J.  Lincoln  Coll. 
Greene,  R.  Esq.  Lichfield 
*Greenwell,  W.   Esq.   St.  John's  Coll. 

Cambridge 
"Gregory,  Rev.  G.  Sandford,  Devon 
Gregory,  R.  Esq.  Corpus 
Gresley,  Rev,  Sir  Nigel,  Bart, 
Gresley,  Rev.  W.Lichfield 
*Gresley,  Rev.  J.  M.  Exeter  Coll. 
Greswell,  Rev.  R.  Worcester  Coll. 
Gretlon,  Rev.  R.  H.  Nantwich,  Cheshire 
*Grey,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Francis,  Morpeth, 

Northumberland 
Grey,    Hon.   and   Rev,  John,   Wooler, 

Northumberland 
Griffiths,  Rev.  John,  Ch.  Ch.  Oxford 
tGrub, George, Esq.  Advocate,  Aberdeen 
Grueber,  Rev.  C.  S.  Magd.  Hall 
*Guillemard,  Rev.  J.  St.  John's  Col!. 
*Guillemard,  Rev.  H.  P.  Trinity  Coll. 
Gunner,  Rev.  W.  Winchester 


Hafrenden,Miss,  Langford Hall,  Newark 
Haight,  Rev.  B.  L  New  York,  U.  S. 
Haines,  Herbert,  Esq.  Hampstead 
Haines,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Oxford 
Halcombe,  John,  Esq. 
Hale,  Rev.  G.  C.  Hillingdon 
*Hale,  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Charter  House 
Hall,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Cambridge 
Hall,  Rev.  Adam,  Drumbair,  Ayrshire 
*Hall,  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Isle  of  Alan 
Hall,  Rev.  S.  C, 
Hall,  Kev,  W.Manchester 
Hall,  Rev,  W,  J. 


SUBSCIUBKHS. 


17 


'Hallen,   Rev.  G.    Rusliock   Medonte, 

Upper  Canada 
Halliburton,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Coldstream 
Hahon,  Mr. 

•Hamilton,  Rev.  Jas.  Beddington 
'Hamilton,   Rev.  Waller  Kerr,  Merton 
Coll.  Chaplain  to  the  Bp.  of  Salisbury 
tHannah,  Rev.  J.  Lincoln  Coll. 
Hannafoid,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Exeter 
Harcourt,    Rev.    Vernon,    West    Dean 

House,  Midhurst 
•Harding,  Rev.  I.  St.Ann's,  Blackfriars 
Hardisty,  Rev.  W.  L.  43,  GreatMarl- 

bro'  Street,  London 
Hardwick,  Rev.  Charles,  Gloucester 
Harington,    Rev.    Rich.     Principal    of 

Brasenose  Coll. 
Harley,  John,  Esq.  Wain  Wemni,  Ponty 

Pool 
♦Harness,  Rev.  Wra. 
Harper,   Rev.  S.  B.   Donnington,  near 

Newbury 
•Harper,  T.  N.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll. 
Harper,  E.  N.  Esq    Kensington 
Harper,  Rev.  H.  J.  C.  Mortimer,  near 

Reading 
Harrington,  Rev.  E.  Exeter 
Harris, Hon.  and  Rev.C.A.Wilton.Wilts 
Harris.  Rev.  Thomas 
Harris,  Rev,  J.  City  of  London  School 
Harris,  Rev.  J.  J.   W.  Tnworth,    near 

Kelvedon,  Essex 
Harrison,  Benj.  Esq.Clapham  Common 
Harrison,  Benson,  E<q.  Ambleside 
•Harrison,   Rev.   B.  Ch.  Ch.  Domestic 

Chaplain  to  the  Abp.  of  Canterbury 
Harrison,  Rev.  H.  Gouldhurst,  Kent 
Harrison,  W.  Esq. 
Harter,  Rev.  G.  Manchester 
Hartley,  L.  L.  Esq.  Middleton  Lodge, 

near  Richmond,  Yorkshire 
Hartnell,  E.  G.  Esq. 
•Hatherell,  Rev.  J. W.  D.D.  Charmouth 

Rectory,  Dorset 
Hassells,  Rev.  C.  S.  Newcastle-under- 

Lyme 
Hawker,  Rev.  R.  S.  Moorwinston, Corn- 
wall 
•Hawker,  Rev.  J.  M.  Balliol  Coll. 
*Hawkins,  Rev.  Edward,  Jamaica 


Hawkins,  Rev.  E.  Newport,  Monmouth- 
shire 
Hawkins,  Rev.  Ernesl,  Exeter  Coll. 
Hawks,  Rev.  W.  Gateshead,  Durham 
"Hayward,  W.  W.  Esq. 
Hazlehurst,    R.  K.   Esq.  Trinity   Coll. 

Cambridge 
Head,  —  Esq.  Exeter 
*Heale,  S.  W.  Esq.  Queen's 
Heath,  Christopher,  Esq. 
*Heathcote,  Rev.  C.  J.  Clapton 
Heathcote,  Rev.  G.  North  Tamerton 
tHeathcote,   Rev.   George,   Connington 

Rectory,  Stilton,  Hunts 
*  Heathcote,  Rev.  W.  B.  New  Coll. 
Heaven,  Rev.  Hudson  Grosett,  Bishop's 

College,  Bristol 
Hedley,  Rev.  T.  A.  Gloucester 
Hemsley,Mr.W.Ke3woith,  Nottingham 
Henderson,  Rev.  T.  Messing,  Kelvedon 
•Henderson,  W.  G.  Esq.  Magd.  Coll. 
Hendeison,  H.  R.  Esq. 
Henn,  Rev.  W.  Burton  Agnes 
Hepburn,  T.  R.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 
Hervey,    Hon.  and   Rev.  Lord  Arthur, 

Ickworth 
Heslop,  Rev.  A.  Preston,  Lancashire 
Hewett,  Rev.P.Binstead,  Isle  of  Wight 
*Hewett,  J.  W.  Esq.  Exeter 
Hewitt,  T.  S.  Esq.  Worcester  Coll. 
Heycock,  Rev.  Owston,  Leicestershire 
•Hibbert,  Miss  E.  S. 
Hildyard,   Rev.  James,   Christ'g  ColL 

Cambridge 
Hill,  Rev.  Edw.  Ch.Ch. 
Hillman,  G.  Esq.  Magd.  Coll.  Camb. 
Hindle,  Rev.  Joseph,  Higham 
Hinde,  Rev.  Thos.  Liverpool 
tHinde,  W.  H.  F.  Esq.  University  Coll. 
Hine,  Rev.  H.  T.  Bury  St.  Edmunds 
Hingeston,  James  Ansley,  Esq. 
Hippisley.J.H.Esq.  Lambourne,  Berks 
Hippisley,  Rev.    R.    W.    Stow   in    the 

Wold,  Gloucestershire 
Hoare,  W.  H.  Esq.  Ashurst  Park,  Tun- 
bridge  Wells 
Hobhouse,  Rev.  E.  Fellow  of  Mert.  Coll. 
Hobhouse,  Rev.  R.  Bridgenorth 
Hobson,    Rev.    W.    W.    Bedingham, 
Norfolk 


18 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Hocking,  Richard,  Esq.  Penzance 
Hodgson,   J  as.    Esq.    Trinity    College, 

Cambridge 
Hodgson,  Rev.  Chas.  Bodmin 
Hodgson,  Rev.  J.Geo.  St.Peter's,Thanet 
Hodgson,  Rev.  John,  St.  Peter's,  Thanet 
*Hodgson,  Rev.  J.  F.  Horsham 
*  Hodgson,  Rev.  H. 
Hodgson,  W.  Esq.  Wanstead 
Hogan,  Rev.  J.  Tetbury,  Gloucestershire 
Hogben,  Mr.  Geo.  Sheerness 
Hogg,  Rev.  J.  R.  Brixham 
Holden,  Rev.  Geo.  Liverpool 
*Holden,  Rev.  \V.  R.  Worcester 
Holden,  Mr.  A.  Bookseller,  Exeter 
Holden,  Rev.  Henry,  Upminster,  Essex 
Holder,  the  Misses,  Torquay 
Holdsworth,  Miss  M.  Dartmouth 
*Hole,  Rev.   George,  Chumleigh,  near 

Exeter 
Holland,  Rev.  J.  E.  M.  Stoke  Bliss,  near 

Tenbury 
Hollis,Rev.G.  P.  Duddington,  Somerset 
Holmes,  Hon.  Mrs.  A'Court 
Holmes,  Rev.  Peter,  Plymouth 
Holthouse,  Rev.  C.  S. 
*Ilope,    A.    B.   Esq.    Trinity    College, 

Cambridge 
Hope,    Jas.   R.  Esq.   D.C.L.    Merton 

College 
Hopwood,   Rev.    H.    Rector  of  Bothal 

Morpeth,  Northumberland 
Hook,  Rev.  Dr.  W.  F.  Leeds 
Hopkins,  Rev.  A.  Clent.  Worcestershire 
*Horncastle  Clerical  Society 
Hornby,  Rev.  James,  Winwick,  War- 
rington 
Hornby,  Rev.  Wm.  St.  Michael's  Gar- 

stang,  Lancashire 
Hornby,  R.  W.  B.  Esq.  Manor  House, 

He  worth,  York 
Horner,  Chas.  Esq.  Mil!  Park,  Somerset 
Horner,  Rev.  John,  Mells,  Somerset 
*Horsfall,  Rev.  A.  Grange, Derby 
Horsfall,  J.  Esq.  Standard  Hill,  Notts 
♦Horsley.  Rev.  J.  W.  Ville  of  Dunkirk, 

Faversham,  Kent 
*Hoskins,  Rev.  W.  E.  Canterbury 
Hotham,  Rev.  C.  Patrington,  Hull 
Hotham,  W.  F.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 


Hotham,    Rev.  J.    G.  Sutton-at-home, 

Dartford 
Houghton,  Rev.  J.  Matching 
Houghton,    Rev.     W,    Hartford,    near 

Northwich,  Cheshire 
Howard,  Rev.  N.  A.  Plymouth 
Howard,  Rev.  W.  Great  Witchingham, 

Norfolk 
*Howard,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Wm.  Whiston, 

Rotherhara,  Yorkshire 
Howell,  Rev.  Alexander,  Southampton 
Howell,  Rev.  H.  Merton  Coll. 
Howell,  Rev.  A.  Sedgley 
•Hubbard,  Rev.  Thos,  Leytonstone 
Huddleston,  Rev.  G.  J. 
•Hue,  Dr. 
♦Hughes,  Rev.  H. 

Hulton,   Rev.   Campbell    Grey,  Man- 
chester 
Hulton,Rev.  W. 
Hunt,  Rev.  R.  S.  Exeter  Coll. 
Hunter,    Rev.    A.    Alvechurch,    Wor- 
cestershire 
Hunter,  Rev.  W.  St.  John's  Coll. 
»Huntingford,    Rev.    G.   W.    College, 

Winchester 
Hutchins,  Rev.  James,  Telscombe 
Hutchins,  Rev.  W.  Bath 
Hutchinson,     Rev.      Cyril,      Batsford, 

Gloucestershire 
Hutchinson,  Rev.  C.  Firle 
Hutchinson,  Rev.  James,  Chelmsford 
Hutchinson,  Rev.  T.  Lymm,  Cheshire 
Hutchison,    W.   Esq.    Trinity   College, 

Cambridge 
Hutton,  Rev.  W.  Warfon,  Lancaster 


tJackson,  Rev.  J.  Islington 
Jackson,    Rev.     Dr.     Lowther,    near 
Penrith 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


19 


Jackson,  Rev.  W.  Ardley  Rectory 
Jackson,  Rev.  W.  D.  Cli.  Ch.  Hoxton 
tJacobson,  Rev.  W.  Magd.  Hall 
JafFray,  Mr.  Jas.  Bookseller,  Berwick 
James,  Rev.  J.  Pinhoe,  Exeter 
James,    Rev.    E.   Prebendary  of  Win- 
chester 
Janvrin,  Rev.  James  H.  Winchester 
Jeanes,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Exeter 
Jefferson,  Rev.  J.  D.  Thorganby,  York- 
shire 
*Jeffray,  Rev.  L.  W.  Preston 
Jeffreys,  Rev.   Henry  Anthony,  Hawk- 
hurst,  Kent 
•Jelf,Rev.RichardWilliam,D.D.  Canon 

of  Ch.  Ch. 
Jelf,  Rev.  W.  E.  Ch.  Ch. 
Jellott,  H.  Esq. 
Jennett,  Mr. 
Jennings,  Rev.  M.  J. 
Jennings,  Rev.  J.  Prebendary  of  West- 
minster 
Jennings,  Mrs.  Driffield 
Jeremie,  Rev.   J.  A.  Trinity  College, 

Cambridge 
Jerrard,  Rev.  M.  Norwich 
Jersey,  The  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of 
lllingworth,  Rev.  E.  A. 
Inge,  Rev.  T.  R.  Southse-a 
Inglis,  Sir  R.H.Bart.  M,P. 
Ingram,  Rev.  Geo.  Chedburgh,  Suffolk 
*Ingram,  Rev.  R. 
Johnson,  C.  W.  Esq.  Balliol  Coll. 
Johnson,  Miss 
Johnson,   Rev.  E.  M.   Brooklyn,  New 

York 
Johnson, INIanuel  John, Esq.  Magd. Hall, 

Radcliffe  Observer 
Johnson,  i\Ir.  Bookseller,  Cambridge 
Johnfon,  W.  F.  Esq. 
Jones,  H.  W.  Esq.  Cheltenham 
*  Jones,    Ven.    H.  C.    Archdeacon    of 

Essex 
Jones,  Rev.  D.  Stamford 
Jones,  Rev.  E.  Wigan 
Jones,  Rev.  Edward,  Fatherwell,  near 

West  Mailing,  Kent 
Jones,  Rev.  J.  Hereford 
Jones,  Rev.  H.  J.  Edinburgh 
Jones,  Rev.  H.  Llanfaes,  Beaumaris 

li 


*Jones,     Rev.    R.    J.     Newcastle-on- 

Tyne 
Jones,  W.  B.  Esq.  Magdalen  Hall 
Jones,  Rev.  R.  Branxton,  Coldstream, 

N.B. 
Jones,  Rev.  W.  Henry,  Alderly  Congle 

ton,  Cheshire 
Jones,  E.  K.  Esq.  28,  Mark  Lane 
Irby,  Hon.  and  Rev.  F.  Hythe 
*Irons,  Rev.  W.  J.  Brompton 
*Irvine,  Rev.  A.  Leicester 
Irvine,  Rev.  J.  Knowle,  near  Bristol 
Irving,  Geo.  Esq.  Newton,  Edinburgli 
Isham,  Rev.  A.  All  Souls  Coll. 


Karslake,  Rev.  W.  Colebrook,  Devon 

Keble,  Miss 

Keble,  Rev.  T.  Bisley,  Gloucestershire 

Keigwin,  Rev.  James  P.  Wadham 
College 

Kekewich,  S.  T.  Esq.  Peamore 

Kempe,  Rev.  G.  Salterton 

Kendal,  Rev.  J.  H.  F.  Kirkby  Lons- 
dale 

Kenney,  Rev.  F.  Ch.  Ch. 

Kenrick,  Rev.  J.  Horsham 

*Kent,  Rev.  G.  D.  Sudbrooke,  near 
Lincoln 

Kenyon,  Lord 

Kenyon,  Robt.  Esq.  D.C.L.  All  Souls 
College 

Kerr,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Lord,  Dittisham 

Kerrier  Clerical  Club,  Cornwall 

Keyraer,  Rev.  N.  Hertford 

Kindersley,  R.  T.  Esq. 

King,  Ven.  Archdeacon 

King,  R.  P.  Esq.  Bristol 

King's  College  Library,  London 

2 


20 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


•Kirwan,  Rev.  E.  Tiverton 

Kitson,     Rev.    G.    Antony    Vicarage, 

Cornwall 
Knatchhull.Rev.H.E,  Elmham,  Norfolk 
Knight,    Rev.   T.    H.    Priest   Vicar  of 

Exeter  Cathedral 
Knight,  Rev.  W.  Worcester  Col!. 
Knollys,  Rev.  Erskine 
*Knowles,  E.  H.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll. 
Knowles,  J.  L.  Esq.  Pembroke  Coll. 
Knox,    Rev.    H.     B.    Monk's    Eleigh, 

Hadleigh 
Kyle,  Rev.  John  Torrens,  Cork 


Lace,  F.  John  Esq.  I ngthorpe  Grange, 

Yorkshire 
Lacon,  F.  Esq.  Worcester  Coll. 
*Laing,  Rev.  David 
Lake,  W.  C.  Esq.  Balliol  Coll. 
*Lampen,  Rev.  R.  Probus,  Cornwall 
Lance,  Rev.  Edw.  Buckland  St.  Mary, 

Somerset 
*Landor,  Rev.  R.  E.  Birlingham 
*Landor,  Rev.  C.  W.  Over-Whitacre, 

Warwickshire 
Landon,  Rev.  E.  H.  St.  Phillips, Dalston 
Lane,  Mrs.  F. 
Lane,  Rev.  C.  Deal 
Lane,  Rev.  E.  Gloucester 
Lane,  Rev.  C.  Kennington 
Lane,  Rev.  Samuel,  Frome 
Langbridgc,  Mr.  Birmingham 
Langdon,  Rev.  G.  H.  Oving 
•Langdon,  Augustus,  Esq. 
Langmore,  W.  Esq.  M.D. 
*Laprimaudaye,  Rev.  C.  J.  Leyton 


Latham,  Rev.    Henry,  Selmeston,  Sus- 
sex 
Latimer,  Rev.  G.  B.  P.  Tyoemouth 
Law,    Rev.    L   T.    Chancellor    of    the 

Diocese  of  Litchfield 
Law,    Rev.    W.  T.    East    Brent,    near 

Cross,  Somerset 
Lawrle,  A.  J.  C.  Esq. 
LawsoD,  Rev.  C.  Richmond 
Lawson,  Rev.  Robt. 
Lawson,  Rev.  W.  Delancey,  Oakham 
Laylon,  Rev.  F.  W.  H.  Islington 
Leak,  J.  Bookseller,  Alford,  Lincolnshire 
Lechmere,  Rev,  A.  B.  Welland,  Wore. 
Lee,  Rev.  S.  Sidmouth 
Lee,  Rev.  W.  Trinity  Coll.  Dublin 
tLeefe,  Rev.  Aiidley  End,  Essex 
Lefroy,  Rev.  A.  C. 
Legge,  Lady  Anne 
*Legge,  Rev.  Henry,  East  Lavant,  near 

Chichester 
Legge,  Rev.  W.  Ashtead 
Leigh,  Stratford,  Esq. 
Leigh,    Wm.   Esq.   Little   Aston   Hall, 

Lichfield 
*Lcighton,  Rev.  F.  K.  All  Souls  Coll. 
Le  Mesurier,  John,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 
Lepage,  I\Ir.  Calcutta 
*Leslie,  Rev.  Charles 
Leslie,  Mr.  Bookseller,  London 
Lewis,  Rev.  David,  Jesus  Coll. 
Lewis,  Rev.  G.  Dundee 
Lewis,  Rev.  R.  Farway,  near  Honiton 
*Lewis,    Rev.    T.    T.    Aymestry,   neai 

Leominster 
fLewthwaite,  Rev.  Geo.  jun.  Adel,  near 

Leeds 
Ley,  Rev.  Jacob  S.  A&hprington,  Devon 
Lev,  R.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coil. 
•Library  of  Christ's  Coll.  Cambridge 
Library  of  Congress,  \Vashington 
*Library  of  Domus  Scholarum,  Wotton- 

under-Edge 
LifTord,    Right    Hon.    Lord    Viscount, 

Astley  Castle,  near  Coventry 
Light  and  Ridler,  Bristol 
Lightfoot,  Rev.  N.  Slockleigh,  Devon 
Lindsay,     Hon.     Colin,     Haigh     Hall, 

Wigan 
Linzee,  Rev.  E.  H. 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


21 


Liiler,Rev.  E..  Poynton,nearMacclesfield 
Littleihales,  Rev.  J.  New  Coll. 
*Liveing,  Rev.  Henry  Thomas,  Stoke  by 

Nayland,  Sufi'olk 
Liverpool  Library 
fLloyd,  Rev.  E.  Badgeworth 
Lloyd,  Rev.  H.  Pentrevoglas,  N.  Wales 
Lloyd,  Rev.  John  F.  Ballylany,  Rich- 
hill,  Ireland 
Lloyd, Rev.  R.W.Wilnecote,  Tamworth 
Lloyd-Carew,  Rev.  H.  Pembrokeshire 
Lockwood,  Rev.  John,  Rector  of  King- 
ham,  Oxon 
Lockwood,  Rev.  Rlr.  Coventry 
Lockyer,  E.  L.   Esq.  Emmanuel  Coll. 

Cambridge 
•Lodge,  Rev.  B. 
London  Institution,  The 
London  Library,  49,  Pall  Mall 
Long,  W.  Esq.  Bath 
Losh,  Miss,  Woodside,  Carlisle 
tLousada,  P.  M.  Esq.  Merton  Coll. 
Low,  Rev.  R.  Ahasenogh,  Ireland 
Lowder,  Rev.  C.  F.  Fetbury,  Gloucester- 
shire 
*Lowe,  John  Wni.  Esq. 
Lowe,  Rev.  T.  Oriel  Coll. 
Lowe,  Rev.  R.  JMisterton,  Somerset 
Lowe,  Rev.  T.  H.  Dean  of  Exeter 
Lowe,  Rev.  E.  F.  Madeira 
Lowe,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Wimborne 
Lucas,  W.  H.  Esq.  iMerton  Coll. 
Lumsden,  Rev.  H.  St.  Peter's,  Ipswich 
Lund,  Mr.  St.  John's  Coll.  Cambridge 
Lundie,  Rev.  W.  Compton,  Berwick-on- 

Tweed 
Luscombe,  Rev.  E.  K.  Plymouth 
Lush,  A.  Esq. 

Lutener,  Rev.  T.  B.  Shrewsbury 
Luxmore,  Rev.  J.  II.  M. 
Lyall,  Rev.  Alfred 
Lyall,    \'en.    VV.    R.    Archdeacon    of 

Colchester 
Lysons,  Rev.  Samuel,  Hempstead,  Glou- 
cestersliire 


Maberly,  Rev.  T.  A. 

*M'Call,  Rev.  E.  Brightsone,   Isle  of 
Wight 

Macauley,  Rev.  S.  llerrick 

Mac-Donnell,  Rev.  J.  Dublin 

*Macfarlane,  Rev.J.  D.Frant,Tunbridge 
Wells 

aiachlachlan,   Stewart,  and  Co.  Edin- 
burgh 

Machlnchlan,    Rev.  A.  N.    Campbell, 
Kelvedon,  Essex 

Maclean,  Rev.  H.  Coventry 

Maclean,  Rev.  J.  Sheffield 

Mackenzie,  L.  Rl.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 

tMackenzie,    A.    C.     Esq.    St.    John's 
College 

Mackinson,Rev.T.C.  Colonial  Chaplain, 
New  South  Wales 

*Macmullen,  Rev.  R.  G.  C.C.C. 

JMaddy,  Rev.  B.  Shrewsbury 

Madox,  Wm.  Esq.   154,  Albany  Street, 
Regent's  Park 

Magdalene  College  Library 

M'Clintoch,  G.  F.  Esq.   Bengal   Civil 
Service 

Mahon,  Rev.  C.  Foit  St.  George,  Ma- 
dras 

'^Rlajor,  Rev.  Dr.  King's  Coll.  London 

M'lver,  Rev.  Wm.  West  Derby 

Maitland,  Rev.  S.  R. 

Maitland,  Rev.   P.  Blackburn,  Lanca- 
siiire 

INlale,  Rev.  Edward,  Birmingham 

*iM'Laren,  INIajor,  Portobello,  Greenock 

Mallory,  Rev.  G. 

Manley,  N.  M.  Esq.   St.  John's  Coll. 
Camb. 

iNIanUj  Rev.  W.  ftloxon,   British  Chap- 
lain, Coblentz 

Manning,  C.  Esq. 

Manning,   Ven.    Hen.    Archdeacon    of 
Chichester,  Lavington,  Sussex 

Manning,  Rev.  G.  W. 

Margetts,  Rev.  H.  Huntingdon 

Mavklaiid,  J.  H.  E=q.  Bath 

Marklaud,  Thomas    Esq.  Manchester 

*Marriott,  Rev.  J.  Bradfield,  Reading 

Marriott,   Ven.    F.   A.    Archdeacon    o. 
Tasmania 

Marsden,  Rev.  .\.  Gargrave 


O'l 


SUBSCKIBEIiS. 


Marsh,    Uev.    U.    A.   Trinity    College, 

Cambridge 
Marshall,  Rev.  Edward,  C.C.C. 
Marshall,    Rev.     Eilward,     Cranvvell, 

Sleaford,  Lincoln 
Marshall,  Rev.  T.   W.  Charlton,  near 

Shaftesbury 
Marsham,    Rev.    G.    F.    J.   AUington, 

Metidstcine 
Martin,  Rev.  John,  Sidney  Sussex  Coll. 

Cambridge 
Martin,  Rev.  Richard,  Menheniot 
Martyn,  Rev.  J.  Exeter 
Mason,    Rev.    A.    W.    Booking,    near 

Braintree 
"Mason,  Rev.  W.  Normanton 
Massiiigberd,Rev.F.C.Ormsby,Spilsby 
Master,  \V.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll. 
Masters,  Rev.  J.  S.  Greenwich 
Matheson,  G.  F.  Esq. 
Mathisnn,  Rev.  W.  C.  Fellow  of  Trinity 

Coll.  Camb. 
Maunsell,  Rev.  F.  R.  Castle  Island 
May,Rcv.G.LiddiDgton, Swindon,  Wilts. 

Mayo,  A.  Esq.  Oriel 

Mayor,  Rev.  C.  Wrentham,  Suffolk 

Mayow,Rev.  M.  W.  Market  Livington, 

Devizes 
Mc  Ewen,  Rev.  A.  Semington,  Melk- 

sham,  Wilts. 
*Meade,  Rev.  E.  Stratford  on  Avon 
*Medwyn,  Hon.  Lord,  Edmburgh 
*Mence,  Rev.  J.  W. 
Mendham,  Rev.  J.  Clophill,  Beds. 
Menzies,  Rev.  F.  Hambleden 
Meredith,  Rev.R.  F.  Wore. Coll. 
Merewether,   Rev.  Francis,  Whitwick, 

Leicestershire 
"Merival,    Rev,    C.    St.    John's    Coll. 

Cambridge 
*Merriman,  Rev.  N.  J.  Street,  Somerset 
*Metcalf,  Rev.  W.  L.  Scarborough 
*Metcalfe,  Rev.  W.  Harleston,  Norfolk 
M'Ewen,  Rev.  A.  Semington,  Wilts 
M'Glashen,  Mr.  Jatnes,  Dublin 
Milburne,  Utv.  William,  Durham 
Millett,  Rev.  H.  D.  near  Marlborough 
Milliken,  Rev.  Rich.  Compton,  Sussex 
*Mill,  Rev.  Dr. 
Mdler.  Rev.  C.  Harlow,  Essex 


Miller,  Rev.  John,  Worcester  Coll. 

Milles,  Rev.  T.  Tenterden,  Kent 

Millner,  Rev,  W.  Bristol 

Mills,  I.  J.  Esq.  Lexden  Park 

Mills,  Rev.  T.  Gloucester 

Milward,  Rev.  Hen.  Parlton,  Somerset 

Rlinchin,  O.  H.  Esq.  Dublin 

Mittre,  Rev.  Gopal  Chunder,  Bishop's 

Coll.  Calcutta 
*Moberly,  Rev.  Dr.  Winchester 
IMoney,  llev.  Kirle  E.  A. 
Monro,  Rev.  Edward,  Oriel  Coll. 
*Moody,  Rev.  Henry  R.Chartham, near 

Canterbury 
Moore,    Rev.   Arthur,    Stratton,  Glou- 
cestershire 
Moorsom,  Captain,  Lowndes  Square 
fiMoorsom,  Rev.  R.  Seaham  Vicarage, 

Durham 
Mordaunt,  Sir  John,  Bart. 
More,    Rev,   R.    H.   G.   Larden    Hall, 

Shropshire 
Morgan,  Rev.  J.  P.  C.  Llangwyryfor 
Morgan,  Rev.  J. 

Morrice,  J.  Esq  Sidcliff,  near  Sidraouth 
Morrell,  Baker,  Esq.  St.  Giles,  Oxford 

Morrell,  F.  Esq.  St.  Giles,  Oxford 

*Morrell,  Rev.  G.  K.  St.  John's 

Morrison,  J.  Esq.  Glasgow 

*Morris,  Rev.  T.  E.  Ch.  Ch. 

aiorton.  Rev.  M.  C.  Exeter  Coll, 

Morton,  Mr.  T.  N.  Boston 

Mosse,  Rev.  S.  T.  Ashbourn,  Derby- 
shire 

*Mozley,  Rev.  Thomas,  Cholderton 

Mozley,  H.  Esq.  Derby 

Munby,  Joseph,  Esq.  York 

Murray,  C.  R.  Scott,  E^q.  1 1 ,  Cavendish 
Square,  London 

INIirrray,  Rev.  James,  London 

Murray,  F.  H.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 

Murray,  Rev.  G.  E.  All  Souls  Coll. 

Mushet,  Robert,  Esq. 

Muskett,  Mr.  C.  Bookseller,  Norwich 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


23 


Neave,  Rev.  H.  L.  Epping 
•Needham,    Hon.    Mr.    Trinity    Coll. 

Cambridge 
Nelson,  Earl,  Trinity  Coll.  Cambridge 
*Nevile,  Rev.  Charles,  Trinity  Coll. 
Newdigate,  Blrs.  Aubry,  near  Coventry 
*New,  Rev.  F.  T.  Christ  Church,  St. 

Pancras 
*New  York  Society  Library 
New  York  Theological  Seminary 
Newcastle-on-Tyne  Clerical  Society 
•Newman,    Rev.    W.   J.    Tankersley, 

Yorkshire 
Newman,  Rev.  \V.  S.  Warwick 
Newton,  Mr.  Croydon 
Nichol,  J.  Esq.  Islington 
Nicholl,   Rev.    J.    R.    Greenhill,  near 

Barnett 
•Nicholls,  Rev.  W.  L.  Clifton,  Bristol 
♦Nicholson,  Rev.  P.  C.  Leeds 
•Nicholson,  Rev.  Wm. 
Nicholson,  Miss  F.  Rochester 
•Nind,  Rev.  W.  Fellow  of  St.  Peter's, 

Cambridge 
Northcote,  Rev.  G.  B.  Exeter  Col'. 
•Northcote,  Rev.  J.  S.  C.C.C. 
Norman,  Rev.  Hugh,  Dunfanaghy 
Norwich,  Dean  and  Chapter  of 
Nunns,  Rev.  Thomas,  Leeds 
Nutt,     Rev.    Charles,    Tiverton,    near 

Bath 
•Nutt,  Mr.  D.  Bookseller,  Fleet  Street 


O'Brien,  S.  August.  Esq.  Blatherwycke 
Park,  Wansford 

O'Connell,  Rev.  A.  Dublin 

Ogilvie,  Rev.  C.  A.  D.D.  Regius  Pro- 
fessor of  Pastoral  Theology,  Oxford 

Ogle,  J.  A.  M.D.  Clinical  Professor 
of  Medicine,  Oxford 

Ogle,  Maurice,  Esq.  Glasgow 

Ogle,  Mr.  Robert,  Bookseller,  Edin- 
burgh 

Oliverson,  R.  Esq. 

Ormandey  and  Son,  Liverpool 

tOrmerod,  Geo.  Esq.  Sedbury  Park, 
Chepstow 

tOrmerod,  Rev.  Thomas  J.  Brasenose 
College 

Osborne,  J.  Esq. 

Oswald,  Alexander,  Esq. 

Oswell,  Rev.  Lloyd,  Stoulton,  near 
Worcester 

Oswell,  Edward  W.  Esq.  Wanstead, 
Essex 

Ouvry,  Rev.  P.  T. 

Owen,  Rev.  E.  Wendover 

Oxenhara,  Rev.  Nutcombe,  Medbury, 
Devon 

Oxford  Union  Society 

Oxley,  R.  D.  Esq.  Ripon,  Yorkshire 


Oakeley,     Rev.     Sir     Herbert,     Bart. 

Booking 
Oakey,  Mr.  H.  Bookseller,  Preston 
O'Brien,  Rev.  H.  Kelleshandra,  Ireland 
♦O'Brien,  Rev.  Hewitt,  Edgefield  Rec- 
tory, Norfolk 


Packe,    Mrs.    J.    Richmond   Terrace, 

Reading 
Page,  Rev.  Dr.  Gillingham,  Kent 
Page,  Rev.  Cyril 
Page,  Rev.  L.  F.  Woolpit 
Paget,  Rev.  E.   F.   Elford,  Lichfield, 

Chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of  Oxford 
Palk,  Rev.  Wm.  Ashcombe,  Devon 
Palmer,  Rev.  J. 


24 


SUBSCRIBEllS. 


Palmer,  Rev.  W.  Worcester  Coll. 

•Palmer,  Rev.  W.  Magd.  Coll. 

Palmer,  R.  Esq. 

fPalmer,  G    H.  Esq.  Lincoln's  Inn 

Panting,  Eev.  R.  Calcutta 

Panting,  T.  Esq.  Pembroke  College 

"Papillon, Rev.  John,  Lexden, Colchester 

Pardee,  Rev.  J. 

Parker,  Rev.  Charles 

Parker,    C.    Esq.    41,    Upper    Bedford 

Place 
tParker,  Rev.  W.  Appleton-le-Slreet 
tParkes,  Rev.  \V. 
Parkinson,  Rev.  J.  P.  Magd.  C'oll. 
Parkinson,  Rev.  R.  Manchester 
Pci.Iby,  Rev.  Kail 
Parmixses,  Rev.  Geo.  A.  Plymouth 
*Parsons,  Rev.  G.  L.  Benson 
*Patteson,  Hon.  Mr.  Justice 
*PattiEon,  Rev.  Mark,  Lincoln  Coll. 
Paul,  Rev.  Charles,  Bath 
Paul.G.  W.Esq.  Magd.  Coll. 
Payne,  Cornelius,  Esq. 
Payne,  Randolph,  Esq.  Magd.  Hall 
Peake,  Rev.  G.  E.  'j'aunlon 
tPeaise,  T.  Esq.  Magdalen  Coll. 
Pearson,  the  Very  Rev.  Hugh  N.  D.D. 

Dean  ot  Salisbury 
Pearson,    Rev.    Charles,     Knebworth, 

Stevenage,  Herts 
Pearson,  Rev.  H.  VV.  Guildford 
Pear>on,  Rev.  F.  T.  Duckmanton,  near 

Chestei  field 
Peck,  J.  Esq.  Temple  Combe 
Peel,  Rev.  J.  Prebendary  of  Canterbury 
*Pelly,  llev.  Theophilus,  C.C.C. 
*Penny,  Rev.  Edw.  St.  John's  Coll. 
•Peikiiis,  Rev.   B.    R.    Wotton-under- 

Edye 
Perriii,  Rev.  J.  Stockenham 

*Perry,  Mr. 

Periy,  Mr.  E.  VV.  Bookseller,  Plymoulb 

Peteis,      Rev.     rien:y,     St.     Johnlee 

Northumberland 
*Pet!ifciarr!,   Mr.    Bookseller,   Chanceiy 

Lane,  London 
Petley,    Rev.    Henry,    Glynde   Lcv.es 

Susse.\ 
i'heljjs,  Rev.  ii.   D.  'larrington,    Led- 

buiy,  Herefordshire 


Phillipps,  S.  M.  Esq. 
Phillips,  Rev.  G.  Queen's  Coll.  Cam- 
bridge 
Phillips,  Rev.  E.  Clapham 

*Piiillips,  iMr.  John,  Worthing 

Phillipps,  R.  Biddulph,  Esq.  Longworth, 
near  Ledbury,  Herefordshire 

Phippen,  Robt.  Esq.  Badgworth  Court, 
Somerset 

tPigot,  Rev.  I.  T.  Wigan 

•Pigott,  Rev.  G.  Bombay 

Pigott,  Rev.  J.  R.  Hughenden  Vicarage, 
Bucks. 

Pinckard.Wm.Esq.  Handley,Towcester 

•Pinder,    Rev.  J.    H.    Diocesan    Coll. 
Wells 

Pirie,  A.  jun.  Esq.  Aberdeen 

Piatt,  Rev.  George 

•Piatt,  T.  P.  Esq.  Liphook,  Hants 

Plumer,     Rev.     J.     J.     Swallowfieid, 
Berks 

Plummer,  Eev.  Mat.  Heworth,  Durham 

tPiumptre,  E.  H.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll. 

Pocock,  iMr.  Bookseller,  Bath 

*Pocock,  Rev.  N.  Queen's  Coll. 

Pole,    Rev.   R.    Chandos,   Radbourne, 
Derby 

*Pole,  E.  S.  Chandos,  Esq.  Radbourne 
Hall,  Derby 

'•■Ponsonby,  Hon.  Walter 

*Poole,  Rev.  J.  Enmore,  near  Bridge- 
water 

fPooIey,  Rev.  M.  Scotter 

I'ope,   T.   A.    E^q.    Jesus    Coll.    Cam- 
bridge 

Popham,  Rev.  John,  Chilton,  Hungerford 

Popham,  Wm.  Esq. 

Porcher,  Charles,  Esq. 

Portal,  Melville,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 

Porter,  Hev.  Chas.  Stamford 

Porter.  Henry,  Esq.  Winslade,  Exeter 

Portmau,  Rev.  F.  B.  Staple  FUzpaine, 
Somerset 

Pountney,  Rev.  H.  Wolverhampton 

Povah, Rev.  J.  V. 

Powell,  Arthur,  Esq. 

*Powfcll,  Chas.  Esq.  Speldhurst 

Powell,  Rev.  H.  T.  Coventry 

-^Powull,  Rev.  Edw.  Arnett,  AnipthiU 

*  Powell,  Rev.  J.  C.  a 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


25 


Powell,  John,  Esq. 

Powell,  Rev.  Rob.  Worcester  Coll. 

Power,  Mr.  Pembroke  Coll.  Cainb. 

•Powles,  Rev.  R.  Cowley,  Exeter  Coll. 

Pownall,  Eev.  C.  C.  B.  Wilton  Ernest 

*Prescott,  Rev.  T.  P.  Portsmouth 

Pressley,  Rev.  !Mr.  Fraserburgh,  Aber- 
deenshire 

"Prevost,  Rev.  Sir  George,  Bart.  Oriel 
Coll. 

"Price,  Rev.  B.  Pembroke  Coll. 

Prickett,  Rev.  M.  Trinity  Coll.  Cam- 
bridge 

Pridden,  Rev.  W.  Broxfed,  Essex 

Prideaux, Esq. 

Puckle,  Rev.  John,  Dover 

Pym,  Rev.  F.  Plymstock,  Devon 


Radcliffe,  Rev.  J.  F.  Hugglescote 

Ramsay,  Rev.  E.  B.  St.  John's  Chapel, 
Edinburgh 

Randall,  Rev.  H.  G.  Queen's  Coll. 

Randall,  R.  \V.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 

*RandoIph,  E.  Esq.  Jesus  Coil- 
Cambridge 

*Eandolph,  Francis,  Esq.  St.  John's 
College,  Cambridge 

Randolph,  Rev.  G.  Coulsdon,  Croydon 

"Randolph,  Rev.  Herbert,  Abbotsley, 
St.  Neot"s,  Hunts 

Randolph,  Rev.  Thomas,  Hadiiam, 
Herts. 

Randolph,  Rev.  E.  J.  i'riug,  Herts. 


Rashdall,  Rev.  John,  Exeter 

*Raven,     Rev.     V.     Magd.     College, 

Cambridge 
*Rawle,  Mr.  Trinity  Coll.  Cambjidge 
Rawlins,  Rev.    C.   Allerthorpe,    Pock- 

lington 
Ray,  Rev.  H.  W.  Kendal 
Rayer,  Rev.  Wm.  Tiverton 
Rayleigh,    Right    Hon.   Lord,    Terling 

Place,  Essex 
Reece,  Rev.  James,  Tinsley 
Reed,  Rev.  Christ.  Tynemouth 
Eeid,  Rev.  C.  B.  Teynham,  near  Sit- 

tingbourne 
*Relton,  Rev.  J.  R.  Tewkesbury 
Raw,  Rev.  Chas.  Maidstone 
Rhodes,  M.   J.   Esq.  Stanmore,   Mid- 
dlesex 
*Rice,      H.      Esq,      Highfield,      near 

Southampton 
*Eichards,  Rev.  J.  L.   D.D.   Rector  of 

Exeter  College 
Richards,  Rev.  E.  T.  Farlington 
Richards,  Rev.  George,  Warrington 
Richards,    Rev.   Henry,   Horfield,  near 

Bristol 
Richards,  Rev.  Upton 
Richards,    Rev.     H.     M.     Churchill, 

Chipping  Norton,  Oxou. 
Rickards,  Rev.  J.  Stowlingtoft 
Ricketts,  Rev.  F. 
Riddell,    Rev.  J.  C.   B.    Harrietsham, 

Maidstone 
Ridings,  Mr.  George,  Bookseller,  Cork 
Ridley,  Rev.  W.  H.  Ch.  Ch. 
Ripon,     Very     Rev.     the     Dean     of, 

Dawlish 
Ritson,  J.  Esq.  Jesus  Coll.  Camb, 
Roberts,  L.  Esq.   Whitewell  Clitheroe, 

Lancashire 
Robertson,   J.    Esq.    D.C.L.    Doctors' 

Commons 
*Robertson,  Rev.   J.  C.   Trinity  Coll. 
Camb.  Beakesbourne,  nr.  Canterbury 
Robertson,  Rev.  J.  C.  University  Coll. 
*Robson,  Rev.  J.  U.  Winston,  Sufl'olk 
*Robinson,  Rev.  C.  Kirknewton,  near 

Wooler,  Northumberland 
Robinson,  Rev.  R.  B.  Lytliam  Preston, 
Lancashire 


26 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Robinson,  Rev.  C.  W.  Hoton,  Leices- 
tershire 
Robins,  Rev.  S.  Shaftesbury 
Robin,  Rev.  Philip  R.  Bolton,  Lanca- 
-   shire 

Rochester,  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of 
*Rodmell,  Rev.  John,  Burford,  Salop 
Rodd,  Rev.  C.  North  Hill 
Rodwell,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Bond  Street 
Rogers,  'Edv/.  Esq.  Blackheath 
Rogers,  Rev.  John,  Canon  of  Exeter 
Rohde,  Mrs.  Eleanor,  Croydon 
Romney,  Rev.  F.  H.  near  Worcester 
Rooper,  Rev.  Wm.  Abbots'  Ripton 
*Rose,  Rev.   H.  H.   Eardington,    Bir- 
mingham 
Rothfield,  Rev.  John  M. 
Round,  Rev.  James  F.  Colchester 
Routh,  Rev.  Martin  Joseph,  D.D.  Presi- 
dent of  Magdalen  Coll. 
Rowe,  W.  Esq.  Rockwell,  Tipperary 
Rump,  James,  Esq.  Swanton  Morley, 

Norfolk 
Rusher  and  Johnson,  Messrs.  Booksellers, 

Reading 
Russell,  J.  Watts,  Esq.  Ham  Hall 
Russell,   Rev.    M.   Watts,    Benefield, 

Oundle 
tRussell,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Aberdeen 
Russell,  Rev.  J.  F.  Enfield 
Russell,  Rev.  Samuel  Henry 
Ryder,  Rev.  G.  D.  Easton,  Hants 
*Ryder,  T.  D.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll. 


Salter,  Rev.  John,  Iron  Acton,  Bristol 
Sampays,  A.  J.  Esq.  Fulham 


Sanders,  Rev.  John,  Liverpool 
Sanders,  Rev.  Lloyd,  Exeter 
»Sandford,     Rev.    G.    B.    Prestwich, 

Manchester 
Sandham,  J.  M.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll. 
Sandilands,  Rev.  R.  S.  B. 
Saunders,  Rev.  A.  P.  Charterhouse 
Saunder,   Rev.  J.   Sidney  Sussex  Coll. 

Camb. 
Savage,   Rev.   W.  St.  Mary's   Church, 

Torquay 
Scadding,  Rev.  H.  Chaplain  to  Bishop 

of  Toronto 
Schneider,  Rev.  H. 
Scobell,  Rev.  John,  Southover,  Lewes 
Scott,  H.  B.  Esq.  Honiton 
Scott,  Rev.  John 
*Scott,  Rev.  R.  Balliol  Coll. 
Scott.  Rev.  W. 
tScudamore,  Rev.  W.  E.  Ditchingh»m, 

Bungay 
Selwyn,  Rev.  Wm.  Ely 
*Sewell,  Rev.  J.  E.  New  Coll. 
Seymour,  Rev.  Sir  J.  H.  Bart.  North- 
church,  Herts 
Seymour,    Rev.    Richard,    Kinwartou, 

Alcester 
Shadwell,  Rev.  J.  E.  Southampton 
Sharp,  Rev.  John,  Horbury 
Sharp,   Rev.  W.  Addingham,  Cumber- 
land 
*Sharpe,  Rev.  W.  C.  Marlborough 
Sharpies,  Rev.  T.  Blackburn 
Shaw,  Rev.  E.  B.  Narborough,  Leices. 

tershire 
Shaw,  Rev.  Morton,  Hawkhurst,  Kent 
tShaw,  Rev.  G.  Fen  Drayton 
Shearly,   W.  J.  Esq.  St.    Peter's  Coll. 

Cambridge 
Shedden,  S.  Esq.  Pembroke  College 
Shepherd,  Rev.  Samuel 
Sheppard,  J.  H.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll. 
tSheppard,  W.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll. 
Sheppard,  Rev.  F.  Clare  Hall,  Camb. 
•Sherlock,    Rev.    H.    H.    Ashton,    in 

Win  wick 
Sherwood,  Rev.  Mr. 
*Shillibeer,  Mr.  John,  Oundle 
Shipton,   Mr.  Thos.    Bookseller,  Chel- 
tenham 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


'21 


fShort,  Rev.  Augustus,   Ravensthorpe, 

Northamptonshire 
Short,  Rev.  T.  Trinity  Coll. 
Shortlaiid,  Rev.  H.  V.  Twinstead,  near 

Halsted 
Snow,  Rev.  D.  Bhindford 
Sidebottom,  Rev.  \V.  Buckden 
Sidgwick,  C.  Esq.  Skipton  Castle,  York- 
shire 
*Sirams,  Rev.  E.  Great  Malvern 
Simpson,  Rev.  J.  D.  Sidney  Sussex  Coll. 

Canab. 
*Simpson,  Rev.  Joseph,  Shrewsbury 
Simpson,  Rev.  T.  \V.  Thurnscowe  Hall 
Simpson,  R.  Esq.  Mitcham,  Surrey 
Sinclair,    Rev.   John,   Chaplain  to  the 

Bishop  of  London 
Sittingbourne  Reading  Society 
Skinner,  F.  Esq. 
Skipsey,  Rev.  Mr. 

Skrine,  Rev.  Ilarcourt,  Wadham  Coll. 
Sladen,    Rev.    E.    H.    M.    Bockleton, 

Worcestershire 
Slocombe  and  Simms,  Messrs.  Leeds 
Smart,  Thomas,  Esq. 
Smirke,  Sir  Robert 

Smith, Andrew, M.D. Fori  Pitt, Chatham 
tSmith,  Rev.  Dr.  Leamiiigton 
Smith,  Rev.  Jeremiah,  Long   Buckby, 

iSorthampton 
Smith,    Rev.    E.    O.     Hulcote,     near 

Woburn 
Smith,  Rev.  John.  Newhaven 
Smith,  Rev.  E.  H.  Jersey 
Smith,     Rev.     J.     C.     Castle     Gary, 

Somerset 
Smith, Rev.  H.  R.Somers, Little  Bentley, 

Essex 
*Smith,  Rev.  John,  Bradford 
Smith,  Rev.  Edward,  Bocking 
*Smith,  R.  P.  Esq.  Pembroke  College 
Smith,  Rev.  Mr.  Greenock 
*Smith,  Rev.  S.  Selby,  Yorkshire 
Smith,  S.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham 
Smith,  Henry,  Esq. 
Smith,  Rev.  Joseph,  Trinity  Coll. 
Smyth,   Rev.    H.    Fenor    Glebe,  John- 
stown, Ireland 
Smythe,  Rev,  P.  M.  Tanworth,  Henley 
in  Arden 


Snow,  Rev,  D.  Blandfoid 

Soltau,  Mr. 

Somers  Cocks,  J.  S.  Esq. 

Somers,  Right  Hon.  Countess 

Southby,  Rev.  Dr.  Bulford,  Amesbury 

*Sotheby,  Rev.  T.  H. 

Southouse,  Rev.  George,  Oriel  Coll. 

*Southwell,  Rev.  Geo.  Bristol 

Sparkes,  Rev.  Chas.  Chesterford,  Saffron 

Walden 
Sparkes,    Rev.    E.    Hapton    Parsonage, 

Long  Straiten 
*Spencer,  Rev.  VV.  J.  Slarsten,  Norfolk 
Spreat,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Exeter 
Spry,    Rev.   John    Hume,   D.D.   Oriel 
Coll.  Rector  of  St.  Mary-le-bone 

*Stackhouse's  Library,  the  Trustees  of 

Stacy,  Rev.  Thomas,  Cardiff 

*Stafford,  Rev.  J.  C.  Dinton,  Salisbury 

St.  Andrew's  University 

Stanfield,  Mr.  J.  Bookseller,  Wakefield 

Stanley,  Rev.  E.  Rugby 

Stanton,  Richard,  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll. 

Statter,  Rev.  Jas.  Lindale 

Staveley,  J.  Bookseller,  Nottingham 

Stebbing,  Rev.  Dr. 

Steel,    Rev.    H.    W.    Mathern,     Mon- 
mouthshire 

Stephens,  Rev.  C.  L.  Kencott 

Stephenson,  G.  H.  Esq. 

Stevens,  Rev.  M.  F.  T.  Thornbury 

Stevens,  Rev.  R.  Culver 

*Stevenson,  Mr.  T.  Bookseller,  Camb. 

Stewart,  INIr.  Pembroke  Coll.  Cambridge 

Stewart,  S.  B.  Esq.  Brase-nose  Coll. 

Stewart,  Mv.  5,  Park  Crescent,  Torquay 

Stockdale,  Rev.  Henry,  Misterton 

Stockham,  Rev.  J.  H.  Ponighill 

Stokes,  Scott  N.  Esq.  Trin.  Coll.  Camb. 

*Stonard,  Rev.  Dr.  L'lverstone 

*Storer,  Rev.  John,  Hawksworth,  Nous 

Story,  A.  B.  Esq.  St.  Alban's 

Storks, T.  F.  Esq.  Jesus  College,  Camb. 
Stracey,  W.  J.  Esq,  Wells Theol.  Coll. 

*Street,  Joseph,  Esq.  South  Sea  House 

Street,  Rev.  A.   VV.   Bishop's  College, 

Calcutta 
Street,  Rev.  J.  C.  Plymouth 
Strong,  Mr.  W.  Bookseller,  Bristol 
•Sturrock,  Rev.  W.  Diocese  of  Calcutta 


28 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


Sunter,  Mr.  Bookseller,  York 
Surridge,  Rev.  Dr. 
Sutherland,  Dr.  A.  J.  Ch.  Ch, 
Sutton,  Rev.  K.  S.  Exeter  Coll. 
*Swainson,  Rev.  C.  L. Crick,  Norihamp- 

tonshire 
*Swainson,  C.  A .  Esq.  Fellow  of  Christ's 

Coll.  Cambridge 
Svcan,  —  Esq.  Clifton 
Svi^ayne,     Rev.     R.    G.     Slymbridge, 

Gloucestershire 
*Swete,  Rev.  B.  Cork 
Swete,  Rev.  Wm.  Dov/ngate,  Sandhurst 
Sykes,  G.M.  Esq. Downing  Coll.Camb. 
tSymons,  Rev.  B.  P.  D.D.  Warden  of 

Wadham  Coll. 


*Tait,  Rev.  Dr.  Head  Master  of  Rugby 

School 
Talbot,  Hon.  and  Rev.  \V.  C.  Ingestrie, 

Lichfield 
Talbot,  Rev.  G.Bristol 
TarbLitt,Rev.Arthur,St.Mary"s,Reading 
+Tate,  Rev.  Frank,  University  Coll. 
Tatham,  Rev.  Arthur 
Taylor,  A.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll. 
Taylor,  Miss,  London  Road,  Brighton, 

(^Chrysoitom) 
Taylor,  Rev.  M.  J.  Harold,  Bedfordshiie 
Taylor,   Rev.  Joseph,  Dukinlield,  near 

Manchester 
Taylor,  Rev.  Robert,  Leeds! 


*Tennant,  Rev.  Wm. 

Temple,  The   Hon.   the  Society  of  the 

Inner 
*Theodosius   J.    H.    Christ's   College, 

Cambridge 
Thomas,  Rev.  C.  N.  St.  Columb's 
*Thomas,  Rev.  R.   Bancroft's  Hospital, 

Mile  End 
Thomas,  Rev.  R.  Blue  Hayes 
Thompson,    Rev.    E.    H.    St.  James's, 

Westminster 
*Thompson,  Rev.  Sir  H.  Bart.  Fareham 
"Thompson,  Rev.  W.  H.  Trinity  Coll. 

Cambridge 
Thompson,  Captain,  R.  N.  Hayes'  Com- 
mon, Kent 
Thompson,  Mr.  G.  Bookseller,  Bury  St. 

Edmunds 
Thomson,  Rev.  George,  Abbot's  Anne, 

Andover 
♦Thornton,  H.  S.  Esq.  Battersea  R,ise 
Thornton,     Rev.     \V.    J.    Lbnwarne, 

Hereford 
Thornton,    Rsv.    Spencer,    Windover, 

Bucks 
Thorold,  Mr.  W.  Barnstaple 
*Thorp,  Rev.  Henry,  Topsham 
*Thurlow,  Rev.  John,  Durham 
Thwaytes,  Rev.  J.  Carlisle 
Thynne,  Rev.  Lord  Chas.   Longbridge 

Deverill,  \Yarminster 
tTickell,  G.  Esq.  University  Coll. 
Tidswell,  Rich.  Esq.  Upper  Clapton 
Timins,  Rev.  Henry 
Tindale,  J.  Esq.  Huddersfield 
Tindal,  H.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coil. 
*Todd,  Rev.  J.  H.  D.D.Trinity  College, 

Dublin 
Tomkyns,  Rev.  John,  Greenford 
Tomjinson's  Library, Newcastle-on-Tyne 
Tonge,  George,  Esq. 
Toovey,  Mr.  Bookseller,  London 
•Tottenham,  Rev.  E.  Bath 
Tounsend,  Rev.  George,  Prebendary  of 

Durham 
*Townsend,  Rev.  G.  F.  Brantingham, 

Yorkshire 
Trenow,  Rev.  F.  \V.  near  Worcester 
*Tripp,  Rev.  H.  St.  Columba's,  Navan, 

Ireland 


i 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


29 


Tristram,  B.  Esq.  Lincoln 

*Tritton,    Henry,    Esq.    54,    Lombard 

Street,  l^ondon 
TroUope,  Rev.  Arthur 
Troughton,  Rev.   J.    E.    Harwardune, 

Flintshire 
*Trowers,  Rev.  Walter 
*Truro  Theological  Library 
Tucker,  Rev.  M.  jun. 
Tufnell,    Rev.   G.    Wormingford,   near 

Colchester 
*Turbitt,  Rev.  W.  Halford 
Turner,  John,  Esq.  Balliol  Coll. 
Turner,  Rev.  Chas.  Kidderminster 
Turner,  Rev.  J.  Stourbridge 
Turner,  Rev.  J.  F.  Exeter 
Turner,  Sharon,  Esq. 
Turner,  Rev.  Tiiomas,  Exeter  Coll. 
Turner,  Rev.  W.  H.  Norwich 
Twiss,  A.  O.  Esq.  Boyle,  Ireland 
Twopeny,  Rev.  D.  S.   Sittingbourne 
*Tyler,  Rev.  James  Endell,   Rector  of 

St.  Giles  in  the  Fields ' 
Tyndale,  Rev.  H.  A.  Westerham,  Kent 
•Tyrrell,     Rev.    W.     Beaulieu,    near 

Southampton 
Tyrrell,  T.  Esq. 
Tytler,  Patrick  Eraser,  Esq. 


Upton, Rev.  J. S.  Wentworth,  Rotherham 
tUtterton,  Rev.  J.  S.  Oriel  Coll. 
Vaux,  Rev.  Bowyer, Collegiate  Church, 

Wolverhampton 
*Vaux,  Rev.  Wm.  Preb.  of  Winchester 
Venables,    Rev.    E.     Hurst    Moneaux, 

near  Brighton 
V^ernon-Harcourt,  Rev.  L. 
Vicars,  Rev.  M.  Exeter 
Vickerman,  C.  R.  Esq 
Vickers,     Yen.     Archdeacon,    Chetton, 

Bridgenorth 
Vickery,  Mr.  Bristol 
Vigne,  Rev.  H.  Sunbury,  Rliddlesex 
•V^izard,  John,  Esq. 
Vogan.  Rev.  T.  S.  L. 
Vyvyan,  Rev.  V.  F.  Withiel,  Cornwall 


Underbill,  Mr.  E.  B.  Oxford 
University  of  Glasgow 


Wainwright,  Rev.  Dr.  Boston,  U.  S.  A. 
Wagner,    A.     Esq.     Trinity    College, 

Cambridge 
Walford,  Rev.  Oliver,  Charterhouse 
Walford,  Rev.  Wra.  Hatfield,  Essex 
Walker,  C.  H.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 
Walker,  E.  Esq.  Lincoln  Coll. 
Walker,    Rev.     G.     A.     Alverthorpe, 

Wakefield 
Walker,  Rev.  R.  Wadhara  Coll. 
Walker,  Rev.  T.  Bickleigh,  Plymouth 
Walker,  Rev.  Thos.  Clipstone,   Market 

Harborough 
Walker,  Mr.  Queen's  Coll.  Cambridge 


30 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


'Walker,  Rev.  Thos,  Christ's  Coll.  Cam- 
bridge 

Wall,  Rev.  Henry,  Vice-Principal  of 
St.  Alban  Hall 

Wallace,  Rev.  Geo.  Canterbury 

Wallas,  Rev.  John,  Queen's  Coil. 

Wallinger,  Rev.  W. 

Wallis,  Mr.  H.  Bookseller,  Cambridge 

Walter,  J.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll. 

Walter,  Rev.  Ed«v.  Langton  Rectory, 
Horncastle 

Walter,  Rev.  Ernest,  Tachbrook 

Walter,  Rev.  Keats 

Walthamstow  Library 

*  Walton,  Rev.  Dr.  Birdhook 

Ward,  Right  Hon.  Lady,  Himley  Hall 

Ward,  Rev.  R.  Skipton 

*Ward,  Rev.W.  P,  Compton  Vallance, 

Dorchester 
Ward,  Rev.  W.  C.  Brome,  Suffolk 
Wardroper,  Rev.  Charles,  Gloucestei 
Ware,  Rev.  H.  Ladock,  near  Truro 
Warren,  Rev.  Z.  S.  Beverley 
•Warter,  Rev.  J.  Wood,  West  Tarring, 

Sussex 
Wason,  James,  Esq.  Stroud 
Watkins,  Rev.  W.  Chichester 
Watkins,  Rev.   Henry,  South  Mailing, 

Lewes 
Watson,  Joshua,  Esq. 
Watson,    Rev.    J.    D.    Guilsborough, 

Northampton 
Watson,  Rev.  Alex.  Cheltenham 
Watson,  Rev.  Geo.  Etheiley,  Durham 
Watts,    Rev.  John,   Tarrant   Gunville, 

Blandford 
Watts,    Richard,    Esq.    Clifton    House, 

Workington 

*  Watts,  Rev.  William 
*Wayett,  Rev.  W.  Pinchbeck 
*Weare,  Rev.  T.  W.  Westminster 
Webb,  J.  W.  Esq.  Clare  Hall,  Camb- 

biidge 

*  Webster,  Rev.  William, Christ's  Hospital 
•Weguelin,     Rev.     W.     Stoke,     near 

Arundel 
Wenham,     S.     G.      Esq.      Magdalen 

College 
*Wells,     Rev.    F.    B.     Woodchurch, 

Kent 


Wells,  F.  F.  Esq.  Cambridge 

Wells,  Rev.  W.  St.  Martin's,  Liverpool 

•West,  Hon.  and  Rev.  R.  W.  Balliol 

Coll. 
Westhorp,  Rev.  John,  Sudbury 
Wheadey,    C.  B.  Esq.    Mirfield,   near 

Dewsbury 
Wheeler,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Oxford 
White,  P.  Esq. 
White,  Rev.  W.  S. 
White,  Rev.  R.  M.  Aveley,  Essex 
White,     Rev.     R.     Lougridge,     near 

Pres/on 
White,  Mr.  W.  Pall  Mall 
Whitford,  Rev.  R.  W.  Madras 
*Whitfield,  Rev.  G.  T.  Bockleton 
Whilmore,      Mr.      Bookseller,      Man- 
chester 
*Wickham,  Rev.  R.  Twyford,  Hants 
fWickens,  Rev.  H, 
Wight,  Isle  of.  Clerical  Library 
Wigson,    Rev.     W.    Coggeshall,    near 

Kelvedon 
*Wilberforce,  Rev.  II.  East  Farleigh, 

Kent 
Wilberforce,  Ven.  Robert,  Archdeacon 

of    the    East    Riding    of    Yorkshire, 

Burton,  Agnes,  Driffield 
Wilde,    Rev.    S.    D.    Fletching,    near 

Uckfield 
Wilkin,  Rev.  Mr.  Bole,  Gainsborough 
Wilkins,     Rev.      J.     M.      Southwell, 

Notts. 
Wilkinson,  Rev.  M.  Hutlerwick 
Wilkinson,  Chas.    Esq.   Trin.   College, 

Cambridge 
Williams,  Rev.  E.  T.  Exeter  Coll. 

*  Williams,  Rev.  G.  King's  Coll.  Cam- 

bridge 

*  Williams,  i\Iatthew  D.  Esq. 
Williams,   Sir  John,  Bart.  Bodelwyd- 

dan 
Williams,  Rev.  I.  Trinity  Coll. 
Williams,  Rev.  F.  D.  Great  Wishford, 

Wilts 
Williams,  Rev.  J.  West  Hackney 
M'^illiamson,    Rev.    R.    H.     Hurworth, 

Newcastle-on-Tyne 
•Williams,  Robert,  Esq. 
•Willis,  Rev.  A.  Ludlow 


SUBSCRIBERS. 


31 


Willis,  H.  Esq.  Catherine  Hall,  Cam- 

biidge 
VViilock,  Rev.  \V.  W.  Ware 
Wilson,  Rev.  John,  Trinity  Coll. 
*WilsoD,    Rev.    R.    F.    Hursley,    near 

Winchester 
Wilson,  Robt.  Esq.  Magdalen  Hall 
Wilson,  Thomas,  Esq.   Bath 
Wilson,    Rev.    Charles    T.    IMagdalen 

Hall 
Wilson,  Walter,  Esq.  Bath 
Wilson,    J.    H.   Esq.    King's    College 

London 
Winchester,  The  Dean  and  Chapter  of 
tW'inchester,    Rev.     W'.    Ashelworth, 

Gloucester 
tWingfield,  Rev.  William 
Winterbottom,  J.  Esq. 
Wise,  J.  A.  Esq.'  Clayton  Hall,  Sta- 

fordshire 
Wise,  Rev.  Henry,  Offchurch 
Whither,     Rev.    W.     B.     Otterbourne, 

Hants 
*  Withers,  Rev.  Geo.  Calcutta 
Witts,  Rev.  EdvF.  F.  Upper  Slaughter, 

Gloucestershire 
Wix,   Rev.    E.   Archdeacon   of   New- 
foundland 
Wood,  C.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham 
Wood,  Rev.  G.  Newcastle 
Wood,     Rev.    H.     Fenstanton,     near 

St.  Ives 
Wood,  Rev.  H.  O. 
Wood,  Rev.  J.  R.  St.  James's  Palace 
Wood,  Rev.  R.  Broughton,  Manchester 
Wood,    Rev.    Jas.     Settrington,    near 

]\Ialton 
W'ood,  Mrs.  W.Tunbridge  Wells 
Woodcock,      H.    Esq.     Bank     House, 

Wigan 
Woodford,  Rev.  Russell,  Bishop's  Coll. 

Bristol 
Woodgate,  Rev.   Henry  A.  St.  John's 

College 
Woodham,  C.  B.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll. 

Cambridge 
Woods,  Rev.  G.  H.  W^est  Dean,  Chi- 
chester 


Woods,  Rev.  P.  Dublin 

•Woodward,  Alex.  Esq.  Catherine  Hall, 

Cambridge 
*Woodward,  Rev.  F.  B. 
Woodward,  Rev.  J.  H.  Bristol 
tWoollcombe,  E.  C.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll. 
Woollcombe,    Rev.  Wrn.   W.    Exeter 

Colleo-e 
VVooUcombe,       Rev.      Louis,      Exeter 

College 
Woollcombe,  G.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch. 
t  Wordsworth,      Rev.      Dr.     Buxtad, 

Uckfield 
•Wordsworth,  Rev.  Chas.  SecondMaster 

of  Winchester  School 
Wordsworth,   Rev.   C.  F.  Gillingham, 

Dorset 
Worthy,  Rev.  C.  Exeter 
Wray,  Rev.  Cecil,  Liverpool 
Wrench,     Rev.     Frederick,      Stowting 

Rectory,  Ashford 
Wright,  Rev.  J.  A. 
Wright,  Rev.  T.  B.  Wrangle  Vicarage, 

near  Boston 
Wright,   H.    P.    St.    Peter's    College, 

Cambridge 
Wright,  Rev.  T.  P.  Hackney 
Wright.  Rev.  R.  R. 
W^yatt,  Rev.  W.Snenton,  Notts. 
Wylde,      Rev.     T.      Bellbroughton, 

Worcestershire 
Wylde,  Rev.  C.  E.  Sheerness 
•Wynter,Rev.Dr.  President  of  St.  John's 

Coll. 
•Wynter,     Rev.     J.    C.      St.    John's 

College 


:}2  SI  BSCniBKHS. 

Yard,  Kev.  J.  Uavant  Young,  Uev.  R.  G. 

Yates,  Dr.  Brighton 

Yate3,  Rev.  E.  T.  Ajlsham,  Norfolk 

Young,  Rev.  P.  Mursley,  nr. Winchester      ZordifTe,  T.  Esq. 


•,•  The  Publishers  of  the  Library  of  liie  Fathers  respectfully  inform  the 
Subscribers,  that  they  cannot  be  ordinarily  ret^ponsible  for  delivering  llie  \'olumes 
at  Subscribers'  price  beyond  three  months  after  the  time  of  Publication  ;  and  re- 
quest that  any  change  of  residence  of  a  Subscriber  may  be  made  known  to  them, 
and  that  they  may  receive  directions  in  what  manner  the  N'olumes  are  to  be  for* 
warded  in  rontinuation.  The  Publishers  arc  obliged  to  make  this  statement  in 
consequence  of  three  of  the  ^'olumes  being  out  of  [>ririt. 

There  seems  to  be  pround  for  tliinkiii;j,  that  many,  who  wished  to 
become  Subscribers  to  the  f)rij{iiial  Texts,  have  not  distinctly  specified 
that  wish.  It  is  requested  that  these,  or  any  other  corrections,  may  be 
sent  to  the  Publishers. 


BAXTER,    PRINTER,   OXFORD. 


^  XibraiP  of  ^nglo-CathoIir  O)falogi> 

roltimes  published  1841  lo  1846. 
BP.  ANDRKWES'  SERMONS,  5  Vols.  21.  16s.     Second  Edition. 
BP.  ANDREWES'  Pattern  of  Catechistical  Doctrine,  &c.  10s. 
BP.  REVEIiinr.E'S   WORKS,  Vol.  I.  to  VII.   31.  16s.     Second  Edition. 
ARl'.   RRA.MH.VLL'S   WORKS,  5  Vols.  .il.  3s. 
BP.    HULL'S    HAR.MONY   OF    THE    APOSTLES    ST.  PAUL  AND 

ST.  JAMES  ON  JUSTIFICATION,  2  Vols.   I89. 
BP.   COSIN'S  WORKS,  Vols.  I.  and  II.    11.  Is. 
BP.  GL'NMNC;  on  the  Paschal,  or  Lent  Fast,  9s. 
M.VRSIIALL'S  Penitential  Disciijline  of  the  Primitive  f'hnrch,  63. 
BP.  NirHOLSON  ON  THE  CATECHISM,  6s.     Second  Edition. 
liP.  OVEI{.\LL'S   CONVOCATION   B(  >OK,  8vo.  8s. 
THORNDIKE'S   WORKS,  Vols.  Land  H.    J  Parts,  21. 
L'ESTRAN(;E'S  ALLI,\NCE  of   divine  offices.   129. 

fobtmcK  in  preparation  for  1846  and  1847. 
IW.    IU:VERn)fii:'S  works,   VoI.  Vni.  /u-ar/v  rtw/v. 
HAMMOND'S   PRACTK  AL  CATECHIS.M,  ncarU,  read//. 
HK^KES'S  Treatises  ot»  the  Christian  Priesthood,  and  on  the  Dignity  of 

the  Episcopal  Order,  Vol.  I.      In  the  I'ress. 
JOHN  JOHNSONS   WORKS,   \ol.  I.     In  the  Press. 
ARP.   LAUD'S  WORKS.  Voh.  I.  and  H. 
CRAKANTHORP,     DEFENSIO     ECCLESI.t     AN(;LICAN.K.       Ed. 

Chr.  Wordsworth,  D.D.      In  the  Press. 
BULL'S  DEFENCE  OF  THE  NICENE  CREED. 
BP.  WILSON'S  WORKS.     Ed.  Rev.  J.  Kcble,  M.A. 

Subscribers  yci^inf^  txco  guineas  annually  IN  APVANCB  are  entitled  lo  all  iht  Publi- 
cations tcithoul  furthei-  paiiment.  It  is  proposed  lo  publish  six  volumes  (0/ AOO  pages 
on  the  averaged  for  each  tfcar.    jVeir  Subscribers  can  exchange  volumes  lo  complete  sets. 

Persons  wishin/;  to  become  Subscrilters  arc  requested  lo  send  their  name',  and  those  of 
their  bot'kseltcrs,  to  the  Secretory  and  Treasurer.  Charles  Crauleu,  lUq.  under  cover, 
to  the  Publisher,  Mr.  Parker,  bookseller,  Oxfcrd. 

Tin:   TRACTICVL  CHRISTIAN'S  LIIU^AKY; 

A  SERIES  OF  CHE.Vr  Pri«HC.\T10NS,  FOR  GKNERAL  CIRCDLATION. 

s.  d.  \  s.  d. 

1.  Learn  to  Die.    [Sutton.)  1  0  I  17.  Steps  to  the  Altar       .         .         0  9 

2.  Practice  of  Divine  Love.  [Kcd.JO  0  '  18.  Selections  from  Hooker.  [Keble.]  I  6 

3.  Private  Devotions.  [Spinckcs.]    1   6     19.  .Vdvice  to  a  Friend.    [Patrick.]   1   G 

4.  ParalileoftlicPilgrim.  [Patrick.]  1    0     '20.  Repentance     and     Fasting. 

5.  The    Imitation  of  Christ.  |  [Patrick.]         .         .         .         1  G 

[A.  Kmipis.]  .  .  1   0  :  21.  On  Prayer.    [Patrick.]       .         2  0 

6.  Manual  of  Prayer  for  the  Young.        1  22.  Practical   Christian,   Part  I. 

[Ken.]     .         .         .         .         0  6.  [Sherlock.]       .         .         .         20 

7.  Guide  to  the  Holy  Communion.         ,  2.3. Part  II.  [Sherlock.]  2  0 

[Nelson.]         .         .         .         0  8'  24.  Meditations  on  the  Eucharist. 

8.  Guide  to  the  Penitent.    [Kettle-         j  [Sutton.]  .         .         .         1   fi 

well.]      .         .         .         .         0  9  I  25.  Learn  to  Live.   [Sutton.]  2  0 

9.  The  Golden  Grove.    [Taylor.]    0  9  ,  26.  The  Art  of  Contentment,  by  the 

10.  Daily  Exercises.    [  Horneck.]      0  9  I  author  of  "  The  Whole  Duty 

1 1.  Life  of  Ambrose  Ronwicke  1  0  of  Man."  .         .         .         2  0 

12.  Plain  Sermons.     [Andrewes.]     2  0     27.  Meditations    for   a    Fortnight. 

13.  Life  of  Rp.  lUill.    [Nelson.]       1  6  [Gerhard.]       .  .         .09 

14.  Death,  .ludgment,  Heaven,  and  28.  The  Heart's  Ease.    [Patrick.]     1   6 

Hell.    [Rp.  Taylor.]  .         0  9  29.  Doctrine  of  the  English  Church. 

15.  Companion  to  the  Prayer  Book    1  0  [Heylin.]         .         .         .         0  8 

16.  Christian  Contentment.    [San-  30.  Manual  for  Confirmation  and 
derson.]                .                           0  9  First  Communion      .         .         0  6 


A  COMMENTARY  on  the  FOUR  GOSPELS,  collected  our.  of  the 
WORKS  of  the  FATHERS,  translated  from  the  CATENA  AUREA  of 

Thumas  Aquinas,     4  vols,  in  8  paits,  3/.  !7o. 

Vol.  1.  ST.  MATTHEW,  in  three  parts,  1/.  8s. 
Vol.  2.  ST.  MARK,  10.,%  6d. 
Vol.  -3.  ST.  LUKE,  in  two  parts,  \l  ]s. 
Vol.  4.  ST.  JOHN,  in  two  parts,  17s.  M. 

THE  UGLY  EUCHARIST  A  COMFORT  FOR  THE  PENITENT. 
A  SERMON  preach jd  before-  the  Uni%'9rsit)'  of  Oxford,  on  che  Fourth 
Sunday  after  Easter,  1843.  Ey  the  REV.  E.  B,  PUSEY,  D.D.  Regius 
Professor  of  Hebrew,  Canon  of  Ch.  Ch.  late  Fellow  of  Oriel  College. 
8vo.  1*.  6cL 

By  the  same  Author, 

THE    ENTIRE    ABSOLUTION     OF    THE    PENITENT. 
Two    SERMONS   preached   before   the   University   of    Oxford,    1846. 

8vo.  2s.  6d. 

A  COURSE  01  SERMONS  on  SOLEMN  SUBJECTS,  chiefly  bearing 
on  Repentance  and  Amendment  of  Life,  preached  in  S.  S.wiour's  Church, 
Leeds,  during  the  Week  after  its  Consecration,  the  Feast  of  St.  Simon 
and  St.  Jude,  18-15.     8vo.  Js.  6d. 

THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.  Thoughts  in  Verse  for  the  Sundays  and 
HoJydays  throughout  che  Year.  The  Tivsiihj-ninth  Edition.  32mo.  cloth 
3s.  66?.  morocco  5s.     Foolscap  8vo.  clolh  Jf.  6d.  morocco'lOs.  6d. 

LYRA  INNOCENTIUM,  or  Thoughts  in  Verse  on  the  Ways  of 
Providence  towards  Little  Children.  By  the  Author  of  the  Christian 
Year.  Third  Edition,  foolscap  Svo.  /s.  6d.  cioth,'  10s.  Qd.  morocco. 
32mo.  3s.  6d.  cloth,  5s.  morocco. 

THE  CATHEDRAL,  OR  THE  CATHOLIC  AND  APOSTOLIC 
CHURCH  IN  ENGLAND.  Thoughts  in  Verse  on  Ecdesiastical 
Subjects,  selected  and  arranged  to  correspond  with  the  different  parts 
of  a  Gothic  Carhedral.  Fourth  Edition,  small  8vo.  "Js.  6d.  cloth,  I'h.  (>d. 
morocco.     Illustrated  by  Engravings. 

THE   Bii.PriSTERY.  OR  THE  WAY  OF  ETERNAL    LIFE. 

By    the    Author    of    the    Cathedral.      Third   Edition,   Svo.    cloth,    15s. 

morocco  \l.  Is.      32ino.  cloth  3s.  6d.  morocco  53. 

OFFICIUM  EUCHARISTICUM .  A  Preparatory  Service  to  a  Devout 
and  V/orthy  Reception  of  the  Lord's  Supper.     To  which  is  added, 

A  MEDITATION  FOR  EVERY  DAY  IN  THE  WEEK,  with  the 
COMMUNION  SERVICE.  By  Edward  Lake,  D.D.  The  32nd  Edition, 
32mo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d.,  morocco,  5s. 

BISHOP  WILSON  ON  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  Reprinted  f.j.tipe 
from  the  folio  Edition.  39.mo.i  cloth,  2s.,  roan,  2s.  6d.,  morocco,  3s., 
handsomely  printed,  with  the  Riibrics  in  red.  [The  above  may  be  had  in  a 
variety  of  handsome  bindings,  from  55.  upwards,] 

Also,  a  cheaper  Edition  for  Parochial  Distribution,  &c.  Cloth,  Is., 
roan,  Is.  6^.  (with  a  liberal  allovvance  to  Clergy.) 


OXFORD:    JOHN  Hi^LNRY  PARKi-R. 


DATE 

DUE 

- 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  us  A 

WELLESLEY  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 


3  5002  03240  1577 


BR  65  . A52  E6  1847 


Augusllne, 


Seventeen  short,  treatises  of 
S.  Augustine,  Bishop  of 


:'!V::;::.:i|ia 


i'V;':^: '■''■« 


