# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume III.   Theodoret, Jerome and Gennadius, Rufinus and Jerome
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume III
# father: theodoret
# work: Dialogues (Eranistes)
# clavis: CPG-6217
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Blomfield Jackson / Schaff English translation of Eranistes seu Polymorphus (Dialogues I-III).

Dialogues.

   The "Eranistes" [965] or "Polymorphus" [966] of the Blessed
   Theodoretus, Bishop of Cyrus.

   ------------------------

   Prologue.

   Some men, distinguished neither by family nor education, and without
   any of the honourable notoriety that comes of an upright life, are
   ambitious of achieving fame by wicked ways. Of these was the famous
   Alexander, the coppersmith, [967] a man of no sort of distinction at
   all,--no nobility of birth, no eloquence of speech, who never led a
   political party nor an army in the field; who never played the man in
   fight, but plied from day to day his ignominious craft, and won fame
   for nothing but his mad violence against Saint Paul.

   Shimei, [968] again, an obscure person of servile rank, has become very
   renowned for his audacious attack on the holy David.

   It is said too that the originator of the Manichæan heresy was a mere
   whipping-block of a slave, and, from love of notoriety, composed his
   execrable and superstitious writings.

   The same line of conduct is pursued by many now, who after turning
   their backs on the honourable glory of virtue on account of the toil to
   be undergone ere it be won, purchase to themselves the notoriety that
   comes of shame and disgrace. For through eagerness to pose as champions
   of new doctrines they pick up and get together the impiety of many
   heresies, and compile this heresy of death.

   Now I will endeavour briefly to dispute with them, with the double
   object of curing them, if I can, of their unsoundness, and of giving a
   word of warning to the whole.

   I call my work "Eranistes, or Polymorphus," for, after getting together
   from many unhappy sources their baleful doctrines, they produce their
   patchwork and incongruous conceit. For to call our Lord Christ God only
   is the way of Simon, of Cerdo, of Marcion, [969] and of others who
   share this abominable opinion.

   The acknowledgment of His birth from a Virgin, but coupled with the
   assertion that this birth was merely a process of transition, and that
   God the Word took nothing of the Virgin's nature, is stolen from
   Valentinus and Bardesanes and the adherents of their fables. [970]

   To call the godhead and the manhood of the Lord Christ one nature is
   the error filched from the follies of Apollinarius. [971]

   Again the attribution of capacity of suffering to the divinity of the
   Christ is a theft from the blasphemy of Arius and Eunomius. Thus the
   main principle of their teaching is like beggars' gabardines--a cento
   of ill-matched rags.

   So I call this work Eranistes or Polymorphus. I shall write it in the
   form of a dialogue with questions and answers, propositions, solutions,
   and antitheses, and all else that a dialogue ought to have. I shall not
   insert the names of the questioners and respondents in the body of the
   dialogue as did the wise Greeks of old, but I shall write them at the
   side at the beginning of the paragraphs. They, indeed, put their
   writings in the hands of readers highly and variously educated, and to
   whom literature was life. I, on the contrary, wish the reading of what
   I write, and the discovery of whatever good it may give, to be an easy
   task, even to the illiterate. This I think will be facilitated if the
   characters of the interlocutors are plainly shown by their names in the
   margin, so the disputant who argues on behalf of the apostolical
   decrees is called "Orthodoxos," and his opponent "Eranistes." A man who
   is fed by the charity of many we commonly call "Beggar;" a man who
   knows how to get money together we call a "Chrematistes." So we have
   given our disputant this name from his character and pursuits.

   I beg that all those into whose hands my book may fall will lay aside
   all preconceived opinion and put the truth to the test. For clearness'
   sake I will divide my book into three dialogues. The first will contain
   the contention that the Godhead of the only-begotten Son is immutable.
   The second will by God's help show that the union of the Godhead and
   the manhood of the Lord Christ is without confusion. The third will
   contend for the impassibility of the divinity of our saviour. After
   these three disputations we will subjoin several others as it were to
   complete them, giving formal proof under each head, and making it
   perfectly plain that the apostles' doctrine is preserved by us.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [965] eranos--a meal to which every one contributes a share; a club
   feast, or pic-nic, and eranistes is in classical Greek a contributor to
   such a feast. But eranizo = (a) "contribute," and (b) "beg for
   contributions." So eranistes is by some rendered "beggar." The idea of
   Theodoretus seems rather that his worse character is a picker up of
   various scraps of heresy from different quarters, and this explanation
   of the name is borne out by his use of the cognate verb eranizomai in
   reference to the selection by Audæus of some of the doctrines of Manes
   in Hist. iv. 9.

   [966] Polymorphus = Multiform.

   [967] 2 Tim. iv. 14

   [968] 2 Kings xvi. 5

   [969] Cerdo, the gnostic teacher of the middle of the 2nd c., and
   placed by Theodoretus (Hær. Fab. i. 24) in the reign of Antoninus, a.d.
   138-161, is described by the Ps. Tertullian as denying that Christ came
   in the substance of the flesh, but in appearance only. According to
   Marcion the greater follower of Cerdo, Christ was not born at all, but
   came down from heaven to Capernaum a.d. 29, his body being an
   appearance and his death an illusion. Simon Magus, the "father of all
   heretics" of Irenæus (adv. Hær. pr. in lib. iii.) is apparently quoted
   rather as the supposed originator of Gnosticism, than from any definite
   knowledge of his tenets.

   [970] Valentinus (taught at Rome c. 140) the arch-gnostic is identified
   with the doctrine of emanation. Bardesanes (Bar Daisan), who lived some
   thirty years later at Edessa, was a great leader of the Syrian school
   of oriental dualism. For mention of his son Harmonius vide Hist. p.
   129.

   [971] Condemned at Constantinople in 381.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dialogue I.--The Immutable.

   Orthodoxos and Eranistes.

   Orth.--Better were it for us to agree and abide by the apostolic
   doctrine in its purity. But since, I know not how, you have broken the
   harmony, and are now offering us new doctrines, let us, if you please,
   with no kind of quarrel, investigate the truth.

   Eran.--We need no investigation, for we exactly hold the truth.

   Orth.--This is what every heretic supposes. Aye, even Jews and Pagans
   reckon that they are defending the doctrines of the truth; and so also
   do not only the followers of Plato and Pythagoras, but Epicureans too,
   and they that are wholly without God or belief. It becomes us, however,
   not to be the slaves of a priori assumption, but to search for the
   knowledge of the truth.

   Eran.--I admit the force of what you say and am ready to act on your
   suggestion.

   Orth.--Since then you have made no difficulty in yielding to this my
   preliminary exhortation, I ask you in the next place not to suffer the
   investigation of the truth to depend on the reasonings of men, but to
   track the footprints of the apostles and prophets, and saints who
   followed them. For so wayfarers when they wander from the high-road are
   wont to consider well the pathways, if haply they shew any prints of
   men or horses or asses or mules going this way or that, and when they
   find any such they trace the tracks as dogs do and leave them not till
   once more they are in the right road.

   Eran.--So let us do. Lead on yourself, as you began the discussion.

   Orth--Let us, therefore, first make careful and thorough investigation
   into the divine names,--I mean substance, and essences, and persons and
   proprieties, and let us learn and define how they differ the one from
   the other. Then let us thus handle afterwards what follows.

   Eran.--You give us a very admirable and proper introduction to our
   argument. When these points are clear, our discussion will go forward
   without let or obstacle.

   Orth.--Since we have decided then that this must be our course of
   procedure, tell me, my friend, do we acknowledge one substance of God,
   alike of Father and of the only begotten Son and of the Holy Ghost, as
   we have been taught by Holy Scripture, both Old and New, and by the
   Fathers in Council in Nicæa, or do we follow the blasphemy of Arius?

   Eran.--We confess one substance of the Holy Trinity.

   Orth.--And do we reckon hypostasis to signify anything else than
   substance, or do we take it for another name of substance?

   Eran.--Is there any difference between substance and hypostasis? [972]

   Orth--In extra Christian philosophy there is not, for ousia signifies
   to on, that which is, and hupostasis that which subsists. But according
   to the doctrine of the Fathers there is the same difference between
   ousia and hupostasis as between the common and the particular, and the
   species and the individual.

   Eran.--Tell me more clearly what is meant by race or kind, and species
   and individual.

   Orth.--We speak of race or kind with regard to the animal, for it means
   many things at once. It indicates both the rational and the irrational;
   and again there are many species of irrational, creatures that fly,
   creatures that are amphibious, creatures that go on foot, and creatures
   that swim. And of these species each is marked by many subdivisions; of
   creatures that go on foot there is the lion, the leopard, the bull, and
   countless others. So, too, of flying creatures and the rest there are
   many species; yet all of them, though the species are the aforesaid,
   belong to one and the same animal race. Similarly the name man is the
   common name of mankind; for it means the Roman, the Athenian, the
   Persian, the Sauromatian, [973] the Egyptian, and, in a word, all who
   are human, but the name Paulus or Petrus does not signify what is
   common to the kind but some particular man; for no one on hearing of
   Paul turns in thought to Adam or Abraham or Jacob, but thinks of him
   alone whose name he has heard. But if he hears the word man simply, he
   does not fix his mind on the individual, but bethinks him of the
   Indian, the Scythian, and the Massagete, and of all the race of men
   together, and we learn this not only from nature, but also from Holy
   Scripture, for God said, we read, "I will destroy man from the face of
   the earth," [974] and this he spake of countless multitudes, and when
   more than two thousand and two hundred years had gone by after Adam, he
   brought universal destruction on men through the flood, and so the
   blessed David says: "Man that is in honour and understandeth not,"
   [975] accusing not one here nor one there, but all men in common. A
   thousand similar examples might be found, but we must not be tedious.

   Eran.--The difference between the common and the proper is shewed
   clearly. Now let us return to discussion about ousia and hupostasis

   Orth.--As then the name man is common to human nature, so we understand
   the divine substance to indicate the Holy Trinity; but the hypostasis
   denotes any person, as the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; for,
   following the definitions of the Holy Fathers, we say that hypostasis
   and individuality mean the same thing.

   Eran.--We agree that this is so.

   Orth.--Whatever then is predicated of the divine nature is common both
   to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, as for instance
   "God," "Lord," "Creator," "Almighty," and so forth.

   Eran.--Without question these words are common to the Trinity.

   Orth.--But all that naturally denotes the hypostasis ceases to be
   common to the Holy Trinity, and denotes the hypostasis to which it is
   proper, as, for instance, the names "Father," "Unbegotten," are
   peculiar to the Father; while again the names "Son," "Only Begotten,"
   "God the Word," do not denote the Father, nor yet the Holy Ghost, but
   the Son, and the words "Holy Ghost," "Paraclete," naturally denote the
   hypostasis of the Spirit.

   Eran.--But does not Holy Scripture call both the Father and the Son
   "Spirit"?

   Orth.--Yes, it calls both the Father and the Son "Spirit," signifying
   by this term the incorporeal illimitable character of the divine
   nature. The Holy Scripture only calls the hypostasis of the Spirit
   "Holy Ghost."

   Eran.--This is indisputable.

   Orth.--Since then we assert that some terms are common to the Holy
   Trinity, and some peculiar to each hypostasis, do we assert the term
   "immutable" to be common to the substance or peculiar to any
   hypostasis?

   Eran.--The term "immutable" is common to the Trinity, for it is
   impossible for part of the substance to be mutable and part immutable.

   Orth.--You have well said, for as the term mortal is common to mankind,
   so are "immutable" and "invariable" to the Holy Trinity. So the
   only-begotten Son is immutable, as are both the Father that begat Him
   and the Holy Ghost.

   Eran.--Immutable.

   Orth.--How then do you advance the statement in the gospel "the word
   became flesh," [976] and predicate mutation of the immutable nature?

   Eran.--We assert Him to have been made flesh not by mutation, but as He
   Himself knows.

   Orth.--If He is not said to have become flesh by taking flesh, one of
   two things must be asserted, either that he underwent the mutation into
   flesh, or was only so seen in appearance, and in reality was God
   without flesh.

   Eran.--This is the doctrine of the disciples of Valentinus, Marcion,
   and of the Manichees, but we have been taught without dispute that the
   divine Word was made flesh.

   Orth.--But in what sense do you mean "was made flesh"? "Took flesh," or
   "was changed into flesh"?

   Eran.--As we have heard the evangelist say, "the word was made flesh."

   Orth.--In what sense do you understand "was made"?

   Eran.--He who underwent mutation into flesh was made flesh, and, as I
   said just now, as He knows. But we know that with Him all things are
   possible, [977] for He changed the water of the Nile into blood, and
   day into night, and made the sea dry land, and filled the dry
   wilderness with water, and we hear the prophet saying "Whatsoever the
   Lord pleased that did He in heaven, and in earth, in the seas and all
   deep places." [978]

   Orth.--The creature is transformed by the Creator as He will, for it is
   mutable and obeys the nod of Him that fashioned it. But His nature is
   immutable and invariable, wherefore of the creature the prophet saith
   "He that maketh and transformeth all things." [979] But of the divine
   Word the great David says "Thou art the same and thy years shall not
   fail." [980] And again the same God says of Himself "For I am the Lord
   and I change not." [981]

   Eran.--What is hidden ought not to "be enquired into."

   Orth.--Nor yet what is plain to be altogether ignored.

   Eran.--I am not aware of the manner of the incarnation. I have heard
   that the Word was made flesh.

   Orth.--If He was made flesh by mutation He did not remain what He was
   before, and this is easily intelligible from several analogies. Sand,
   for instance, when it is subjected to heat, first becomes fluid, then
   is changed and congealed into glass, and at the time of the change
   alters its name, for it is no longer called sand but glass.

   Eran.--So it is.

   Orth.--And while we call the fruit of the vine grape, when once we have
   pressed it, we speak of it no longer as grape, but as wine.

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--And the wine itself, after it has undergone a change, it is our
   custom to name no longer wine, but vinegar.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And similarly stone when burnt and in solution is no longer
   called stone, but lime. And innumerable other similar instances might
   be found where mutation involves a change of name.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--If therefore you assert that the Divine Word underwent the
   change in the flesh, why do you call Him God and not flesh? for change
   of name fits in with the alteration of nature. For if where the things
   which undergo change have some relation to their former condition (for
   there is a certain approximation of vinegar to wine and of wine to the
   fruit of the vine, and of glass to sand) they receive another name
   after their alteration, how, where the difference between them is
   infinite and as wide as that which divides a gnat from the whole
   visible and invisible creation (for so wide, nay much wider, is the
   difference between the nature of flesh and of Godhead) is it possible
   for the same name to obtain after the change?

   Eran.--I have said more than once that He was made flesh not by
   mutation, but continuing still to be what He was, He was made what He
   was not.

   Orth.--But unless this word "was made" becomes quite clear it suggests
   mutation and alteration, for unless He was made flesh by taking flesh
   He was made flesh by undergoing mutation.

   Eran.--But the word "take" is your own invention. The Evangelist says
   the Word was made flesh. [982]

   Orth.--You seem either to be ignorant of the sacred Scripture, or to do
   it wrong knowingly. Now if you are ignorant, I will teach you; if you
   are doing wrong, I will convict you. Answer then; do you acknowledge
   the teaching of the divine Paul to be of the Spirit?

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--And do you allow that the same Spirit wrought through both
   Evangelists and Apostles?

   Eran.--Yes, for so have I learnt from the Apostolic Scripture "There
   are diversities of gifts but the same spirit," [983] and again "All
   these things worketh that one and the selfsame spirit, dividing to
   every man severally as He will," [984] and again "Having the same
   Spirit of the Faith." [985]

   Orth.--Your introduction of the apostolic testimony is in season. If we
   assert that the instruction alike of the evangelists and of the
   apostles is of the same spirit, listen how the apostle interprets the
   words of the Gospel, for in the Epistle to the Hebrews he says, "Verily
   he took not on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed of
   Abraham." [986] Now tell me what you mean by the seed of Abraham. Was
   not that which was naturally proper to Abraham proper also to the seed
   of Abraham?

   Eran.--No; not without exception, for Christ did no sin.

   Orth.--Sin is not of nature, but of corrupt will. [987] On this very
   account, therefore, I did not say indefinitely what Abraham had, but
   what he had according to nature, that is to say, body and reasonable
   soul. Now tell me plainly; will you acknowledge that the seed of
   Abraham was endowed with body and reasonable soul? If not, in this
   point you agree with the ravings of Apollinarius. But I will compel you
   to confess this by other means. Tell me now; had the Jews a body and a
   reasonable soul?

   Eran.--Of course they had.

   Orth.--So when we hear the prophet saying, "But thou, Israel, art my
   servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend,"
   [988] are we to understand the Jews to be bodies only? Are we not to
   understand them to be men consisting of bodies and souls?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And the seed of Abraham not without soul nor yet intelligence,
   but with everything which characterizes the seed of Abraham?

   Eran.--He who so says puts forward two sons.

   Orth.--But he who says that the Divine Word is changed into the flesh
   does not even acknowledge one Son, for mere flesh by itself is not a
   son; but we confess one Son who took upon Him the seed of Abraham,
   according to the divine apostle, and wrought the salvation of mankind.
   But if you do not accept the apostolic preaching, say so openly.

   Eran.--But we maintain that the utterances of the apostles are
   inconsistent, for there appears to be a certain inconsistency between
   "the Word was made flesh" and "took upon Him the seed of Abraham."

   Orth.--It is because you lack intelligence, or because you are arguing
   for arguing's sake, that the consistent seems inconsistent. It does not
   so appear to men who use sound reasoning; for the divine apostle
   teaches that the Divine Word was made Flesh, not by mutation, but by
   taking on Him the seed of Abraham. At the same time, too, he recalls
   the promise given to Abraham. Or do you not remember the promises given
   to the Patriarch by the God of the Universe?

   Eran.--What promises?

   Orth.--When He brought him out of his father's house, and ordered him
   to come into Palestine, did He not say to him "I will bless them that
   bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee, and in thy seed [989]
   shall all families of the earth be blessed"?

   Eran.--I remember these promises.

   Orth.--Remember, too, the covenants made by God with Isaac and Jacob,
   for He gave them, too, the same promises, confirming the former by the
   second and the third.

   Eran.--I remember them too.

   Orth.--It is in relation to these covenants that the divine apostle
   writes in his Epistle to the Galatians "Now to Abraham and his seed
   were the promises made." He saith not "seeds" as of many, but as of
   one...which is Christ, [990] very plainly showing that the manhood of
   Christ sprang from the seed of Abraham, and fulfilled the promise made
   to Abraham.

   Eran.--So the apostle says.

   Orth.--Enough has been said to remove all the controversy raised on
   this point. But I will nevertheless remind you of another prediction.
   The blessing given to the Patriarch Jacob and to his father and his
   grandfather was given by him to his son Judah alone. He said "A Prince
   shall not fail Judah, nor a leader from his loins, until he shall have
   come to whom it is in store, and he is the expectation of the
   Gentiles." [991] Or do you not accept this prediction as spoken of the
   Saviour Christ?

   Eran.--Jews give erroneous interpretations of prophecies of this kind,
   but I am a Christian; I trust in the Divine word; and I receive the
   prophecies without doubt.

   Orth.--Since then you confess that you believe the prophecies and
   acknowledge the predictions have been divinely uttered about our
   Saviour, consider what follows as to the intention of the words of the
   apostle, for while pointing out that the promises made to the
   patriarchs have reached their fulfilment, he uttered those remarkable
   words [992] "He took not on Him the nature of angels," all but saying
   the promise is true; the Lord has fulfilled His pledges; the fount of
   blessing is open to the gentiles; God had taken on Him the seed of
   Abraham; through it He brings about the promised salvation; through it
   He confirms the promise of the gentiles.

   Eran.--The words of the Prophet fit in admirably with those of the
   apostle.

   Orth.--So again the divine apostle, reminding us of the blessing of
   Judah, and pointing out how it received its fulfilment exclaims [993]
   "For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah." So too the
   Prophet [994] Micah and the evangelist [995] Matthew. For the former
   spoke his prediction, and the latter connects the prophecy with his
   narrative. What is extraordinary is that he says that the open enemies
   of the truth plainly told Herod that the Christ is born in Bethlehem,
   for it is written, he says, "And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah
   art not the least among the Princes of Judah for out of thee shall come
   a Governor who shall rule my people Israel." [996] Now let us subjoin
   what the Jews in their malignity omitted and so made the witness
   imperfect. For the prophet, after saying "Out of thee shall he come
   forth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel" adds "Whose goings forth
   have been of old, from everlasting." [997]

   Eran.--You have done well in adducing the whole evidence of the
   Prophet, for he points out that He who was born in Bethlehem was God.

   Orth.--Not God only but also Man; Man as sprung from Judah after the
   flesh and born in Bethlehem; and God as existing before the ages. For
   the words "Out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be
   Ruler," shew his birth after the flesh which has taken place in the
   last days; while the words "Whose goings forth have been of old, from
   everlasting" plainly proclaim His existence before the ages. In like
   manner also the divine apostle in his Epistle to the Romans bewailing
   the change to the worse of the ancient felicity of the Jews, and
   calling to mind their divine promises and legislation, goes on to say
   "Whose are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came,
   who is over all God blessed for ever Amen," [998] and in this same
   passage he exhibits Him both as Creator of all things and Lord and
   Ruler as God and as sprung from the Jews as man.

   Eran.--Well; you have explained these passages, what should you say to
   the prophecy of Jeremiah? For this proclaims him to be God only.

   Orth.--Of what prophecy do you speak?

   Eran.--"This is our God and there shall none other be accounted of in
   comparison to him--he hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath
   given it unto Jacob his servant and to Israel his beloved. Afterward
   did he shew himself upon earth and conversed with men." [999]

   In these words the Prophet speaks neither of the flesh, nor of manhood,
   nor of man, but of God alone.

   Orth.--What then is the good of reasoning? Do we say that the Divine
   nature is invisible? or do we dissent from the Apostle when he says
   [1000] "Immortal, invisible, the only God."

   Eran.--Indubitably the Divine nature is invisible.

   Orth.--How then was it possible for the invisible nature to be seen
   without a body? Or do you not remember those words of the apostle in
   which he distinctly teaches the invisibility of the divine nature? He
   says "Whom no man hath seen nor can see." [1001] If therefore the
   Divine Nature is invisible to men, and I will add too to Angels, tell
   me how he who cannot be seen or beheld was seen upon earth?

   Eran.--The Prophet says [1002] he was seen on the earth.

   Orth.--And the apostle says [1003] "Immortal, invisible, the only God"
   and [1004] "Whom no man hath seen and can see."

   Eran.--What then? is the Prophet lying?

   Orth.--God forbid. Both utterances are the words of the Holy Ghost.

   Eran.--Let us inquire then how the invisible was seen.

   Orth.--Do not, I beg you, bring in human reason. I shall yield to
   scripture alone.

   Eran.--You shall receive no argument unconfirmed by Holy Scripture, and
   if you bring me any solution of the question deduced from Holy
   Scripture I will receive it, and will in no wise gainsay it.

   Orth.--You know how a moment ago we made the word of the evangelist
   clear by means of the testimony of the apostle; and that the divine
   apostle showed us how the Word became Flesh, saying plainly "for verily
   He took not on Him the nature of angels but He took on Him the seed of
   Abraham." [1005] The same teacher will teach us how the divine Word was
   seen upon the earth and dwelt among men.

   Eran.--I submit to the words both of apostles and of prophets. Shew me
   then in accordance with your promise the interpretation of the
   prophecy.

   Orth.--The divine apostle, writing to Timothy, also says "without
   controversy great is the mystery of godliness. God was manifest in the
   flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the
   Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory." [1006]

   It is therefore plain that the divine nature is invisible, but the
   flesh visible, and that through the visible the invisible was seen, by
   its means working wonders and unveiling its own power, for with the
   hand He fashioned the sense of seeing and healed him that was blind
   from birth. Again He gave the power of hearing to the deaf, and loosed
   the fettered tongue, using his fingers for a tool and applying his
   spittle like some healing medicine. So again when He walked upon the
   sea He displayed the almighty power of the Godhead. Fitly, therefore,
   did the apostle say "God was manifest in the flesh." For through it
   appeared the invisible nature beheld by its means by the angel hosts,
   for "He was seen," he says, "of angels."

   The nature then of bodiless beings has shared with us the enjoyment of
   this boon.

   Eran.--Then did not the angels see God before the manifestation of the
   Saviour?

   Orth.--The apostle says that He "was made manifest in the flesh and
   seen of angels."

   Eran.--But the Lord said, "Take heed that ye despise not one of these
   little ones, for I say unto you that their angels do always behold the
   face of my Father which is in heaven." [1007]

   Orth.--But the Lord said again, "Not that any man hath seen the Father
   save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father." [1008] Wherefore the
   evangelist plainly exclaims, "No man hath seen God at any time," [1009]
   and confirms the word of the Lord, for he says, "The only begotten Son
   which is in the bosom of the Father He hath declared Him," and the
   great Moses, when he desired to see the invisible nature, heard the
   Lord God saying, "There shall no man see me and live." [1010]

   Eran.--How then are we to understand the words, "Their angels do always
   behold the face of my Father which is in heaven"?

   Orth.--Just as we commonly understand what is said about men who have
   been supposed to see God.

   Eran.--Pray make this plainer, for I do not understand. Can God be seen
   of men also?

   Orth.--Certainly not.

   Eran.--Yet we hear the divine scripture saying God appeared unto
   Abraham at the oak of Mamre; [1011] and Isaiah says "I saw the Lord
   sitting upon a throne high and lifted up," [1012] and the same thing is
   said by Micah, by Daniel and Ezekiel. And of the lawgiver Moses it is
   related that "The Lord spake to Moses face to face as a man speaketh
   unto his friend," [1013] and the God of the universe Himself said,
   "With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently and not in dark
   speeches." [1014] What then shall we say; did they behold the divine
   nature?

   Orth.--By no means, for God Himself said, "There shall no man see me
   and live."

   Eran.--Then they who say that they have seen God are liars?

   Orth.--God forbid--they saw what it was possible for them to see.

   Eran.--Then the loving Lord accommodates his revelation to the capacity
   of them that see Him?

   Orth.--Yes; and this He has shewn through the Prophet, "for I," He
   says, "have multiplied visions and by the hands of the Prophets was
   made like." [1015]

   He does not say "was seen" but "was made like." And making like does
   not shew the very nature of the thing seen. For even the image of the
   emperor does not exhibit the emperor's nature, though it distinctly
   preserves his features.

   Eran.--This is obscure and not sufficiently plain. Was not then the
   substance of God seen by them who beheld those revelations?

   Orth.--No; for who is mad enough to dare to say so?

   Eran.--But yet it is said that they saw.

   Orth.--Yes; it is said; but we both in the exercise of reverent reason,
   and in reliance on the Divine utterances, which exclaim distinctly, "No
   man hath seen God at any time," affirm that they did not see the Divine
   Nature, but certain visions adapted to their capacity.

   Eran.--So we say.

   Orth.--So also then let us understand of the angels when we hear that
   they daily see the face of your Father. [1016] For what they see is not
   the divine substance which cannot be circumscribed, comprehended, or
   apprehended, which embraces the universe, but some glory made
   commensurate with their nature.

   Eran.--This is acknowledged.

   Orth.--After the incarnation, however, He was seen also of angels, as
   the divine apostle says, not however by similitude of glory, but using
   the true and living covering of the flesh as a kind of screen. "God,"
   he says, "was made manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen
   of angels." [1017]

   Eran.--I accept this as Scripture, but I am not prepared to accept the
   novelties of phrase.

   Orth.--What novelties of phrase have we introduced?

   Eran.--That of the "screen." What Scripture calls the flesh of the Lord
   a screen?

   Orth.--You do not seem to be a very diligent reader of your Bible; if
   you had been you would not have found fault with what we have said as
   in a figure. For first of all the fact that the divine apostle says
   that the invisible nature was made manifest through the flesh allows us
   to understand the flesh as a screen of the Godhead. Secondly, the
   divine apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, distinctly uses the
   phrase, for he says, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter
   into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus by a new and living way, which
   he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say his flesh;
   and having an High Priest over the House of God. Coming with truth
   drawing near with a true heart in fulness of faith." [1018]

   Eran.--Your demonstration is unanswerable, for it is based on apostolic
   authority.

   Orth.--Do not then charge us with innovation. We will adduce for you
   yet another prophetic authority, distinctly calling the Lord's flesh a
   robe and mantle.

   Eran.--Should it not appear obscure and ambiguous we will say nothing
   against it, and be thankful for it.

   Orth.--I will make you yourself testify to the truth of the promise.
   You know how the Patriarch Jacob, when he was addressing Judah, limited
   the sovereignty of Judah by the birth of the Lord. [1019] "A prince
   shall not fail Judah, nor a leader from his loins until he shall have
   come to whom it is in store and he is the expectation of the Gentiles."
   You have already confessed that this prophecy was uttered about the
   saviour.

   Eran.--I have.

   Orth.--Remember then what follows; for he says "And unto him shall the
   gathering of the people be...he shall wash his robe in wine and his
   mantle in the blood of the grape." [1020]

   Eran.--The Patriarch spoke of garments, not of a body.

   Orth.--Tell me, then, when or where he washed his cloak in the blood of
   the grape?

   Eran.--Nay; tell me you when he reddened his body in it?

   Orth.--Answer I beseech you more reverently. [1021] Perhaps some of the
   uninitiated are within hearing.

   Eran.--I will both hear and answer in mystic language.

   Orth.--You know that the Lord called himself a vine?

   Eran.--Yes I know that he said "I am the true vine." [1022]

   Orth.--Now what is the fruit of a vine called after it is pressed?

   Eran.--It is called wine.

   Orth.--When the soldiers wounded the Saviour's side with the spear,
   what did the evangelist say was poured out from it?

   Eran.--Blood and water. [1023]

   Orth.--Well, then; he called the Saviour's blood blood of the grape,
   for if the Lord is called a vine, and the fruit of the vine wine, and
   from the Lord's side streams of blood and water flowed downwards over
   the rest of his body, fitly and appropriately the Patriarch foretells
   "He shall wash his robe in wine and his mantle in blood of the grape."
   For as we after the consecration call the mystic fruit of the vine the
   Lord's blood, so he called the blood of the true vine blood of the
   grape.

   Eran.--The point before us has been set forth in language at once
   mystical and clear.

   Orth.--Although what has been said is enough for your faith, I will,
   for confirmation of the faith, give you yet another proof.

   Eran.--I shall be grateful to you for so doing, for you will increase
   the favour done me.

   Orth.--You know how God called His own body bread?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And how in another place he called His flesh corn?

   Eran.--Yes, I know. For I have heard Him saying "The hour is come that
   the Son of man should be glorified," [1024] and "Except a corn of wheat
   fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die it
   bringeth forth much fruit." [1025]

   Orth.--Yes; and in the giving of the mysteries He called the bread,
   body, and what had been mixed, blood.

   Eran.--He so did.

   Orth.--Yet naturally the body would properly be called body, and the
   blood, blood.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--But our Saviour changed the names, and to His body gave the name
   of the symbol and to the symbol that of his body. So, after calling
   himself a vine, he spoke of the symbol as blood.

   Eran.--True. But I am desirous of knowing the reason of the change of
   names.

   Orth.--To them that are initiated in divine things the intention is
   plain. For he wished the partakers in the divine mysteries not to give
   heed to the nature of the visible objects, but, by means of the
   variation of the names, to believe the change wrought of grace. For He,
   we know, who spoke of his natural body as corn and bread, and, again,
   called Himself a vine, dignified the visible symbols by the appellation
   of the body and blood, not because He had changed their nature, but
   because to their nature He had added grace. [1026]

   Eran.--The mysteries are spoken of in mystic language, and there is a
   clear declaration of that which is not known to all.

   Orth.--Since then it is agreed that the body of the Lord is called by
   the patriarch "robe" and "mantle" [1027] and we have reached the
   discussion of the divine mysteries, tell me truly, of what do you
   understand the Holy Food to be a symbol and type? Of the godhead of the
   Lord Christ, or of His body and His blood?

   Eran.--Plainly of those things of which they received the names.

   Orth.--You mean of the body and of the blood?

   Eran.--I do.

   Orth.--You have spoken as a lover of truth should speak, for when the
   Lord had taken the symbol, He did not say "this is my godhead," but
   "this is my body;" and again "this is my blood" [1028] and in another
   place "the bread that I will give is my flesh which I will give for the
   life of the world." [1029]

   Eran.--These words are true, for they are the divine oracles.

   Orth.--If then they are true, I suppose the Lord had a body.

   Eran.--No; for I maintain him to be bodiless.

   Orth.--But you confess that He had a body?

   Eran.--I say that the Word was made flesh, for so I have been taught.

   Orth.--It seems, as the proverb has it, as if we are drawing water in a
   pail with a hole in it. [1030] For after all our demonstrations and
   solutions of difficulties, you are bringing the same arguments round
   again.

   Eran.--I am not giving you my arguments, but those of the gospels.

   Orth.--And have I not given you the interpretation of the words of the
   gospels from those of prophets and apostles?

   Eran.--They do not serve to clear up the point at issue.

   Orth.--And yet we shewed how, being invisible, He was made manifest
   through flesh, and the relationship of this very flesh we have been
   taught by the sacred writers--"He took on Him the seed of Abraham."
   [1031] And the Lord God said to the patriarch, "in thy seed shall all
   the nations of the earth be blessed," [1032] and the apostle, "It is
   evident our Lord sprang out of Judah." [1033] We adduced further
   several similar testimonies; but, since you are desirous of hearing yet
   others, listen to the apostle when he says, "For every high priest
   taken from among men is ordained that he may offer both gifts and
   sacrifices, wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat
   also to offer." [1034]

   Eran.--Point out, then, how He offered after taking a body.

   Orth.--The divine apostle himself clearly teaches in the very passage,
   for after a few words he says: "Wherefore, when He cometh into the
   world, He saith, sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not, but a body
   hast thou prepared me." [1035] He does not say "into a body hast thou
   changed," but "a body hast thou prepared," and he shows plainly that
   the formation of the body was wrought by the Spirit in accordance with
   the utterance of the gospel, "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife;
   for that which is generated in her is of the Holy Ghost." [1036]

   Eran.--The virgin then gave birth only to a body?

   Orth.--It appears that you do not even understand the composition of
   words, much less their meaning, for he is teaching Joseph the manner,
   not of the generation, but of the conception. For he does not say that
   which is generated of her, i.e. made, or formed, is of the Holy Ghost.
   Joseph, ignorant of the mystery, was suspicions of adultery; he was
   therefore plainly taught the formation by the Spirit. It is this which
   He signified through the prophet when He said "A body hast thou
   prepared me" [1037] for the divine Apostle being full of the Spirit
   interpreted the prediction. If then the offering of gifts is the
   special function of priests and Christ in His humanity was called
   priest and offered no other sacrifice save [1038] His own body, then
   the Lord Christ had a body.

   Eran.--This even I have repeatedly affirmed, and I do not say that the
   divine Word appeared without a body. What I maintain is not that He
   took a body but that He was made flesh.

   Orth.--So far as I see our contest lies with the supporters of
   Valentinus, of Marcion, and of Manes; but even they never had the
   hardihood to say that the immutable nature underwent mutation into
   flesh.

   Eran.--Reviling is unchristian.

   Orth.--We do not revile, but we are fighting for truth, and we are
   vexed at your arguing about the indisputable as though it could be
   disputed. However, I will endeavour to put an end to your ungracious
   contention. Answer now; do you remember the promises which God made to
   David?

   Eran.--Which?

   Orth.--Those which the prophet inserted in the 88th Psalm.

   Eran.--I know that many promises were made to David. Which are you
   enquiring about now?

   Orth.--Those which refer to the Lord Christ.

   Eran.--Recall the utterances yourself, for you promised to adduce your
   proofs.

   Orth.--Listen now how the prophet praises God at the very beginning of
   the Psalm. He saw with his prophetic eyes the future iniquity of his
   people, and the captivity that was in consequence foredoomed; yet he
   praised his own Lord for unfailing promises. "I will sing," he says,
   "of the mercies of the Lord forever, with my mouth will I make known
   Thy faithfulness to all generations, for thou hast said, Mercy shall be
   built up for ever, Thy faithfulness shalt Thou establish in the very
   heavens." [1039]

   Through all this the prophet teaches that the promise was made by God
   on account of lovingkindness, and that the promise is faithful. Then he
   goes on to say what He promised, and to whom, introducing God Himself
   as the speaker. ("I have made a covenant with my chosen." [1040] ) It
   is the Patriarchs that He called chosen; then He goes on "I have sworn
   unto David my servant," [1041] and He states concerning what He swore,
   "Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all
   generations." [1042]

   Now whom do you suppose to be called the seed of David?

   Eran.--The promise was made about Solomon.

   Orth.--Then he made his covenant with the Patriarchs about Solomon, for
   before what was said about David he mentioned the promises made to the
   Patriarchs "I have made a covenant with my chosen," and He promised the
   Patriarchs that in their seed He would bless all nations. Kindly point
   out how the nations were blessed through Solomon.

   Eran.--Then God fulfilled this promise, not by means of Solomon, but of
   our Saviour.

   Orth.--So then our Lord Christ gave the fulfilment to the promises made
   to David.

   Eran.--I hold that these promises were made by God, either about
   Solomon, or about Zerubbabel.

   Orth.--Just now you used the arguments of Marcion and Valentinus and of
   Manes. Now you have gone over to the directly opposite faction, and are
   advocating the impudence of the Jews. This is just like all those who
   turn out of a straight road; they err and stray first one way and then
   another, wandering in a wilderness.

   Eran.--Revilers are excluded by the Apostle from the kingdom. [1043]

   Orth.--Yes, if their revilings are vain. Sometimes the divine Apostle
   himself opportunely uses this mode of speech. He calls the Galatians
   "foolish," [1044] and of others he says "men of corrupt minds,
   reprobate concerning the faith," [1045] and again of another set,
   "Whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame," [1046] and
   so forth.

   Eran.--What occasion did I give you for reviling?

   Orth.--Do you really not think that the willing advocacy of the
   declared enemies of the truth furnishes the pious with very reasonable
   ground of indignation?

   Eran.--And what enemies of the truth have I patronized?

   Orth.--Now, Jews.

   Eran.--How so?

   Orth.--Jews connect prophecies of this kind with Solomon and
   Zerubbabel, in order to exhibit the groundlessness of the Christian
   position; but the mere words are quite enough to convict them of their
   iniquity, for it is written "I will establish my throne for ever."
   [1047] Now not only Solomon and Zerubbabel, to whom such prophecies are
   applied by the Jews, have lived out their appointed time, and reached
   the end of life, but the whole race of David has become extinct; for
   who ever heard of any one at the present day descended from the root of
   David?

   Eran.--But are not, then, those who are called Patriarchs of the Jews
   of the family of David?

   Orth.--Certainly not.

   Eran.--Whence, then, are they sprung?

   Orth.--From the foreigner Herod, who, on his father's side, was an
   Ascalonite, and on his mother's an Idumæan; [1048] but they, too, have
   all disappeared, and many years have gone by since their sovereignty
   came to an end. But our Lord God promised not only to maintain the seed
   of David for ever, but to establish his kingdom undestroyed; for He
   said, "I will build up my throne to all generations."

   But we see that his race is gone, and his kingdom come to an end. Yet
   though we see this, we know that the God of the Universe is true.

   Eran.--That God is true is plain.

   Orth.--If, then, God is true, as in truth He is, and promised David
   that He would establish His race for ever, and keep his kingdom through
   all time, and if neither race nor kingdom are to be seen, for both have
   come to an end, how can we convince our opponents that God is true?

   Eran.--I suppose, then, the prophecy really points to the Lord Christ.

   Orth.--If, then, you confess this, let us investigate together a
   passage in the middle of the Psalm; we shall then more clearly see what
   the prophecy means.

   Eran.--Lead on; I will religiously follow in your footsteps.

   Orth.--After making many promises about this seed that it should be
   Lord both by sea and land [1049] and higher than the kings of the earth
   and be called the first begotten of God, [1050] and should boldly call
   God, Father [1051] God also added this, "My mercy will I keep for him
   for evermore and my covenant shall stand fast with him. His seed also
   will I make to endure for ever and his throne as the days of heaven."
   [1052]

   Eran.--The promise goes beyond the bounds of human nature, for both the
   life and the honour are indestructible and eternal. But men endure but
   for a season; their nature is short lived and their kingdom even during
   its lifetime undergoes many and various vicissitudes, so that truly the
   greatness of the prophecy befits none but the Saviour Christ.

   Orth.--Go on then to what follows and your opinion upon this point will
   be in every way confirmed, for again saith the God of the universe,
   "Once have I sworn by my holiness, if I lie unto David, his seed shall
   endure for ever and his throne as the sun before me. It shall be
   established for ever as the moon." [1053]

   Then, pointing out the truth of the promise He adds, "And the witness
   is faithful in heaven."

   Eran.--We must believe without doubt in the promises given by the
   faithful witness, for, if we are wont to believe men who have promised
   to speak the truth even if they do not confirm their words with an
   oath, who can be so mad as to disbelieve the Creator of the Universe,
   when He adds an oath to his words? For He who forbids others to swear
   confirmed the immutability of his counsel by an oath, [1054] "that by
   two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie we might
   have a strong consolation who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
   hope set before us." [1055]

   Orth.--If then the promise is irrefragable, and among the Jews there is
   now neither family nor kingdom of the prophet David to be seen, let us
   believe that our Lord Jesus Christ is plainly called seed of David in
   His humanity, for of Him the life and the kingdom are both alike
   eternal.

   Eran.--We have no doubt; and this I own to be the truth.

   Orth.--These proofs then are sufficient to show clearly the manhood
   which our Lord and Saviour took of David's seed. But to remove all
   possibility of doubt by the witness of the majority, let us hear how
   God makes mention of the promises given to David through the voice of
   the prophet Isaiah. "I will make," he says, "an everlasting covenant
   with you," and, signifying the law-giver, he adds, "even the sure
   mercies of David." [1056]

   Since He made this promise to David, and spoke through Esaias, He will
   assuredly bring the promise to pass. And what follows after the
   prophecy is in harmony with what I say, for he saith "Behold I have
   given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the
   people. Behold nations that know thee not shall call upon thee, and
   peoples that understand thee not shall run unto thee." [1057] Now this
   fits in with none that are sprung from David, for who of David's
   descendants, as Esaias says, was made a ruler of nations? And what
   nations in their prayers ever called on David's descendants as God?

   Eran.--About what is perfectly clear it is unbecoming to dispute, and
   this plainly refers to the Lord Christ.

   Orth.--Then let us pass on to another prophetic testimony and let us
   hear the same prophet saying "There shall come forth a rod out of the
   stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow out of his roots." [1058]

   Eran.--I think this prophecy was delivered about Zerubbabel.

   Orth.--If you hear what follows, you will not remain in your opinion.
   The Jews have never so understood this prediction, for the prophet goes
   on, "and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
   wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit
   of knowledge and the fear of the Lord." [1059] This would never be
   attributed by any one to a mere man, for even to the very holy the
   gifts of the Spirit are given by division, as the divine apostle
   witnesses when he says, "To one is given by the Spirit the word of
   wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit," [1060]
   and so on. The prophet describes Him who sprang from the root of Jesse
   as possessing all the powers of the spirit.

   Eran.--To gainsay this were sheer folly.

   Orth.--Now hear what follows. You will see some things that transcend
   human nature, he goes on. "He shall not judge after the sight of His
   eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of His ears, but with
   righteousness shall He judge the poor, and reprove with equity the
   mighty [1061] of the earth, and He shall smite the earth with the word
   of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips shall he slay the
   wicked." [1062] Now of these predictions some are human and some
   divine. Justice, truth, equity, and rectitude in giving judgment
   exhibit virtue in human nature.

   Eran.--We have so far clearly learned that the prophet predicts the
   coming of our Saviour Christ.

   Orth.--The sequel will shew you yet more plainly the truth of the
   interpretation. For he goes on, "The wolf shall dwell with the lamb,"
   [1063] and so on, whereby he teaches at once the distinction of modes
   of life and the harmony of faith; and experience furnishes a proof of
   the prediction, for they that abound in wealth, they that live in
   poverty, servants and masters, rulers and ruled, soldiers and citizens
   and they that wield the sceptre of the world are received in one font,
   are all taught one doctrine, are all admitted to one mystic table, and
   each of the believers enjoys an equal share.

   Eran.--It is thus shewn that God is spoken of.

   Orth.--Not only God but man. So at the very beginning of this
   prediction he says that a rod shall grow out of the root of Jesse. Then
   at the conclusion of the prediction he takes up once more the strain
   with which he began, for he says "There shall be a root of Jesse which
   shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek
   and his rest shall be glorious." [1064] Now Jesse was the father of
   David, and the promise with an oath was made to David. The prophet
   would not have spoken of the Lord Christ as a rod growing out of Jesse
   if he had only known Him as God. The prediction also foretold the
   change of the world, for "the earth" he says "shall be full of the
   knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea." [1065]

   Eran.--I have heard the prophetic utterances. But I was anxious to know
   clearly if the divine company of the apostles also says that the Lord
   Christ sprang from the seed of David according to the flesh.

   Orth.--You have asked for information which so far from being hard is
   exceedingly easy to give you. Only listen to the first of the apostles
   exclaiming "David being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn an
   oath to him that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, He
   would raise up Christ to sit upon His throne; he seeing this before
   spake of the resurrection of Christ, that His soul was not left in hell
   neither His flesh did see corruption." [1066]

   Hence you may perceive that of the seed of David according to the flesh
   sprang the Lord Christ, and had not flesh only but also a soul.

   Eran.--What other apostle preached this?

   Orth.--The great Peter alone was sufficient to testify to the truth,
   for the Lord after receiving the confession of the truth given by Peter
   alone confirmed it by a memorable approval. But since you are anxious
   to hear others proclaiming this same thing, hear Paul and Barnabas
   preaching in Antioch in Pisidia; for they, when they had made mention
   of David, continued "Of this man's seed hath God according to his
   promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus," [1067] and so on. And in
   a letter to Timothy the divine Paul says "Remember that Jesus Christ of
   the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel."
   [1068] And, when writing to the Romans, at the very outset he calls
   attention to the Davidic kin, for he says "Paul a servant of Jesus
   Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God which
   He had promised before by his prophets in the holy scriptures
   concerning His Son which was made of the seed of David according to the
   flesh," [1069] and so on.

   Eran.--Your proofs are numerous and convincing; but tell me why you
   have omitted what follows?

   Orth.--Because it is not about the Godhead, but about the manhood, that
   you are in difficulties. Had you been in doubt about the Godhead, I
   would have given you proof of it. It is enough to say "according to the
   Flesh" to declare the Godhead which is not expressed in terms. When
   speaking of a relationship of man in general I do not say the son of
   such an one "according to the flesh," but simply "son," so the divine
   Evangelist writing his genealogy says "Abraham begat Isaac" [1070] and
   does not add according to the flesh, for Isaac was merely man, and he
   mentions the rest in like manner, for they were men and had no
   qualities transcending their nature. But when the heralds of the truth
   are discoursing of our Lord Christ, and are pointing out to the
   ignorant His lower relation, they add the words "according to the
   flesh," thus indicating His Godhead and teaching that the Lord Christ
   was not only man but also Eternal God.

   Eran.--You have adduced many proofs from the apostles and prophets, but
   I follow the words of the Evangelist "The Word was made Flesh." [1071]

   Orth.--I also follow this divine teaching, but I understand it in a
   pious sense, as meaning that He was made Flesh by taking flesh and a
   reasonable soul. But if the divine Word took nothing of our nature,
   then the covenants made with the patriarchs by the God of all with
   oaths were not true, and the blessing of Judah was vain, and the
   promise to David was false, and the Virgin was superfluous, because she
   did not contribute anything of our nature to the Incarnate God. Then
   the predictions of the prophets have no fulfilment. Then vain is our
   preaching, vain our faith and vain the hope of the resurrection [1072]
   for the Apostle, it appears, lies when he says "and hath raised us up
   together and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus."
   [1073] For if the Lord Christ had nothing of our nature then He is
   falsely described as our first fruits, and His bodily nature has not
   risen from the dead and has not taken the seat in Heaven on the right
   hand; and if He has obtained none of these things, how hath God raised
   us up together and made us sit together with Christ, when we in no wise
   belong to Him in Nature? But it is impious to say this, for the divine
   apostle, though the general resurrection has not yet taken place,
   though the kingdom of heaven has not yet been bestowed upon the
   faithful, exclaims, "He hath raised us up together and made us sit
   together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus," in order to teach that
   since the resurrection of our first fruits, and His sitting on the
   right hand has come to pass, we too in general shall attain the
   resurrection, and that all they who share in His nature and have
   adopted His faith, share too in the first fruits of His glory.

   Eran.--We have gone through many and sound arguments, but I was anxious
   to know the force of the Gospel saying.

   Orth.--You stand in need of no interpretation from without. The
   evangelist himself interprets himself. For after saying "the Word was
   made flesh," he goes on "and dwelt among us." [1074] That is to say by
   dwelling in us, and using the flesh taken from us as a kind of temple,
   He is said to have been made flesh, and, teaching that He remained
   unchanged, the evangelist adds "and we beheld His glory--the glory as
   of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." [1075]
   For though clad with flesh He exhibited His Father's nobility, shot
   forth the beams of the Godhead, and emitted the radiance of the power
   of the Lord, revealing by His works of wonder His hidden nature. A
   similar illustration is afforded by the words of the divine apostle to
   the Philippians: "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ
   Jesus, who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal
   with God, but made Himself of no reputation and took upon Him the form
   of a servant and was made in the likeness of men, and being found in
   fashion as a man he humbled Himself and became obedient unto death even
   the death of the cross." [1076]

   Look at the relation of the utterances. The evangelist says "the Word
   was made flesh and dwelt among us," the apostle, "took upon him the
   form of a servant;" the evangelist "We beheld His glory, the glory as
   of the only begotten of the Father"--the apostle, "who being in the
   form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with God." To put the
   matter briefly, both teach that being God and son of God, and clad with
   His Father's glory, and having the same nature and power with Him that
   begat Him, He that was in the beginning and was with God, and was God,
   and was Creator of the world, took upon Him the form of a servant, and
   it seemed that this was all which was seen; but it was God clad in
   human nature, and working out the salvation of men. This is what was
   meant by "The word was made flesh" and "was made in the likeness of men
   and being found in fashion as a man." This is all that was looked at by
   the Jews, and therefore they said to him "For a good work we stone Thee
   not but for blasphemy and because that Thou being a man makest Thyself
   God," [1077] and again "This man is not of God because He keepeth not
   the Sabbath Day." [1078]

   Eran.--The Jews were blind on account of their unbelief, and therefore
   used these words.

   Orth.--If you find even the apostles before the resurrection thus
   saying, will you receive the interpretation? I hear them in the boat,
   after the mighty miracle of the calm, saying "what manner of man is
   this, that even the winds and the sea obey Him?" [1079]

   Eran.--This is made plain. But now tell me this;--the divine apostle
   says that He "was made in the likeness of man."

   Orth.--What was taken of him was not man's likeness, but man's nature.
   For "form of a servant" is understood just as "the form of God" is
   understood to mean God's nature. He took this, and so was made in the
   likeness of man, and was found in fashion as a man. For, being God, He
   seemed to be man, on account of the nature which He took. The
   evangelist, however, speaks of His being made in the likeness of man as
   His being made flesh. But that you may know that they who deny the
   flesh of the Saviour are of the opposite spirit, hear the great John in
   his Catholic Epistle saying "Every spirit that confesses that Jesus
   Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that confesses
   not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God, and this is
   that spirit of Anti-Christ." [1080]

   Eran.--You have given a plausible interpretation, but I was anxious to
   know how the old teachers of the Church have understood the passage
   "the word was made flesh."

   Orth.--You ought to have been persuaded by the apostolic and prophetic
   proofs; but since you require further the interpretations of the holy
   Fathers I will also furnish you, God helping me, this medicine.

   Eran.--Do not bring me men of obscure position or doubtful doctrine. I
   shall not receive the interpretation of such as these.

   Orth.--Does the far famed Athanasius, brightest light of the church of
   Alexandria, seem to you to be worthy of credit?

   Eran.--Certainly, for he ratified his teaching by the suffering he
   underwent for the Truth's sake.

   Orth.--Hear then how he wrote to Epictetus. [1081] "The expression of
   John the Word was made flesh' has this interpretation, so far as can be
   discovered from the similar passage which we find in St. Paul Christ
   was made a curse for us.' [1082] It is not because He was made a curse
   but because He received the curse on our behalf that He is said to have
   been made a curse, and so it is not because He was turned into flesh,
   but because He took flesh on our behalf, that He is said to have been
   made flesh." So far the divine Athanasius. Gregory, too, whose glory
   among all men is great, who formerly ruled the Imperial city at the
   mouth of the Bosphorus and afterwards dwelt at Nazianzus, thus wrote to
   Cledonius against the specious fallacies of Apollinarius.

   Eran.--He was an illustrious man and a foremost fighter in the cause of
   piety.

   Orth.--Hear him then. He says [1083] "the expression He was made Flesh'
   seems to be parallel to His being said to have been made sin and a
   curse, [1084] not because the Lord was transmuted into these,--for how
   could He?--but because He accepted these when He took on Him our
   iniquities and bore our infirmities." [1085]

   Eran.--The two interpretations agree.

   Orth.--We have shown you the pastors of the south and north in harmony;
   now then let us introduce too the illustrious teachers of the west, who
   have written their interpretation, if with another tongue, yet with one
   and the same mind.

   Eran.--I am told that Ambrosius, who adorned the episcopal throne at
   Milan, fought in the first ranks against all heresy, and wrote works of
   great beauty and in agreement with the teaching of the apostles.

   Orth.--I will give you his interpretation. Ambrosius says in his work
   concerning the faith "It is written that the Word was made flesh. I do
   not deny that it is written, but look at the terms used; for there
   follows and dwelt among us,' that is to say dwelt in human flesh. You
   are therefore astonished at the terms in which it is written that the
   Word was made flesh, on the assumption of flesh, by the divine Word,
   when also concerning sin which He had not, it is said that He was made
   sin, that is to say not that He was made the nature and operation of
   sin, but that he might crucify our sin in the flesh; let them then give
   over asserting that the nature of the Word has undergone change and
   alteration, for He who took is one and that which was taken other."
   [1086]

   It is now fitting that you should hear the teachers of the east, this
   being the only quarter of the east, this being the only quarter of the
   world which we have hitherto left unnoticed, though they indeed might
   well have first witnessed to the truth, for to them was first imparted
   the teaching of the apostles. But since you have sharpened your tongues
   against the first-born sons of piety by whetting them on the hone of
   falsehood, we have reserved for them the last place, that after first
   hearing the rest, you might lay witness by the side of witness, and so
   at once admire their harmony, and cease from your own interminable
   talk. Listen then to Flavianus who for a long time right wisely moved
   the tiller of the church of Antioch, and made the churches which he
   guided ride safe over the Arian storm, by expounding to them the word
   of the gospel. "The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us; He is not
   turned into flesh, nor yet did he cease from being God, for this he was
   from all eternity and became flesh in the dispensation of the
   incarnation [1087] after himself building his own temple, and taking up
   his abode in the passible creature." And if you desire to hear the
   ancients of Palestine, lend your ears to the admirable Gelasius, who
   did diligent husbandry in the church of Cæsarea. Now these are his
   words in his homily on the festival of the Lord's epiphany. [1088]
   "Learn the truth from the words of John the Fisherman, And the word was
   made flesh,' not having himself undergone change, but having taken up
   his abode with us. The dwelling is one thing; the Word is another; the
   temple is one thing, and God who dwells in it, another."

   Eran.--I am much struck by the agreement.

   Orth.--Now do you not suppose that the rule of the apostolic faith was
   kept by John, who first nobly watered the field of the church of the
   Antiochenes, and then was a wise husbandman of that of the imperial
   city?

   Eran.--I hold this teacher to be in all respects an admirable one.

   Orth.--Well, this most excellent man has interpreted this passage of
   the Gospel. He writes, [1089] "When you hear that the Word was made
   flesh, be not startled or cast down, for the substance did not
   deteriorate into flesh--an idea of the uttermost impiety--but
   continuing to be just what it is, so took the form of a servant. For
   just as when the apostle says Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of
   the law, being made a curse for us,' [1090] he does not say that the
   substance of Christ departed from His own glory, and took the substance
   of a curse, a position which not even devils would imagine, nor the
   utterly senseless, and the naturally idiotic--so remarkable being the
   connection between impiety and insanity. But what he does assert is
   that after receiving the curse due to us, He does not suffer us to be
   cursed for the future. It is in this sense that He is stated to have
   been made flesh, not because he had changed the substance into flesh,
   but because he had assumed the flesh, the substance remaining all the
   while unimpaired." [1091]

   You may like to hear also Severianus, Bishop of Gabala. [1092] If so, I
   will adduce his testimony and do you lend your ears.

   "The text the Word was made flesh' does not indicate a deterioration of
   nature but the assumption of our nature. Suppose you take the word was
   made' to indicate a change; then when you hear Paul saying Christ hath
   redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,' do
   you understand him to mean a change into the nature of a curse? Just as
   being made a curse had no other meaning than that He took our curse
   upon Himself, so the words was made flesh and dwelt among us mean
   nothing other than the assumption of flesh."

   Eran.--I admire the exact agreement [1093] of these men. For they are
   as unanimous in giving the same interpretations of evangelical writings
   as if they had met in the same place and written down their opinion
   together.

   Orth.--Mountains and seas separate them very far from one another, yet
   distance does not damage their harmony, for they were all inspired by
   the same gift of the spirit. I would also have offered you the
   interpretations of the victorious champions of piety Diodorus and
   Theodorus, had I not seen that you were ill disposed towards them, and
   had inherited the hostility of Apollinarius; you would have seen that
   they have expressed similar experiences, drawing water from the divine
   Fount, and becoming themselves too, streams of the spirit. But I will
   pass them by, for you have declared a truceless war against them. I
   will, however, shew you the famous teacher of the Church, and his mind
   about the divine incarnation, that you may know what opinion he held
   concerning the assumed nature. You have no doubt heard of the
   illustrious Ignatius, who received episcopal grace by the hand of the
   great Peter, [1094] and after ruling the church of Antioch, wore the
   crown of martyrdom. You have heard too of Irenæus, who enjoyed the
   teaching of Polycarp, and became a light of the western Gauls;--of
   Hippolytus and Methodius, bishops and martyrs, and the rest, whose
   names I will append to their expressions of opinion.

   Eran.--I am exceedingly desirous of hearing their testimony too.

   Orth.--Hear them now bringing forward the apostolic teaching. Testimony
   of Saint Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, and martyr.

   From the letter to the Smyrnæans (I.):--

   "Having a full conviction with respect to our Lord as being truly
   descended from David according to the flesh, son of God according to
   Godhead [1095] and power, born really of a virgin, baptized by John
   that all righteousness might be fulfilled [1096] by Him, really in the
   time of Pontius Pilate and of Herod the tetrarch crucified for our sake
   in the flesh." [1097]

   Of the same in the same epistle:--

   "For what advantageth it me if a man praises me but blasphemes my Lord,
   in not confessing him to be a bearer of flesh? but he who does not make
   this confession really denies Him and is himself bearer of a corpse."
   [1098]

   Of the same from the same epistle:--

   "For if these things were done by our Lord in appearance only, then it
   is in appearance only that I am a prisoner in chains; and why have I
   delivered myself to death, to fire, to sword, to the beasts? But he who
   is near to the sword is near to God. [1099] Only in the name of Jesus
   Christ that I may share his sufferings I endure all things while He,
   Perfect Man whom some in their ignorance deny, gives me strength."
   [1100]

   From the same in the letter to the Ephesians:--

   "For our God Jesus Christ was born in Mary's womb by dispensation of
   God of the seed of David [1101] and of the Holy Ghost who was born and
   was baptized that our mortality might be purified." [1102]

   From the same epistle:--

   "If ye all individually come together by grace name by name in one
   faith, and in one Jesus Christ according to the flesh of David's race
   Son of God and Son of man. [1103]

   Of the same from the same epistle:--

   "There is one Physician of flesh and of spirit generate and ingenerate,
   God in man, true life in death, Son of Mary and of God, first passible
   and then impassible, Jesus Christ our Lord." [1104]

   Lastly of the same in his epistle to the Trallians:--

   "Be ye made deaf therefore when any man speaks to you apart from Jesus
   Christ, who was of David's race and of Mary, who was really born and
   really ate and drank and was persecuted in the time of Pontius Pilate,
   was crucified and died, while beings on earth and beings in heaven and
   beings under the earth were looking on." [1105]

   Testimony of Irenæus bishop of Lyons, from his third book Against the
   heresies:--

   "Why then did they add the words In the city of David,' [1106] save to
   proclaim the good news that the promise made by God to David, that of
   the fruit of his loins should come an everlasting king, was fulfilled;
   a promise which indeed the Creator of the world had made." [1107]

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "And when he says Hear ye now, Oh House of David' [1108] he means that
   the everlasting King whom God promised to David that he would raise up
   from his body is He who was born of David's Virgin."

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "If then the first Adam had had a human father and had been begotten of
   seed, it would have been reasonable to say that the second Adam had
   been begotten of Joseph. But if the former was taken from earth, and
   his creator was God, it was necessary also that He who renews in
   himself the man created by God should have the same likeness of
   generation with that former. Why then did not God again take dust? Why
   did he on the other hand ordain that the formation should be made of
   Mary? That there might be no other creation; that that which was being
   saved might be no other thing; but that the former might himself be
   renewed without loss of the likeness. For then do they too fall away
   who allege that He took nothing from the Virgin, that they may
   repudiate the inheritance of the flesh and cast off the likeness."
   [1109]

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "Since his going down into Mary is useless; for why went He down into
   her if He was designed to take nothing from her? And further, if He had
   taken nothing from Mary He would not have accepted the food taken from
   earth whereby is nourished the body taken from earth, nor would He like
   Moses and Elias, after fasting forty days, have hungered, on account of
   His body demanding its own food, nor yet would John his disciple when
   writing about him have said--Jesus being wearied from his journey sat,'
   [1110] nor would David have uttered the prediction about him And they
   added to the pain of my wounds,' [1111] nor would he have wept over
   Lazarus, [1112] nor would He have sweated drops of blood, [1113] nor
   would He have said, my soul is exceedingly sorrowful,' [1114] nor yet
   when He was pierced would blood and water have issued from His side.
   [1115] For all these things are proofs of the flesh taken from earth,
   which He had renewed in Himself in the salvation of his own creature."
   [1116]

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "For as by the disobedience of the one man who was first formed from
   rude earth the many were made sinners [1117] and lost their life, so
   also was it fitting that through obedience of one man, the firstborn of
   a virgin, many should be made righteous and receive their salvation."
   [1118]

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "I have said ye are gods and all of you children of the Most High but
   ye shall die like man.' [1119] This He says to them that did not accept
   the gift of adoption, but dishonour the incarnation of the pure
   generation of the word of God, deprive man of his ascent to God, and
   are ungrateful to the Word of God who for their sakes was made flesh.
   For this cause was the word made man that man receiving the word and
   accepting the adoption should be made God's son. [1120] "

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "Since then on account of the foreordained dispensation [1121] the
   spirit came down, and the only begotten Son of God, who also is Word of
   the Father, when the fulness of time was come, was made flesh in man
   and our Lord Jesus Christ--being one and the same--fulfilled all the
   human dispensation as the Lord himself testifies, and the apostles
   confess, all the teachings of men who invented the ogdoads and tetrads
   and similitudes are proved plainly false." [1122]

   Testimony of the Holy Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, from his discourse
   on [1123] "The Lord is my shepherd":--

   "And an ark of incorruptible wood was the Saviour Himself, for the
   incorruptibility and indestructibility of His Tabernacle signified its
   producing no corruption of sin. For the sinner who confesses his sin
   says My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness.' [1124]
   But the Lord was without sin, made in His human nature of incorruptible
   wood, that is to say, of the Virgin and the Holy Ghost, overlaid within
   and without, as it were, by purest gold of the word of God."

   Of the same from his discourse on Elkanah and Hannah:--

   "Bring me then, O Samuel, the Heifer drawn to Bethlehem, that you may
   shew the King begotten of David, and anointed King and Priest by the
   Father."

   From the same discourse:--

   "Tell me, O Blessed Mary, what it was that was conceived by thee in the
   womb; what it was that was borne by thee in a Virgin's womb. It was the
   Word of God, firstborn from Heaven, on thee descending, and man
   firstborn being formed in a womb, that the first born Word of God might
   be shewn united to a firstborn man."

   From the same discourse:--

   "The second, which was through the prophets as through Samuel, he
   revokes, and turns his people from the slavery of strangers. The third,
   in which He took the manhood of the Virgin and was present in the
   flesh; who, when He saw the city wept over it."

   Of the same from his discourse on the beginning of Isaiah: [1125] --

   "He likens the world to Egypt; its idolatry, to images; its removal and
   destruction to an earthquake. The Word he calls the Lord' and by a
   swift cloud' he means the right pure tabernacle enthroned on which our
   Lord Jesus Christ entered into life to undo the fall."

   Testimony of the Holy Methodius, [1126] bishop and martyr, from his
   discourse on the martyrs:--

   "So wonderful and precious is martyrdom that our Lord Jesus Christ
   Himself, the Son of God, testified in its honour that He thought it not
   robbery to be equal with God, that He might crown with this grace the
   Manhood into whom He had come down."

   Testimony of the holy Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, confessor. From
   his interpretation of the xvith Psalm:--

   "The soul of Jesus experienced both. For it was in the place of the
   souls of men and being made without the flesh, lives and survives. So
   it is reasonable and of the same substance as the souls of men, just as
   the flesh is of the same substance as the flesh of men, coming forth
   from Mary."

   Of the same from his work about the soul:--

   "On looking at the education of the child, or at the increase of his
   stature, or at the extension of time, or at the growth of the body,
   what would they say? But, to omit the miracles wrought upon earth, let
   them behold the raisings of the dead to life, the signs of the Passion,
   the marks of the scourges, the bruises and the blows, the wounded side,
   the prints of the nails, the shedding of the blood, the evidences of
   the death, and in a word the actual resurrection of the very body."

   From the same work:--

   "Indeed if any one looks to the generation of the body, he would
   clearly discover that after being born at Bethlehem He was wrapped in
   swaddling clothes, and was brought up for some time in Egypt, because
   of the evil counsel of the cruel Herod, and grew to man's estate at
   Nazareth."

   From the same work:--

   "For the tabernacle of the Word and of God is not the same, whereby the
   blessed Stephen beheld the divine glory." [1127]

   Of the same from his sermon on "the Lord created me in the beginning of
   His way": [1128] --

   "If the Word received a beginning of His generation from the time when
   passing through His mother's womb He wore the human frame, it is clear
   that He was made of a woman; but if He was from the first Word and God
   with the Father, and if we assert that the universe was made by Him,
   then He who is and is the cause of all created things was not made of a
   woman, but is by nature God, self existent, infinite, incomprehensible;
   and of a woman was made man, formed in the Virgin's womb by the Holy
   Ghost."

   From the same work:--

   "For a temple absolutely holy and undefiled is the tabernacle of the
   word according to the flesh, wherein God visibly made his habitation
   and dwelt, and we assert this not of conjecture, for He who is by
   nature the Son of this God when predicting the destruction and
   resurrection of the temple distinctly instructs us by His teaching when
   He says to the murderous Jews, Destroy this temple and in three days I
   will raise it up.'" [1129]

   From the same work:--

   "When then the Word built a temple and carried the manhood, companying
   in a body with men, He invisibly displayed various miracles, and sent
   forth the apostles as heralds of His everlasting kingdom."

   Of the same from his interpretation of Psalm xcii:--

   "It is plain then if He that anointeth' means God whose throne He calls
   everlasting,' the anointer is plainly by nature God, begotten of God.
   But the anointed took an acquired virtue, being adorned with a chosen
   temple of the Godhead dwelling in it."

   The testimony of the holy Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria and
   Confessor. From the defence of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria:--

   "I am the vine, ye are the branches. My Father is the husbandman.'
   [1130] For we according to the body are of kin to the Lord, and for
   this reason He himself said I will declare thy name unto my brethren.'
   [1131] And just as the branches are of one substance with the vine, and
   of it, so too we, since we have bodies akin to the body of the Lord,
   receive them of His fulness, and have it as a root for our resurrection
   and salvation. And the Father is called a husbandman, for He Himself
   through the Word tilled the vine which is the Lord's body."

   Of the same from the same treatise:--

   "The Lord was called a vine on account of His bodily relationship to
   the branches which are ourselves."

   Of the same from his greater oration concerning the faith:--

   "The scripture in the beginning was the Word' [1132] clearly indicates
   the Godhead. The passage the Word was made flesh' [1133] shews the
   human nature of the Lord."

   From the same discourse:--

   "He shall wash His garments in wine' [1134] that is His body, which is
   the vestment of the Godhead in His own blood."

   Of the same from the same discourse:--

   "The Word was' [1135] is referred to His divinity, the words was made
   flesh' [1136] to His body, the Word was made flesh not by being reduced
   to flesh, but by bearing flesh, just as any one might say such an one
   became or was made an old man, though not so born from the beginning,
   or the soldier became a veteran, not being previously such as he
   became. John says, I became,' or was in the island of Patmos on the
   Lord's day.' [1137] Not that he was made or born there, but he says I
   became or was in Patmos' instead of saying I arrived;' so the Word
   arrived' at flesh, as it is said the Word was made flesh.' Hear the
   words I became like a broken vessel,' [1138] and I became like a man
   that hath no strength, free among the dead.'" [1139]

   Of the same from his letter to Epictetus:--

   "Whoever heard such things? Who taught them? Who learnt them? Out of
   Zion shall go forth the law and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'
   [1140] But whence did these things come forth? What hell vomited them
   out? To say that the body taken of Mary was of the same substance as
   the Godhead of the Word, or that the Word was changed into flesh and
   bones and hairs and a whole body; whoever heard in a church or at all
   among Christians that God bore a body by adoption and not by birth?"
   [1141]

   Of the same from the same Epistle:--

   "But who, hearing that the Word made for Himself a passible body, not
   of Mary, but of His own substance, would call the sayer of these things
   a Christian? Who has invented so unfounded an impiety, as even to think
   and to say that they who affirm the Lord's body to be of Mary, conceive
   no longer of a Trinity, but of a quaternity in the godhead? As though
   they that are of this opinion described the flesh which the Saviour
   clothed himself with of Mary as of the substance of the Trinity.

   "Whence further have some men vomited forth an impiety as bad as the
   foregoing, and alleged that the body is not of later time than the
   godhead of the Word, but has always been co-eternal with it, since it
   is formed of the substance of wisdom."

   Of the same from the same letter:--

   "So the body taken of Mary was human according to the scriptures, and
   real in that it was the same as our own. For Mary was our sister, since
   we are all of Adam, a fact which no one could doubt who remembers the
   words of Luke." [1142]

   Testimony of the holy Basil, bishop of Cæsarea:--

   From the interpretation of Psalm LX.

   "All strangers have stooped and been put under the yoke of Christ,
   wherefore also over Edom' does he cast out' his shoe.' [1143] Now the
   shoe of the Godhead is the flesh which bore God whereby he came among
   men."

   Of the same from his writings about the Holy Ghost to Amphilochius:--

   "He uses the phrase of whom' instead of through whom;' as when Paul
   says made of a woman.' [1144] He clearly made this distinction for us
   in another place where he says that the being made of the man is proper
   to a woman, but to a man the being made by the woman, in the words For
   as the woman is of the man so is the man by the woman.' [1145] But with
   the object at once of pointing out the different use of these
   expressions, and of correcting obiter an error of certain men who
   supposed the body of the Lord to be spiritual, that he may shew how the
   God-bearing flesh was composed of human matter, he gives prominence to
   the more emphatic expression, for the expression by a woman' was in
   danger of suggesting that the sense of the word generation was merely
   in passing through, while the phrase of the woman' makes the common
   nature of the child and of the mother plain enough."

   Testimony of the holy Gregory bishop of Nazianus. From the former
   exposition to Cledonius:--

   "If any one says that the flesh came down from heaven, and not from
   this earth, and from us, let him be Anathema. For the words The second
   man is from heaven,' [1146] and as is the heavenly such are they also
   that are heavenly' [1147] and no man hath ascended up to heaven but the
   son of man that came down from heaven,' [1148] and any other similar
   passage, must be understood to be spoken on account of the union with
   man, as also the statement that all things were made by Christ,' [1149]
   and that Christ dwells in our hearts,' [1150] must be understood not
   according to the sensible, but according to the intellectual conception
   of the Godhead, the terms being commingled together just as are the
   natures."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Let us see from their own words what reason they give for the being
   made man, that is for the incarnation. If indeed it was that God
   otherwise not contained in space, might be contained in space and, as
   it were under a veil, might converse with men in the flesh, then their
   mask and their stage play are exquisite: not to say that it was
   possible for Him otherwise to converse with us, as of yore, in a
   burning bush and in human form, but if that He might undo the damnation
   of sin by taking like to like [1151] then just as He required flesh on
   account of the condemned flesh, and a soul on account of the soul, so
   too he required a mind on account of the mind, which in Adam not only
   fell but,--to employ a term which physicians are accustomed to use
   about diseases--was affected with original malady. [1152] For that
   which did not keep the commandment was what had received the
   commandment; and that which dared transgression was what had not kept
   the commandment; and that which specially needed salvation was what had
   transgressed, and that which was assumed was what needed salvation; so
   the mind was assumed. Now this point has been demonstrated, whether
   they will or no, by proofs which are so to say mathematical and
   necessary. But you are doing just as though, if a man were to have a
   diseased eye and a limping foot you were to cure the foot but leave the
   eye uncured; or, if a painter had painted a picture badly, were to
   alter the picture, but leave the painter alone, as though he were doing
   his work well. But if they are so constrained by these arguments as to
   take refuge in the statement that it is possible for God to save man,
   even without a mind, why then clearly He might have done so even
   without flesh, by the mere expression of His will, just as He works and
   has worked in the universe without a body. Away then with the flesh as
   well as with the mind! Let there be no inconsistency in your
   absurdity."

   Testimony of the Holy Gregory, bishop of Nyssa. From his sermon on
   Abraham:--

   "So the Word came down not naked, but after having been made flesh, not
   in the form of God, but in the form of a servant. [1153] This then is
   He who said that He could do nothing of Himself. [1154] For the not
   being able is the part of powerlessness. For as darkness is opposed to
   light, and death to life, so is weakness to power. But yet Christ is
   Power of God. Power is wholly inconsistent with not being able. For if
   power were powerless what is powerful? When then the Word declares that
   He can do nothing it is plain that He does not attribute his
   powerlessness to the Godhead of the Only-begotten, but connects his not
   being able with the powerlessness of our nature. The flesh is weak, as
   it is written, The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.'" [1155]

   Of the same from his Book "on the Perfection of Life":--

   "Again the true lawgiver, of whom Moses was a type, hewed for Himself
   out of our earth the slabs of nature. No wedlock fashioned for Him the
   flesh that was to receive the godhead, but He Himself is made the hewer
   of His own flesh, graven as it is by the finger of God. For the Holy
   Ghost came upon the Virgin, and the power of the Highest overshadowed
   her. [1156] And when this had come to pass, nature once again took its
   indestructible character, being made immortal by the marks of the
   divine finger."

   Of the same from his Book against Eunomius:--

   "We assert therefore that when He said above that wisdom built for
   herself a house, [1157] he intimates by the phrase the formation of the
   flesh of the Lord, for the very wisdom made its home in no strange
   dwelling, but built itself its dwelling of the Virgin's body."

   Of the same from the same treatise:--

   "The Word was before the ages, but the flesh was made in the last
   times, and no one would say on the contrary either that the flesh was
   before the ages, or the Word made in the last times."

   Of the same from the same treatise:--

   "The expression created me' [1158] is not to be understood of the
   divine and the undefiled, but, as has been said, of our created nature,
   according to the dispensation of the incarnation." [1159]

   Of the same from the first discourse on the Beatitudes:--

   "Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with
   God, but emptied himself, and took the form of a servant.' [1160] What
   poorer, in respect of God, than the form of a servant? What more lowly,
   in respect of the King of all, than approach to fellowship in our poor
   nature? The King of Kings and Lord of Lords [1161] voluntarily dons the
   form of servitude."

   Testimony of the Holy Flavianus, bishop of Antioch. From his sermon on
   John the Baptist:--

   "Do not think of connexion in any physical sense, nor entertain the
   idea of conjugal intercourse. For thy Creator is creating His own
   bodily temple now being born of thee."

   Of the same from his book on "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me":--

   "Hear Him saying, The Spirit is upon me because He hath anointed me.'
   [1162] You do not know, He says, what you read, for I, the anointed
   with the Spirit, am come to you. Now what is akin to us, and not the
   invisible nature, is anointed with the Spirit." [1163]

   Testimony of Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium. From his Discourse on "My
   Father is greater than I:" [1164] --

   "Distinguish me now the natures, the Divine and the human. For man was
   not made from God by falling away, nor was God made of man by
   advancement. I am speaking of God and man. When, however, you attribute
   the passions to the flesh and the miracles to God, you of necessity and
   involuntarily assign the lowly titles to the man born of Mary, and the
   exalted and divine to the Word Who in the beginning was God. Wherefore
   in some cases I utter exalted words, in others lowly, to the end that
   by means of the lofty I may shew the nature of the indwelling Word, and
   by the lowly, own the weakness of the lowly flesh. Whence sometimes I
   call myself equal to the Father and sometimes greater than the Father,
   not contradicting myself, but shewing that I am God and man, for God is
   of the lofty, man of the lowly; but if you wish to know how my Father
   is greater than I, I spoke of the flesh and not of the person of the
   Godhead."

   Of the same from his discourse on "The Son, can do nothing of Himself:"
   [1165] --

   "How was Adam disobedient in Heaven, and how of heavenly body was he
   formed first-formed beside the first formation? But it was the Adam of
   the earth who was formed at the beginning; the Adam of the earth
   disobeyed; the Adam of the earth was assumed. Wherefore also the Adam
   of the earth was saved that thus the reason of the incarnation [1166]
   may be proved necessary and true." [1167]

   Testimony of the Holy John Bishop of Constantinople. From the speech
   which he made when the Gothic envoy had spoken before him:--

   "See from the beginning what He does. He clothes Himself in our nature,
   powerless and vanquished, that by its means He may fight and struggle
   and from the beginning He uproots the nature of rebellion."

   Of the same from his discourse on [1168] The Festival of the
   Nativity:--

   "For is it not of the very last stupidity for them to bring down their
   own gods into stones and cheap wooden images, shutting them up as it
   were in a kind of prison, and to fancy that there is nothing
   disgraceful in what they either say or do, and then to find fault with
   us for saying that God made a living temple for Himself of the Holy
   Ghost, by means of which he brought succour to the world? For if it is
   disgraceful for God to dwell in a human body, then in proportion as the
   stone and the wood are more worthless than man is it much more
   disgraceful for him to dwell in stone and wood. But perhaps mankind
   seems to them to be of less value than these senseless objects. They
   bring down the substance of God into stones and into dogs; [1169] but
   many heretics into fouler things than these. But we could never endure
   even to hear of these things. [1170] But what we say is that of a
   virgin's womb the Christ took pure flesh, holy and without spot, and
   made impervious to all sin, and restored the body [1171] that was His
   own."

   A little further on: "And we assert that when the divine Word had
   fashioned for Himself a holy temple by its means he brought the
   heavenly state into our life."

   Of the same from the oration: That the lowly words and deeds of Christ
   were not spoken and done through lack of power, but through
   distinctions of dispensation.

   "What then are the causes of many humble things having been said about
   Him both by Himself and by His apostles? The first and greatest cause
   is the fact of His having clothed Himself with flesh, and wishing all
   his contemporaries and all who have lived since, to believe that He was
   not a shadow, nor what was seen merely a form, but reality of nature.
   For if when He Himself and His apostles had spoken about Him so often
   in humble and in human sense, the devil yet had power to persuade some
   wretched and miserable men to deny the reason of the incarnation, and
   dare to say that He did not take flesh and so to destroy all the ground
   of His love for man, how many would not have fallen into this abyss if
   He had never said anything of the kind?"

   I have now produced for you a few out of many authorities of the
   heralds of the truth, not to stun you with too many. They are quite
   enough to show the bent of the mind of the excellent writers. It is now
   for you to say what force their writings seem to have.

   Eran.--They have all spoken in harmony with one another, and the
   workers in the vineyard of the West agree with them whose husbandry is
   done in the region of the rising sun. Yet I perceived a considerable
   difference in their sayings.

   Orth.--They are successors of the divine apostles; some even of those
   apostles were privileged to hear the holy voice and see the goodly
   sight. The majority of them too were adorned with the crown of
   martyrdom. Does it seem right for you to wag the tongue of blasphemy
   against them?

   Eran.--I shrink from doing this; at the same time I do not approve of
   their great divergence.

   Orth.--But now I will bring you an unexpected remedy. I will adduce one
   of your own beautiful heresy--your teacher Apollinarius, [1172] and I
   will shew you that he understood the text "The Word was made flesh"
   just as the holy Fathers did. Hear now what he wrote about it in his
   "Summary."

   The testimony of Apollinarius from his "Summary":--

   "If no one is turned into that which he assumes, and Christ assumed
   flesh, then He was not turned into flesh."

   And immediately afterward he continues:--

   "For also He gave himself to us in relationship by means of the body to
   save us. Now that which saves is far more excellent than that which is
   being saved. Far more excellent then than we are, is He in the
   assumption of a body! But He would not have been more excellent had He
   been turned into flesh."

   A little further on he says:--

   "The simple is one, but the complex cannot be one; he then that alleges
   that He was made flesh affirms the mutation of the one Word. But if the
   complex is also one, as man, then he who on account of the union with
   the flesh says the Word was made flesh means the one in complexity."

   And again a little further on he says--"To be made flesh is to be made
   empty, [1173] but the being made empty declares not man, but the Son of
   man, who emptied Himself' not by undergoing change, but by
   investiture."

   There; you see the teacher of your own doctrines has introduced the
   word investiture' and indeed in his little work upon the faith he
   says--"We then believe that he was made flesh, while His Godhead
   remained unchanged for the renewal of the manhood. For in the holy
   power of God there has been neither alteration nor change of place, nor
   inclusion"--and then shortly again--"We worship God who took flesh of
   the blessed virgin, and on this account in the flesh is man, but in the
   spirit God." And in another exposition he says--"We confess the Son of
   God to have been made the Son of man, not nominally but verily, on
   taking flesh of the Virgin Mary."

   Eran.--I did not suppose that Apollinarius held these sentiments. I had
   other ideas about him.

   Orth.--Well; now you have learnt that not only the prophets and
   apostles, and they who after them were ordained teachers of the world,
   but even Apollinarius, the writer of heretical babbling, confesses the
   divine Word to be immutable, states that He was not turned into flesh
   but assumed flesh, and this over and over again, as you have heard. Do
   not then struggle to throw your master's blasphemy into the shade by
   your own. For, says the Lord "the disciple is not above his master."
   [1174]

   Eran.--Yes, I confess that the divine Word of God is immutable and took
   flesh. It were the uttermost foolishness to withstand authorities so
   many and so great.

   Orth.--Do you wish to have a solution of the rest of the difficulties?

   Eran.--Let us put off their investigation until to-morrow.

   Orth.--Very well; our synod is dismissed. Let us depart, and bear in
   mind what we have agreed upon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [972] Cf. note p. 36, History.

   [973] "Sauromatas gentes Scytharum Græci vocant, quos Sarmatas Romani."
   Pliny iii.

   [974] Gen. vi. 7

   [975] Ps. xlix. 20

   [976] John i. 14

   [977] Matt. xix. 26

   [978] Ps. cxxxv. 6

   [979] The reference in Schulze's edition is to Jeremiah x. 16, but here
   the Septuagint ho plasas ta panta does not bear out the point. The
   quotation is no doubt of Amos v. 8, where the LXX is ho poion panta kai
   metaskeuazon

   [980] Ps. iii. 27

   [981] Mal. iii. 6

   [982] John i. 14

   [983] 1 Cor. xii. 4

   [984] 1 Cor. xii. 11

   [985] 2 Cor. iv. 13

   [986] Heb. ii. 16

   [987] cf. Article ix. of the English Church. Sin is not part of man's
   nature, but the fault or corruption of it. If in one sense the fallen
   Adam is the natural man, in a higher sense Christ, the Son of man, is
   the natural man; i.e. in Him the manhood is seen incorrupt. cf. p. 183
   and note.

   [988] Isaiah xli. 8

   [989] Gen. xii. 3. The lxx. has eneulogethesontai en soi. In Acts iii.
   25, it is to spermati sou: in Gal. iii. 8, en soi

   [990] Gal. iii. 16. There is here an omission of the four words "kai to
   spermati sou." Of the difficulty of the passage a full discussion will
   be found in Bishop Lightfoot's "Galatians" --page 141.

   [991] Gen. xlix. 10. Here the text follows the Alexandrine Septuagint
   substituting heos an elthe ho apokeitai for heos an elthe ta apokeimena
   auto The Vulgate runs "Non auferetur sceptrum de Iuda, et dux de femore
   eius, donec veniat qui mittendus est et ipse erit expectatio gentium."

   [992] Hebrews ii. 16

   [993] Hebrews vii. 14

   [994] Micah v. 2

   [995] Matthew ii. 5, 6

   [996] Matthew ii. 6

   [997] Micah v. 2

   [998] Romans ix. 5

   [999] Baruch iii. 35, 37 "The ascription of the prophecy of Baruch to
   Jeremiah may be explained by the fact that in the lxx. Baruch was
   placed either before or after Lamentations, and was regarded in the
   early church as an appendix to, and of equal authority with, Jeremiah.
   It is so quoted by Irenæus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian."
   Augustine de Civ. xviii, 33. quotes Baruch iii. 16. with the remark
   "Hoc testimonium quidem non Hieremiæ sed Scribæ eius attribuunt qui
   vocabatur Baruch, sed Hieremiæ celebratius habetur."

   [1000] 1 Tim. i. 17

   [1001] 1 Tim. vi. 16

   [1002] Baruch iii. 38

   [1003] 1 Tim. i. 17

   [1004] 1 Tim. vi. 16

   [1005] Heb. ii. 16

   [1006] 1 Tim. iii. 16. Theodoretus shews no knowledge of the reading *
   for * in this famous passage accepted by our revisers with the marginal
   comment "The word God in place of He who rests on no sufficient ancient
   evidence." Macedonius II, patriarch of Constantinople, is said to have
   been accused by his enemy the Emperor Anastasius of falsifying this
   particular passage. But if Theodoretus, who died c. 458, really wrote *
   copies of the Epistles containing this reading must have existed some
   half century before the dispute between Macedonius and Anastasius.
   Gregory of Nyssa also uses the passage as does Theodoretus; Greg. Nyss.
   cont. Eun. iv. i. The accepted opinion now regards the Codex of
   Alexandrianus as reading hos

   [1007] Matt. xviii. 10. Observe the omission of the words "In heaven,"
   which A.V. inserts with ' B D, etc.

   [1008] John vi. 46

   [1009] John i. 18

   [1010] Exodus xxxiii. 20

   [1011] Genesis xviii. i. Sept.

   [1012] Isaiah vi. i

   [1013] Exodus xxxiii. 11

   [1014] Numbers xii. 8

   [1015] Hosea xii. 10. Sept. A.V. has "used similitudes."

   [1016] Matthew xviii. 10

   [1017] 1 Tim. iii. 16

   [1018] Hebrews x. 19-22. In iii. 607. ed. Migne this passage is quoted
   by Theodoret as in A.V.

   [1019] Gen. xlix. 10. Compare note on p. 6.

   [1020] Gen. xlix. 11

   [1021] mustikoteron

   [1022] John xv. 1

   [1023] John xix. 34

   [1024] John xii. 23

   [1025] John xii. 24

   [1026] This passage and a parallel passage from Dial. II. were quoted
   with force in the discussions of the English Reformation. Bp. Ridley on
   the foregoing writes (A Brief Declaration of the Lord's Supper, Parker
   Soc. Ed. p. 35.) "What can be more plainly said than this that this old
   writer saith? That although the Sacraments bear the name of the body
   and blood of Christ, yet is not their nature changed, but abideth
   still. And where is then the Papists' transubstantiation?"

   [1027] Gen. xlix. 2

   [1028] Matt. xxvi. 28

   [1029] John vi. 51

   [1030] Aristotle (OEc: 1. 6. 1.) uses the proverb as we say in English
   "to draw water in a sieve."

   [1031] Heb. ii. 16

   [1032] Gen. ii. 18

   [1033] Heb. vii. 14

   [1034] Heb. v. 1; viii. 3

   [1035] Heb. x. 5

   [1036] Matt. i. 20. The rendering of gennethen by "conceived" in the
   A.V. somewhat obscures the argument of Theodoret. The R.V. has
   "begotten" in the margin.

   [1037] Ps. xl. 7. Septuagint. The difficulty how to account for the
   rendering of 'nms kryhlv i.e. "My ear hast thou dug" by "soma
   katertiso" is an old one. Did EThELECACOTIADEKATERTICO get altered by
   mistake into EThELECACCOMADEKATERTICO? "How the word soma came into the
   lxx. we cannot say; but being there it is now sanctioned for us by the
   citation here; not as the, or even a proper rendering of the Hebrew,
   but as a prophetic utterance." Alford ad loc.

   [1038] I have no hesitation in translating alla here by "save," in
   spite of the purist prejudice which has led even the revisers of 1881
   to retain something of the awkward periphrasis by which the meaning of
   Matt. xx. 23 and Mark x. 40. is confused in A.V., and an Arian sense
   given to our Lord's declaration, "To sit on my right hand and my left
   is not mine to give save to them for whom it is prepared." i.e. It is
   His to give, but not to give arbitrarily or of caprice. Liddell and
   Scott, Ed. 1883, recognise and illustrate this use of alla (Vide s.v.
   I. 3.) which in classical Greek is vindicated by such a passage as
   Soph. O.T. 1331. epaise d' autocheir nin outis all' ego, and in N.T.
   Greek, as well as by the crucial passage in question, in Mark ix. 8
   ouketi oudena eidon alla ton Iesoun monon, "They no longer saw any one
   save Jesus only."

   [1039] Ps. lxxxix. 1, 2

   [1040] Ps. lxxxix. 3

   [1041] Ps. lxxxix. 3

   [1042] Ps. lxxxix. 4

   [1043] 1 Cor. vi. 10

   [1044] Gal. iii. 1

   [1045] 2 Tim. iii. 8

   [1046] Phil. iii. 19

   [1047] Ps. lxxxix. 4

   [1048] Antipater or Antipas, a = Cypros, an Idumæan, wealthy Idumæan. |
   Herod the Great = Mariamne, Princess of the Maccabees. |
   _____________________ | | Alexander. Aristobulus. |
   __________________________________ | | Herod Agrippa I. Herod K. of
   Chalcis. Herodias. | __________________________ | | Herod Agrippa II.
   Bernice. Drusilla.

   [1049] Ps. lxxxix. 25

   [1050] Ps. lxxxix. 27

   [1051] Ps. lxxxix. 26

   [1052] Ps. lxxxix. 28, 29

   [1053] Ps. lxxxix. 35, 36, 37

   [1054] Heb. vi. 17

   [1055] Heb. vi. 18

   [1056] Is. lv. 3

   [1057] Is. lv. 4, 5, lxx.

   [1058] Isaiah xi. 1

   [1059] Isaiah xi. 2

   [1060] 1 Cor. xii. 8

   [1061] A.V. "reprove with equity for the meek of the earth;" Sept.
   elenxei tous tapeinous tes ges

   [1062] Isaiah xi. 4

   [1063] Is. xi. 6

   [1064] Isaiah xi. 10

   [1065] Isaiah xi. 9

   [1066] Acts ii. 30-31

   [1067] Acts xiii. 23

   [1068] 2 Tim. ii. 8

   [1069] Romans i. 1-3

   [1070] Matt. i. 2

   [1071] John i. 14

   [1072] A kene elpiso pistis would be a faith which could not possibly
   be realized; and mataia elpis a hope of not impossible but very
   improbable fulfilment. But the distinction between kenos and mataios is
   hardly borne out by their use in the text.

   [1073] Ephes. ii. 6

   [1074] John i. 14

   [1075] John i. 14

   [1076] Phil. ii. 5, 8

   [1077] John x. 33

   [1078] John ix. 16

   [1079] Matt. viii. 27

   [1080] 1 John iv. 2, 3

   [1081] Ed. Ben. I. 2. 207.

   [1082] Gal. iii. 13

   [1083] I Ep. ad Cled. i. Ed. Paris. p. 744.

   [1084] 2 Cor. v. 21. Gal. iii. 13

   [1085] Isaiah liii. 4

   [1086] de Incar. Dom. Sac. vi. II. Ed. Ben. p. 716. The Latin of
   Ambrose, which is not exactly rendered by Theodoret, is as
   follows:--"Sic scriptum est, inquiunt, quia Verbum caro factum est
   (Ioan 1, 14). Scriptum est, non nego: sed considera quid sequatur;
   sequitur enim: Et habitavit in nobis, hoc est, illud Verbum quod carnem
   suscepit, hoc habitavit in nobis, hoc est, in carue habitavit humana.
   "Miraris ergo quia scriptum est: Verbum caro factum est, cum caro
   assumpta sit a Dei Verbo: quando de peccato quod non habuit, scriptum
   est quia peccatum factus est, hoc est, non natura operationeque
   peccati, utpote in similitudinem carnis peccati factus: sed ut peccatum
   nostrum in sua carne crucifigeret, susceptionem pro nobis infirmitatum
   obnoxii jam corporis peccati carnalis assumpsit. Desinant ergo dicere
   naturam Verbi in corporis naturam esse mutatam; ne pari interpretatione
   videatur natura Verbi in contagium mutata peccati Aliud est enim quod
   assumpsit, et aliud quod assumptum est."

   [1087] Compare note on page 72.

   [1088] "In the Eastern church till nearly the end of the fourth century
   we find, as has been said, the divine celebration of Christ's nativity
   and baptism on January 6th. The date of the severance of the two can be
   approximately fixed, for Chrysostom refers to it as a matter of merely
   a few years' standing, in a sermon probably delivered on the Christmas
   day of 386 a.d. How far back we are to refer the origin of this
   two-fold festival it is not easy to determine, the earliest mention of
   any kind being the allusion by Clement of Alexandria to the annual
   commemoration of Christ's baptism by the Basilidians (Stromata, lib. i.
   c. 21). At any rate by the latter part of the fourth century the
   Epiphany had become one of the most important and venerable festivals
   in the Eastern church." Dict. Christ. Ant. i. 617.

   [1089] Chrys. Ed. Sav. II. p. 598.

   [1090] Gal. iii. 13

   [1091] The modern reader will not omit to note the bearing of these
   patristic interpretations of the scriptural statements that the word
   was "made" flesh and that Christ was "made" a curse on later
   controversies concerning Transubstantiation.

   [1092] On the northern seaboard of Syria. Severianus was at one time
   Chrysostom's commissary and afterwards his determined opponent.

   [1093] The value of Chrysostom and Severianus as independent witnesses
   is somewhat weakened by the fact, pointed out by Schulze, that among
   the writings of the former some are attributed to the latter.

   [1094] The Apost. Const. vii. 46. represent Ignatius as ordained by St.
   Paul. Malalas describes St. Peter as ordaining Ignatius on the death of
   Euodius. Vide article "Euodius" in Dict. Christ. Biog.

   [1095] Bp. Lightfoot (Ap. Fathers pt. II. ii. 290.) adopts the reading
   kata thelema kai dunamin for kata theoteta, and notes "Theodoret
   strangely substitutes theoteta for thelema. This reading...may be due
   to...ignorance of the absolute use of thelema. The Armenian translator
   likewise has substituted another word.

   [1096] Matt. iii. 15

   [1097] Ig. ad Smyrn. I.

   [1098] There is a play here on the sarkophoros, nekrophoros, and,
   possibly, theophoros. Vide Pearson and Lightfoot ad loc. (Ignat. ad
   Smyrn. V.)

   [1099] "A saying to this effect is attributed to Our Lord by Didymus on
   Ps. lxxxviii. 8. It is mentioned also by Origen Hom. XX. In Jerem. Sec.
   III." Bp. Lightfoot l. c.

   [1100] Ignat. ad Smyrn. IV.

   [1101] Compare note on page 72.

   [1102] Bp. Lightfoot adopts the reading of Cod. Med. "that by his
   passion he might cleanse the water." Ig. ad Eph. XVIII.

   [1103] Ig. ad Eph. XX.

   [1104] Ignat. ad Eph. VII.

   [1105] Ig. ad Trall. ix.

   [1106] Luke ii. 4

   [1107] Ps. cxxxii. 11

   [1108] Is. vii. 13

   [1109] Cont. Hær. iii. 31.

   [1110] John iv. 6

   [1111] Ps. lxix. 26. A.V. They talk to the grief of those whom thou
   hast wounded. lxx. R.V. They tell of the sorrow of those whom thou hast
   wounded.

   [1112] John xi. 35

   [1113] Luke xxii. 44

   [1114] Mat. xxvi. 28

   [1115] John xix. 34

   [1116] Cont. Hær. iii. 32.

   [1117] Rom. v. 19

   [1118] Cont. Hær. iii. 20.

   [1119] Ps. lxxxii. 67

   [1120] Cont. Hær. iii. 21.

   [1121] Vide note on page 72.

   [1122] Adv. Hær. iii. 26. The allusion is to the gnostics and mainly to
   Valentinus and his school who imagined seven heavens, and a
   supercelestial space termed "Ogdoad." "The doctrine of an Ogdoad of the
   commencement of finite existence having been established by Valentinus,
   those of his followers who had been imbued with the Pythagorean
   philosophy introduced a modification. In that philosophy the tetrad was
   regarded with peculiar veneration, and held to be the foundation of the
   sensible world." Cf. Hippolytus Ref. vi. 23, p. 179 "We read there
   (Iren. i. xi.) of Secundus as a Valentinian who divided the Ogdoad into
   a right hand and a left hand tetrad, and in the case of Marcus who
   largely uses Pythagorean speculations about numbers, the tetrad holds
   the highest place in the system." Dr. Salmon, Dict. Christ. Biog. iv.
   72. Irenæus wrote a work, no longer extant, "on the Ogdoad." Euseb.
   H.E. v. 20.

   [1123] Ps. xxiii. 1

   [1124] Ps. xxxviii. 5

   [1125] Vide Isaiah xix. 1

   [1126] Bishop first of Olympus and then of Patara at the beginning of
   the 4th c. This is the only fragment preserved by Theodoret.

   [1127] Acts vii. 57

   [1128] Prov. viii. 22. Sept.

   [1129] John ii. 19

   [1130] John xv. 5 and 1

   [1131] Ps. xii. 22

   [1132] John i. 1

   [1133] John i. 14

   [1134] Gen. xlix. 11, lxx.

   [1135] John i. 1

   [1136] John i. 14

   [1137] Rev. i. 9

   [1138] Ps. xxi. 12

   [1139] Ps. lxxxviii. 4, 5

   [1140] Isaiah ii. 13

   [1141] The antithesis is between the Greek words thesis and phusis. cf.
   "Krinotelen Pindarou, thesei de Philoxenou." Corp. Ins. (add.) 2480. d.

   [1142] Luke iii. 38

   [1143] Ps. lx. 8

   [1144] Gal. iv. 4

   [1145] 1 Cor. xi. 12

   [1146] 1 Cor. xv. 47

   [1147] 1 Cor. xv. 48

   [1148] John iii. 13

   [1149] John i. 3

   [1150] Ephes. iii. 17

   [1151] The original for harpasas, "seizing" has hagiasas i.e.
   hallowing.

   [1152] The word used is protopathein, a late and rare one. Galen uses
   the correlative protopatheia to express a condition distinguished from
   sumpatheia

   [1153] Phil. ii. 7

   [1154] John v. 19

   [1155] Matt. xxvi. 41

   [1156] Luke i. 35

   [1157] Prov. ix. 1

   [1158] Prov. viii. 22; lxx. "ektise."

   [1159] oikonomia. cf. note on p. 72.

   [1160] Phil. ii. 6, 7

   [1161] Deut. x. 17; Rev. xvii. 14. and xix. 16

   [1162] Is. lxi. 1

   [1163] Of these two works no fragments exist but these two preserved by
   Theodoretus.

   [1164] John xiv. 28

   [1165] John v. 19

   [1166] oikonouia. cf. note on p. 72.

   [1167] cf. 1 Cor. xv. 47

   [1168] Migne II. 356.

   [1169] e.g. Anubis, the barker Anubis--cf. Virg. Æn. viii. 698, and the
   common oath "by the dog," unless indeed the common adjuration of
   Socrates ne ton kuna may have been only a vernacular substitute for ne
   ton Dia, like the vulgar "law" for "Lord." The Benedictine Ed. adds
   "cats."

   [1170] cf. Ephes. v. 12

   [1171] skeuos. cf. 2 Cor. iv. 7. 1 Thess. iv. 4. 1 Peter iii. 7.
   Cicero. Tusc. 1. 22 calls the body "vas animi."

   [1172] cf. p. 132.

   [1173] sarkosis kenosis. cf. Phil. ii. 7

   [1174] Matt. x. 24
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dialogue II.--The Unconfounded.

   Eranistes and Orthodoxus.

   Eran.--I am come as I promised. 'Tis yours to adopt one of two
   alternatives, and either furnish a solution of my difficulties, or
   assent to what I and my friends lay down.

   Orth.--I accept your challenge, for I think it right and fair. But we
   must first recall to mind at what point we left off our discourse
   yesterday, and what was the conclusion of our argument.

   Eran.--I will remind you of the end. I remember our agreeing that the
   divine Word remained immutable, and took flesh, and was not himself
   changed into flesh.

   Orth.--You seem to be content with the points agreed on, for you have
   faithfully called them to mind.

   Eran.--Yes, and I have already said that the man that withstands
   teachers so many and so great is indubitably out of his mind. I was
   moreover put to not a little shame to find that Apollinarius used the
   same terms as the orthodox, although in his books about the incarnation
   his drift has distinctly been in another direction.

   Orth.--Then we affirm that the Divine Word took flesh?

   Eran.--We do.

   Orth.--And what do we mean by the flesh? A body only, as is the view of
   Arius and Eunomius, or body and soul?

   Eran.--Body and soul.

   Orth.--What kind of soul? The reasonable soul, or that which is by some
   termed the phytic, vegetable, [1175] that is, vital? for the
   fable-mongering quackery of the Apollinarians compels us to ask
   unseemly questions.

   Eran.--Does then Apollinarius make a distinction of souls? [1176]

   Orth.--He says that man is composed of three parts, of a body, a vital
   soul, and further of a reasonable soul, which he terms mind. Holy
   Scripture on the contrary knows only one, not two souls; and this is
   plainly taught us by the formation of the first man. For it is written
   God took dust from the earth and "formed man," and "breathed into his
   nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul." [1177] And
   in the gospels the Lord said to the holy disciples "Fear not them which
   kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him
   which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." [1178]

   And the very divine Moses when he told the tale of them that came down
   into Egypt and stated with whom each tribal chief had come in, added,
   "All the souls that came out of Egypt were seventy-five," [1179]
   reckoning one soul for each immigrant. And the divine apostle at Troas,
   when all supposed Eutychus to be dead, said "Trouble not yourselves for
   his soul is in him." [1180]

   Eran.--It is shewn clearly that each man has one soul.

   Orth.--But Apollinarius says two; and that the Divine Word took the
   unreasonable, and that instead of the reasonable, he was made in the
   flesh. It was on this account that I asked what kind of soul you assert
   to have been assumed with the body.

   Eran.--I say the reasonable. For I follow the Divine Scripture.

   Orth.--We agree then that the "form of a servant" assumed by the Divine
   Word was complete.

   Eran.--Yes; complete.

   Orth.--And rightly; for since the whole first man became subject to
   sin, and lost the impression of the Divine Image, [1181] and the race
   followed, it results that the Creator, with the intention of renewing
   the blurred image, assumed the nature in its entirety, and stamped an
   imprint far better than the first.

   Eran.--True. But now I beg you in the first place that the meaning of
   the terms employed may be made quite clear, that thus our discussion
   may advance without hindrance, and no investigation of doubtful points
   intervene to interrupt our conversation.

   Orth.--What you say is admirable. Ask now concerning whatever point you
   like.

   Eran.--What must we call Jesus the Christ? Man?

   Orth.--By neither name alone, but by both. For the Divine Man after
   being made man was named Jesus Christ. "For," it is written, "Thou
   shalt call His name Jesus for he shall save His people from their
   sins," [1182] and unto you is born this day in the city of David Christ
   the Lord. [1183] Now these are angels' voices. But before the
   Incarnation he was named God, son of God, only begotten, Lord, Divine
   Word, and Creator. For it is written "In the beginning was the Word,
   and the word was with God, and the word was God," [1184] and "all
   things were made by Him," [1185] and "He was life," [1186] and "He was
   the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world."
   There are also other similar passages, declaring the divine nature. But
   after the Incarnation He was named Jesus and Christ.

   Eran.--Therefore the Lord Jesus is God only.

   Orth.--You hear that the divine Word was made man, and do you call him
   God only?

   Eran.--Since He became man without being changed, but remained just
   what He was before, we must call Him just what He was.

   Orth.--The divine Word was and is and will be immutable. But when He
   had taken man's nature He became man. It behoves us therefore to
   confess both natures, both that which took, and that which was taken.

   Eran.--We must name Him by the nobler.

   Orth--Man,--I mean man the animal,--is he a simple or a composite
   being?

   Eran.--Composite.

   Orth.--Composed of what component parts?

   Eran.--Of a body and a soul.

   Orth.--And of these natures whether is nobler?

   Eran.--Clearly the soul, for it is reasonable and immortal, and has
   been entrusted with the sovereignty of the animal. But the body is
   mortal and perishable, and without the soul is unreasonable, and a
   corpse.

   Orth.--Then the divine Scripture ought to have called the animal after
   its more excellent part.

   Eran.--It does so call it, for it calls them that came out of Egypt
   souls. For with seventy-five souls, it says, Israel came down into
   Egypt.

   Orth.--But does the divine Scripture never call any one after the body?

   Eran.--It calls them that are the slaves of flesh, flesh. For "God," it
   is written, "said my spirit shall not always remain in these men, for
   they are flesh." [1187]

   Orth.--But without blame no one is called flesh?

   Eran.--I do not remember.

   Orth.--Then I will remind you, and point out to you that even the very
   saints are called "flesh." Answer now. What would you call the
   apostles? Spiritual, or fleshly?

   Eran.--Spiritual;--and leaders and teachers of the spiritual.

   Orth.--Hear now the holy Paul when he says "But when it pleased God who
   separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to
   reveal his son in me that I might preach him among the heathen,
   immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood neither went I up to
   them that were apostles before me." [1188] Does he so style the
   apostles because he blames them?

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--Is it not that he names them after their visible nature, and
   comparing the calling which is of men with that which is of heaven?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Then hear too the psalmist David--"Unto thee shall all flesh
   come." [1189] Hear too, the prophet Isaiah foretelling "All flesh shall
   see the salvation of our God." [1190]

   Eran.--It is made perfectly plain that Holy Scripture names human
   nature from the flesh without the least blame.

   Orth.--I will proceed to give you the yet further proof.

   Eran.--What further?

   Orth.--The fact that sometimes when giving blame the divine Scripture
   uses only the name of soul.

   Eran.--And where will you find this in holy Scripture?

   Orth.--Hear the Lord God speaking through the prophet Ezekiel "The soul
   that sinneth it shall die." [1191] Moreover through the great Moses He
   saith "If a soul sin--" [1192] And again "It shall come to pass that
   every soul that will not hear that prophet shall be cut off." [1193]
   And many other passages of the same kind may be found.

   Eran.--This is plainly proved.

   Orth.--In cases, then, where there is a certain natural union, and a
   combination of created things, and of beings connected by service and
   by time, it is not the custom of holy Scripture to use a name for this
   being derived only from the nobler nature; it names it indiscriminately
   both by the meaner and by the nobler. If so, how can you find fault
   with us for calling Christ the Lord, man, after confessing Him to be
   God, when many things combine to compel us to do so?

   Eran.--What is there to compel us to call the Saviour Christ, "man"?

   Orth.--The diverse and mutually inconsistent opinions of the heretics.

   Eran.--What opinions, and contrary to what?

   Orth.--That of Arius to that of Sabellius. The one divides the
   substances: the other confounds the hypostases. Arius introduces three
   substances, and Sabellius makes one hypostasis instead of three. [1194]
   Tell me now, how ought we to heal both maladies? Must we apply the same
   drug for both ailments, or for each the proper one?

   Eran.--For each the proper one.

   Orth.--We shall therefore endeavour to persuade Arius to acknowledge
   the substance of the Holy Trinity, and we shall adduce proofs of this
   position from Holy Scripture.

   Eran.--Yes: this ought to be done.

   Orth.--But in arguing with Sabellius we shall adopt the opposite
   course. Concerning the substance we shall advance no argument, for even
   he acknowledges but one.

   Eran.--Plainly.

   Orth.--But we shall do our best to cure the unsound part of his
   doctrine.

   Eran.--We say that where he halts is about the hypostases.

   Orth.--Since then he asserts there to be one hypostasis of the Trinity,
   we shall point out to him that the divine Scripture proclaims three
   hypostases.

   Eran.--This is the course to take. But we have wandered from the
   subject.

   Orth.--Not at all. We are collecting proofs of it, as you will learn in
   a moment. But tell me, do you understand that all the heresies which
   derive their name from Christ, acknowledge both the Godhead of Christ
   and His manhood?

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--Do not some acknowledge the godhead alone, and some the manhood
   alone?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And some but a part of the manhood?

   Eran.--I think so. But it will be well for us to lay down the names of
   the holders of these different opinions, that the point under
   discussion may be made plainer.

   Orth.--I will tell you the names. Simon, Menander, Marcion, Valentinus,
   Basilides, Bardesanes, Cerdo, and Manes, openly denied the humanity of
   Christ. On the other hand Artemon, Theodotus, Sabellius, Paul of
   Samosata, Marcellus, and Photinus, fell into the diametrically opposite
   blasphemy; for they preach Christ to be man only, and deny the Godhead
   which existed before the ages. Arius and Eunomius make the Godhead of
   the only begotten a created Godhead, and maintain that He assumed only
   a body. Apollinarius confesses that the assumed body was a living
   [1195] body, but in his work deprives the reasonable soul alike of its
   honour and of its salvation. This is the contrariety of these corrupt
   opinions. But do you, with all due love of truth, tell us, must we
   institute a discussion with these men, or shall we let them go dashed
   down headlong and howling to their doom?

   Eran.--It is inhuman to neglect the sick.

   Orth.--Very well; then we must compassionate them, and do our best to
   heal them.

   Eran.--By all means.

   Orth.--If then you had scientifically learned how to cure the body, and
   round you stood many men asking you to cure them, and shewing their
   various ailments, such as arise from running at the eyes, injury to the
   ears, tooth-ache, contraction of the joints, palsy, bile, or phlegm,
   what would you have done? Tell me; would you have applied the same
   treatment to all, or to each that which was appropriate?

   Eran.--I should certainly have given to each the appropriate remedy.

   Orth.--So by applying cold treatment to the hot, and heating the cold,
   and loosing the strained, and giving tension to the loose, and drying
   the moist, and moistening the dry, you would have driven out the
   diseases and restored the health which they had expelled.

   Eran.--This is the treatment prescribed by medical science, for
   contraries, it is said, are the remedies of contraries.

   Orth.--If you were a gardener, would you give the same treatment to all
   plants? or their own to the mulberry and the fig, and so to the pear,
   to the apple, and to the vine what is fitting to each, and in a word to
   each plant its own proper culture?

   Eran.--It is obvious that each plant requires its own treatment.

   Orth.--And if you undertook to be a ship builder, and saw that the mast
   wanted repair, would you try to mend it in the same way as you would
   the tiller? or would you give it the proper treatment of a mast?

   Eran.--There is no question about these things: everything demands its
   own treatment, be it plant or limb or gear or tackle.

   Orth.--Then is it not monstrous to apply to the body and to things
   without life to each its own appropriate treatment, and not to keep
   this rule of treatment in the case of the soul?

   Eran.--Most unjust; nay, rather stupid than unrighteous. They who adopt
   any other method are quite unskilled in the healing art.

   Orth.--Then in disputing against each heresy we shall use the
   appropriate remedy?

   Eran.--By all means.

   Orth.--And it is fitting treatment to add what is wanting and to remove
   what is superfluous?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--In endeavouring then to cure Photinus and Marcellus and their
   adherents, in order to carry out the rule of treatment, what should we
   add?

   Eran.--The acknowledgment of the Godhead of Christ, for it is this that
   they lack.

   Orth.--But about the manhood we will say nothing to them, for they
   acknowledge the Lord Christ to be man.

   Eran.--You are right.

   Orth.--And in arguing with Arius and Eunomius about the incarnation of
   the only begotten, what should we persuade them to add to their own
   confession?

   Eran.--The assumption of the soul; for they say that the divine Word
   took only a body.

   Orth.--And what does Apollinarius lack to make his teaching accurate
   about the incarnation?

   Eran.--Not to separate the mind from the soul, but to confess that,
   with the body, was assumed a reasonable soul.

   Orth.--Then shall we dispute with him on this point?

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--But under this head what did we assert to be confessed, and what
   altogether denied, by Marcion, Valentinus, Manes and their adherents?

   Eran.--That they admitted their belief in the Godhead of Christ, but do
   not accept the doctrine of His manhood.

   Orth.--We shall therefore do our best to persuade them to accept also
   the doctrine of the manhood, and not to call the divine incarnation
   [1196] a mere appearance.

   Eran.--It will be well so to do.

   Orth.--We will therefore tell them that it is right to style the Christ
   not only God, but also man.

   Eran.--By all means.

   Orth.--And how is it possible for us to induce others to style the
   Christ man' while we excuse ourselves from doing so? They will not
   yield to our persuasion, but on the contrary will convict us of
   agreeing with them.

   Eran.--And how can we, confessing as we do that the divine Word took
   flesh and a reasonable soul, agree with them?

   Orth.--If we confess the fact, why then shun the word?

   Eran.--It is right to name the Christ from His nobler qualities.

   Orth.--Keep this rule then. Do not speak of Him as crucified, nor yet
   as risen from the dead, and so on.

   Eran.--But these are the names of the sufferings of salvation. Denial
   of the sufferings implies denial of the salvation.

   Orth.--And the name Man is the name of a nature. Not to pronounce the
   name is to deny the nature: denial of the nature is denial of the
   sufferings, and denial of the sufferings does away with the salvation.

   Eran.--I hold it profitable to acknowledge the assumed nature; but to
   style the Saviour of the world man is to belittle the glory of the
   Lord.

   Orth.--Do you then deem yourself wiser than Peter and Paul; aye, and
   than the Saviour Himself? For the Lord said to the Jews "Why do ye seek
   to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I heard of my
   Father?" [1197] And He frequently called Himself Son of Man.

   And the meritorious Peter, in his sermon to the Jewish people,
   says,--"Ye men of Israel, hear these words. Jesus of Nazareth, a man
   approved of God among you." [1198] And the blessed Paul, when bringing
   the message of salvation to the chiefs of the Areopagus, among many
   other things said this,--

   "And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all
   men everywhere to repent: Because he hath appointed a day in the which
   he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath
   ordained, whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath
   raised him from the dead." [1199] He then who excuses himself from
   using the name appointed and preached by the Lord and his Apostles
   deems himself wiser than even these great instructors, aye, even than
   the very well-spring of the wisest.

   Eran.--They gave this instruction to the unbelievers. Now the greater
   part of the world [1200] has professed the faith.

   Orth.--But we have still among us Jews and pagans and of heretics
   systems innumerable, and to each of these we must give fit and
   appropriate teaching. But, supposing we were all of one mind, tell me
   now, what harm is there in calling the Christ both God and man? Do we
   not behold in Him perfect Godhead, and manhood likewise lacking in
   nothing?

   Eran.--This we have owned again and again.

   Orth.--Why then deny what we have again and again owned?

   Eran.--I hold it unnecessary to call the Christ man,'--especially when
   believer is conversing with believer.

   Orth.--Do you consider the divine Apostle a believer?

   Eran.--Yes: a teacher of all believers.

   Orth.--And do you deem Timothy worthy of being so styled?

   Eran.--Yes: both as a disciple of the Apostle, and as a teacher of the
   rest.

   Orth.--Very well: then hear the teacher of teachers writing to his very
   perfect disciple. "There is one God, and one mediator between God and
   man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all." [1201]
   Do stop your idle prating, and laying down the law about divine names.
   Moreover in this passage that very name mediator' stands indicative
   both of Godhead and of manhood. He is called a mediator because He does
   not exist as God alone; for how, if He had had nothing of our nature
   could He have mediated between us and God? But since as God He is
   joined with God as having the same substance, and as man with us,
   because from us He took the form of a servant, He is properly termed a
   mediator, uniting in Himself distinct qualities by the unity of natures
   of Godhead, I mean, and of manhood. [1202]

   Eran.--But was not Moses called a mediator, though only a man? [1203]

   Orth.--He was a type of the reality: but the type has not all the
   qualities of the reality. Wherefore though Moses was not by nature God,
   yet, to fulfil the type, he was called a god. For He says "See, I have
   made thee a god to Pharaoh." [1204] And then directly afterwards he
   assigns him also a Prophet as though to God, for "Aaron thy brother,"
   He says, "shall be thy Prophet." [1205] But the reality is by nature
   God, and by nature man.

   Eran.--But who would call one not having the distinct characteristics
   of the archetype, a type?

   Orth.--The imperial images, it seems, you do not call images of the
   emperor.

   Eran.--Yes, I do.

   Orth.--Yet they have not all the characteristics which their archetype
   has. For in the first place they have neither life nor reason; secondly
   they have no inner organs, heart, I mean, and belly and liver and the
   adjacent parts. Further they present the appearance of the organs of
   sense, but perform none of their functions, for they neither hear, nor
   speak, nor see; they cannot write; they cannot walk, nor perform any
   other human action; and yet they are called imperial statues. In this
   sense Moses was a mediator and Christ was a mediator; but the former as
   an image and type and the latter as reality. But that I may make this
   point clearer to you from yet another authority, call to mind the words
   used of Melchisedec in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

   Eran.--What words?

   Orth.--Those in which the divine Apostle comparing the Levitical
   priesthood with that of the Christ likens Melchisedec in other respects
   to the Lord Christ, and says that the Lord had the priesthood after the
   order of Melchisedec. [1206]

   Eran.--I think the words of the divine Apostle are as follows;--"For
   this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God who met
   Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him; to
   whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by
   interpretation king of righteousness, and after that also king of
   Salem, which is king of peace; without father, without mother, without
   descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made
   like unto the son of God; abideth a priest continually." [1207] I
   presume you spoke of this passage.

   Orth.--Yes, I spoke of this; and I must praise you for not mutilating
   it, but for quoting the whole. Tell me now, does each one of these
   points fit Melchisedec in nature and reality?

   Eran.--Who has the audacity to deny a fitness where the divine apostle
   has asserted it?

   Orth.--Then you say that all this fits Melchisedec by nature?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--Do you say that he was a man, or assumed some other nature?

   Eran.--A man.

   Orth.--Begotten or unbegotten?

   Eran.--You are asking very absurd questions.

   Orth.--The fault lies with you for openly opposing the truth. Answer
   then.

   Eran.--There is one only unbegotten, who is God and Father.

   Orth.--Then we assert that Melchisedec was begotten?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--But the passage about him teaches the opposite. Remember the
   words which you quoted a moment ago, "Without father, without mother,
   without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life." How
   then do the words "Without father and without mother" fit him; and how
   the statement that he neither received beginning of existence nor end,
   since all this transcends humanity?

   Eran.--These things do in fact overstep the limits of human nature.

   Orth.--Then shall we say that the Apostle told lies?

   Eran.--God forbid.

   Orth.--How then is it possible both to testify to the truth of the
   Apostle, and apply the supernatural to Melchisedec?

   Eran.--The passage is a very difficult one, and requires much
   explanation.

   Orth.--For any one willing to consider it with attention it will not be
   hard to attain perception of the meaning of the words. After saying
   "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither
   beginning of days nor end of life," the divine Apostle adds "made like
   unto the Son of God, abideth a priest continually." [1208] Here he
   plainly teaches us that the Lord Christ is archetype of Melchisedec in
   things concerning the human nature. And he speaks of Melchisedec as
   "made like unto the Son of God." Now let us examine the point in this
   manner;--do you say that the Lord had a father according to the flesh?

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--Why?

   Eran.--He was born of the holy Virgin alone.

   Orth.--He is therefore properly styled "without father"?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Do you say that according to the divine Nature He had a mother?
   [1209]

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--For He was begotten of the Father alone before the ages?

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--And yet, as the generation He has of the Father is ineffable, He
   is spoken of as "without descent." "Who" says the prophet "shall
   declare His generation?" [1210]

   Eran.--You are right.

   Orth.--Thus it becomes Him to have neither beginning of days nor end of
   life; for He is without beginning, indestructible, and, in a word,
   eternal, and coeternal with the Father.

   Eran.--This is my view too. But we must now consider how this fits the
   admirable Melchisedec.

   Orth.--As an image and type. The image, as we have just observed, has
   not all the properties of the archetype. Thus to the Saviour these
   qualities are proper both by nature and in reality; but the story of
   the origin of the race has attributed them to Melchisedec. For after
   telling us of the father of the patriarch Abraham, and of the father
   and mother of Isaac, and in like manner of Jacob and of his sons, and
   exhibiting the pedigree of our first forefathers, of Melchisedec it
   records neither the father nor the mother, nor does it teach that he
   traced his descent from any one of Noah's sons, to the end that he may
   be a type of Him who is in reality without father, and without mother.
   And this is what the divine Apostle would have us understand, for in
   this very passage he says further, "But he whose descent is not counted
   from them received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the
   promises." [1211]

   Eran.--Then, since Holy Scripture has not mentioned his parents, can he
   be called without father and without mother?

   Orth.--If he had really been without father and without mother, he
   would not have been an image, but a reality. But since these are his
   qualities not by nature, but according to the dispensation of the
   Divine Scripture, he exhibits the type of the reality.

   Eran.--The type must have the character of the archetype.

   Orth.--Is man called an image of God?

   Eran.--Man is not an image of God, but was made in the image of God.
   [1212]

   Orth.--Listen then to the Apostle. He says: "For a man indeed ought not
   to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God."
   [1213]

   Eran.--Granted, then, that he is an image of God.

   Orth.--According to your argument then he must needs have plainly
   preserved the characters of the archetype, and have been uncreate,
   uncompounded, and infinite. He ought in like manner to have been able
   to create out of the non existent, he ought to have fashioned all
   things by his word and without labour, in addition to this to have been
   free from sickness, sorrow, anger, and sin, to have been immortal and
   incorruptible and to possess all the qualities of the archetype.

   Eran.--Man is not an image of God in every respect.

   Orth.--Though truly an image in the qualities in which you would grant
   him to be so, you will find that he is separated by a wide interval
   from the reality.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Consider now too this point. The divine Apostle calls the Son
   the image of the Father; for he says "Who is the image of the invisible
   God?" [1214]

   Eran.--What then; has not the Son all the qualities of the Father?

   Orth.--He is not Father. He is not uncaused. He is not unbegotten.

   Eran.--If He were He would not be Son.

   Orth.--Then does not what I said hold good; the image has not all the
   qualities of the archetype?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Thus too the divine Apostle said that Melchisedec is made like
   unto the Son of God. [1215]

   Eran.--Suppose we grant that he is without Father and without Mother
   and without descent, as you have said. But how are we to understand his
   having neither beginning of days nor end of life?

   Orth.--The holy Moses when writing the ancient genealogy tells us how
   Adam being so many years old begat Seth, [1216] and when he had lived
   so many years he ended his life. [1217] So too he writes of Seth, of
   Enoch, and of the rest, but of Melchisedec he mentions neither
   beginning of existence nor end of life. Thus as far as the story goes
   he has neither beginning of days nor end of life, but in truth and
   reality the only begotten Son of God never began to exist and shall
   never have an end.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Then, so far as what belongs to God and is really divine is
   concerned, Melchisedec is a type of the Lord Christ; but as far as the
   priesthood is concerned, which belongs rather to man than to God, the
   Lord Christ was made a priest after the order of Melchisedec. [1218]
   For Melchisedec was a high priest of the people, and the Lord Christ
   for all men has made the right holy offering of salvation.

   Eran.--We have spent many words on this matter.

   Orth.--Yet more were needed, as you know, for you said the point was a
   difficult one.

   Eran.--Let us return to the question before us.

   Orth.--What was the question?

   Eran.--On my remarking that Christ must not be called man, but only
   God, you yourself besides many other testimonies adduced also the well
   known words of the Apostle which he has used in his epistle
   Timothy--"One God, one mediator between God and men, the man, Christ
   Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time."
   [1219]

   Orth.--I remember from what point we diverged into this digression. It
   was when I had said that the name of mediator exhibits the two natures
   of the Saviour, and you said that Moses was called a mediator though he
   was only a man and not God and man. I was therefore under the necessity
   of following up these points to show that the type has not all the
   qualities of the archetype. Tell me, then, whether you allow that the
   Saviour ought also to be called man.

   Eran.--I call Him God, for He is God's Son.

   Orth.--If you call him God, because you have learnt that he is God's
   Son, call him also man, for he often called Himself "Son of Man."

   Eran.--The name man does not apply to Him in the same way as the name
   God.

   Orth.--As not really belonging to Him or for some other reason?

   Eran.--God is his name by nature; man is the designation of the
   Incarnation. [1220]

   Orth.--But are we to look on the Incarnation as real, or as something
   imaginary and false?

   Eran.--As real.

   Orth.--If then the grace of the Incarnation is real, and what we call
   Incarnation is the divine Word's being made man, then the name man is
   real; for after taking man's nature He is called man.

   Eran.--Before His passion He was styled man, but afterward He was no
   longer so styled.

   Orth.--But it was after the Passion and the Resurrection that the
   divine Apostle wrote the Epistle to Timothy wherein he speaks of the
   Saviour Christ as man, [1221] and writing after the Passion and the
   Resurrection to the Corinthians he exclaims "For since by man came
   death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead." [1222] And in
   order to make his meaning clear he adds, "For as in Adam all die, even
   so in Christ shall all be made alive." [1223] And after the Passion and
   the Resurrection the divine Peter, in his address to the Jews, called
   Him man. [1224] And after His being taken up into heaven, Stephen the
   victorious, amid the storm of stones, said to the Jews, "Behold, I see
   the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of
   God." [1225] Are we to suppose ourselves wiser than the illustrious
   heralds of the truth?

   Eran.--I do not suppose myself wiser than the holy doctors, but I fail
   to find the use of the name.

   Orth.--How then could you persuade them that deny the incarnation of
   the Lord, Marcionists, I mean, and Manichees, and all the rest who are
   thus unsound, to accept the teaching of the truth, unless you adduce
   these and similar proofs with the object of shewing that the Lord
   Christ is not God only but also man?

   Eran.--Perhaps it is necessary to adduce them.

   Orth.--Why not then teach the faithful the reality of the doctrine? Are
   you forgetful of the apostolic precept enjoining us to be "ready to
   give an answer." [1226] Now let us look at the matter in this light.
   Does the best general engage the enemy, attack with arrows and
   javelins, and endeavour to break their column all alone, or does he
   also arm his men, and marshal them, and rouse their hearts to play the
   man?

   Eran.--He ought rather to do this latter.

   Orth.--Yes; for it is not the part of a general to expose his own life,
   and take his place in the ranks, and let his men go fast asleep, but
   rather to keep them awake for their work at their post.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--This is what the divine Paul did, for in writing to them who had
   made profession of their faith he said, "Take unto you the whole armour
   of God that ye be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil." [1227]
   And again, "Stand therefore with your loins girt about with truth,"
   [1228] and so on. Bear in mind too what we have already said, that a
   physician supplies what nature lacks. Does he find the cold redundant?
   He supplies the hot, and so on with the rest; and this is what the Lord
   does.

   Eran.--And where will you show that the Lord has done this?

   Orth.--In the holy gospels.

   Eran.--Show me then and fulfil your promise.

   Orth.--What did the Jews consider our Saviour Christ?

   Eran.--A man.

   Orth.--And that He was also God they were wholly ignorant.

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--Was it not then necessary for the ignorant to learn?

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Listen to Him then saying to them: "Many good works have I
   shewed you from my Father; for which of these works do ye stone me?"
   [1229] And when they replied: "For a good work we stone thee not, but
   for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man makest thyself God,"
   [1230] He added "It is written in your law I said ye are gods. If he
   called them gods unto whom the word of God came and the scripture
   cannot be broken, say ye of Him whom the Father hath sanctified and
   sent into the world thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of
   God? If I do not the works of my father believe me not...that I am in
   the Father and the Father is in me." [1231]

   Eran.--In the passages you have just read you have shewn that the Lord
   shewed Himself to the Jews to be God and not man.

   Orth.--Yes, for they did not need to learn what they knew; that He was
   a man they knew, but they did not know that He was from the beginning
   God. He adopted this same course in the case of the Pharisees; for when
   He saw them accosting Him as a mere man He asked them "What think ye of
   Christ? Whose son is He?" [1232] And when they said "Of David" He went
   on "How then doth David calling him Lord say The Lord said unto my Lord
   sit thou on my right hand.'" [1233] Then He goes on to argue, "If then
   He is His Lord how is He His Son?"

   Eran.--You have brought testimony against yourself, for the Lord
   plainly taught the Pharisees to call Him not "Son of David" but "Lord
   of David." Wherefore He is distinctly shown wishing to be called God
   and not man.

   Orth.--I am afraid you have not attended to the divine teaching. He did
   not repudiate the name of "Son of David," but He added that He ought
   also to be believed to be Lord of David. This He clearly shews in the
   words "If He is his Lord how is He then his Son?" He did not say "if He
   is Lord He is not Son," but "how is He his Son?" instead of saying in
   one respect He is Lord and in another Son. These passages both
   distinctly show the Godhead and the manhood.

   Eran.--There is no need of argument. The Lord distinctly teaches that
   He does not wish to be called Son of David.

   Orth.--Then He ought to have told the blind men and the woman of Canaan
   and the multitude not to call Him Son of David, and yet the blind men
   cried out "Thou Son of David have mercy on us." [1234] And the woman of
   Canaan "Have mercy on me O Son of David; my daughter is grievously
   vexed with a Devil." [1235] And the multitude: "Hosanna to the Son of
   David! Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord." [1236] And
   not only did He not take it ill, but even praised their faith; for the
   blind He freed from their long weary night and granted them the power
   of sight; the maddened and distraught daughter of the woman of Canaan
   He healed and drove out the wicked demon; and when the chief priests
   and Pharisees were offended at them that shouted "Hosanna to the Son of
   David" He did not merely not prevent them from shouting, but even
   sanctioned their acclamation, for, said He, "I tell you that if these
   should hold their peace the stones would immediately cry out." [1237]

   Eran.--He put up with this style of address before the resurrection in
   condescension to the weakness of them that had not yet properly
   believed. But after the resurrection these names are needless.

   Orth.--Where shall we rank the blessed Paul? among the perfect or the
   imperfect?

   Eran.--It is wrong to joke about serious things.

   Orth.--It is wrong to make light of the reading of the divine oracles.

   Eran.--And who is such a wretch as to despise his own salvation?

   Orth.--Answer my question, and then you will learn your ignorance.

   Eran.--What question?

   Orth.--Where are we to rank the divine Apostle?

   Eran.--Plainly among the most perfect, and one of the perfect teachers.

   Orth.--And when did he begin his teaching?

   Eran.--After the ascension of the Saviour, the coming of the Spirit,
   and the stoning of the victorious Stephen.

   Orth.--Paul, at the very end of his life, when writing his last letter
   to his disciple Timothy, and in giving him, as it were, his paternal
   inheritance by will, added "Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of
   David was raised from the dead according to my gospel." [1238] Then he
   went on to mention his sufferings on behalf of the gospel, and thus
   showed its truth saying, "Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer even
   unto bonds." [1239]

   It were easy for me to adduce many similar testimonies, but I have
   judged it needless to do so.

   Eran.--You promised to prove that the Lord supplied the lacking
   instruction to them that needed, and you have shown that He discoursed
   about His own Godhead to the Pharisees, and to the rest of the Jews.
   But that He gave also His instruction about the flesh you have not
   shewn.

   Orth.--It would have been quite superfluous to have discoursed about
   the flesh which was before their eyes, for He was plainly seen eating
   and drinking and toiling and sleeping. Furthermore, to omit the many
   and various events before the passion, after His resurrection He proved
   to His disbelieving disciples not His Godhead but His manhood; for He
   said, "Behold my hands and my feet that it is I myself. Handle me and
   see for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have." [1240]

   Now I have fulfilled my promise, for we have proved the giving of
   instruction about the Godhead to them that were ignorant of the
   Godhead, and about the resurrection of the flesh to them that denied
   this latter. Cease therefore from contending, and confess the two
   natures of the Saviour.

   Eran.--There were two before the union, but, after combining, they made
   one nature.

   Orth.--When do you say that the union was effected?

   Eran.--I say at the exact moment of the conception.

   Orth.--And do you deny that the divine Word existed before the
   conception?

   Eran.--I say that He was before the ages.

   Orth.--And that the flesh was co-existent with Him?

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--But was formed, after the salutation of the angel, of the Holy
   Ghost?

   Eran.--So I say.

   Orth.--Therefore before the union there were not two natures but only
   one. For if the Godhead pre-existed, but the manhood was not
   co-existent, being formed after the angelic salutation, and the union
   being coincident with the formation, then before the union there was
   one nature, that which exists always and existed before the ages. Now
   let us again consider this point. Do you understand the making of flesh
   or becoming man to be anything other than the union?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--For when He took flesh He was made flesh.

   Eran.--Plainly.

   Orth.--And the union coincides with the taking flesh.

   Eran.--So I say.

   Orth.--So before the making man there was one nature. For if both union
   and making man are identical, and He was made man by taking man's
   nature, and the form of God took the form of a servant, then before the
   union the divine nature was one.

   Eran.--And how are the union and the making man identical?

   Orth.--A moment ago you confessed that there is no distinction between
   these terms.

   Eran.--You led me astray by your arguments.

   Orth.--Then, if you like, let us go over the same ground again.

   Eran.--We had better so do.

   Orth.--Is there a distinction between the incarnation and the union,
   according to the nature of the transaction?

   Eran.--Certainly; a very great distinction.

   Orth.--Explain fully the character of this distinction.

   Eran.--Even the sense of the terms shows the distinction, for the word
   "incarnation" shows the taking of the flesh, while the word "union"
   indicates the combination of distinct things.

   Orth.--Do you represent the incarnation to be anterior to the union?

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--You say that the union took place in the conception?

   Eran.--I do.

   Orth.--Therefore if not even the least moment of time intervened
   between the taking of flesh and the union, and the assumed nature did
   not precede the assumption and the union, then incarnation and union
   signify one and the same thing, and so before the union and incarnation
   there was one nature, while after the incarnation we speak properly of
   two, of that which took and of that which was taken.

   Eran.--I say that Christ was of two natures, but I deny two natures.

   Orth.--Explain to us then in what sense you understand the expression
   "of two natures;" like gilded silver? like the composition of electron?
   [1241] like the solder made of lead and tin?

   Eran.--I deny that the union is like any of these; it is ineffable, and
   passes all understanding.

   Orth.--I too confess that the manner of the union cannot be
   comprehended. But I have at all events been instructed by the divine
   Scripture that each nature remains unimpaired after the union.

   Eran.--And where is this taught in the divine Scripture?

   Orth.--It is all full of this teaching.

   Eran.--Give proof of what you assert.

   Orth.--Do you not acknowledge the properties of each nature?

   Eran.--No: not, that is, after the union.

   Orth.--Let us then learn this very point from the divine Scripture.

   Eran.--I am ready to obey the divine Scripture.

   Orth.--When, then, you hear the divine John exclaiming "In the
   beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
   God" [1242] and "By Him all things were made" [1243] and the rest of
   the parallel passages, do you affirm that the flesh, or the divine
   Word, begotten before the ages of the Father, was in the beginning with
   God, and was by nature God, and made all things?

   Eran.--I say that these things belong to God the Word. But I do not
   separate Him from the flesh made one with Him.

   Orth.--Neither do we separate the flesh from God the Word, nor do we
   make the union a confusion.

   Eran.--I recognise one nature after the union.

   Orth.--When did the Evangelists write the gospel? Was it before the
   union, or a very long time after the union?

   Eran.--Plainly after the union, the nativity, the miracles, the
   passion, the resurrection, the taking up into heaven, and the coming of
   the Holy Ghost.

   Orth.--Hear then John saying "In the beginning was the word, and the
   word was with God, and the word was God. He was in the beginning with
   God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything
   made" [1244] and so on. Hear too Matthew, "The book of the generation
   of Jesus Christ, Son of David,--Son of Abraham,"--and so on. [1245]
   Luke too traced His genealogy to Abraham and David. [1246] Now make the
   former and the latter quotation fit one nature. You will find it
   impossible, for existence in the beginning, and descent from
   Abraham,--the making of all things, and derivation from a created
   forefather, are inconsistent.

   Eran.--By thus arguing you divide the only begotten son into two
   Persons.

   Orth.--One Son of God I both know and adore, the Lord Jesus Christ; but
   I have been taught the difference between His Godhead and his manhood.
   You, however, who say that there is only one nature after the union, do
   you make this agree with the introductions of the Evangelists.

   Eran.--You appear to assume the proposition to be hard, nay impossible.
   Be it, I beg, short and easy;--only solve our question.

   Orth.--Both qualities are proper to the Lord Christ,--existence from
   the beginning, and generation, according to the flesh, from Abraham and
   David.

   Eran.--You laid down the law that after the union it is not right to
   speak of one nature. Take heed lest in mentioning the flesh you
   transgress your own law.

   Orth.--Even without mentioning the flesh it is quite easy to explain
   the point in question, for I am applying both to the Saviour Christ.

   Eran.--I too assert that both these qualities belong to the Lord
   Christ.

   Orth.--Yes; but you do so in contemplation of two natures in Him, and
   applying to each its own properties. But if the Christ is one nature,
   how is it possible to attribute to it properties which are inconsistent
   with one another? For to have derived origin from Abraham and David,
   and still more to have been born many generations after David, is
   inconsistent with existence in the beginning. Again to have sprung from
   created beings is inconsistent with being Creator of all things; to
   have had human fathers with existence derived from God. In short the
   new is inconsistent with the eternal.

   Let us also look at the matter in this way. Do we say that the divine
   Word is Creator of the Universe?

   Eran.--So we have learnt to believe from the divine Scriptures.

   Orth.--And how many days after the creation of heaven and earth are we
   told that Adam was formed?

   Eran.--On the sixth day.

   Orth.--And from Adam to Abraham how many generations went by?

   Eran.--I think twenty.

   Orth.--And from Abraham to Christ our Saviour how many generations are
   reckoned by the Evangelist Matthew.

   Eran.--Forty-two. [1247]

   Orth.--If then the Lord Christ is one nature how can He be Creator of
   all things visible and invisible and, at the same time, after so many
   generations, have been formed by the Holy Ghost in a virgin's womb? And
   how could He be at one and the same time Creator of Adam and Son of
   Adam's descendants?

   Eran.--I have already said that both these properties are appropriate
   to Him as God made flesh, for I recognise one nature made flesh of the
   Word.

   Orth.--Nor yet, my good sir, do we say that two natures of the divine
   Word were made flesh, for we know that the nature of the divine Word is
   one, but we have been taught that the flesh of which He availed Himself
   when He was incarnate is of another nature, and here I think that you
   too agree with me. Tell me now; after what manner do you say that the
   making flesh took place?

   Eran.--I know not the manner, but I believe that He was made flesh.

   Orth.--You make a pretext of your ignorance unfairly, and after the
   fashion of the Pharisees. For they when they beheld the force of the
   Lord's enquiry, and suspecting that they were on the point of
   conviction, uttered their reply "We do not know." [1248] But I proclaim
   quite openly that the divine incarnation is without change. For if by
   any variation or change He was made flesh, then after the change all
   that is divine in His names and in His deeds is quite inappropriate to
   Him.

   Eran.--We have agreed again and again that God the Word is immutable.

   Orth.--He was made flesh by taking flesh.

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--The nature of God the Word made flesh is different from that of
   the flesh, by assumption of which the nature of the divine Word was
   made flesh and became man.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Was He then changed into flesh?

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--If then He was made flesh, not by mutation, but by taking flesh,
   and both the former and the latter qualities are appropriate to Him as
   to God made flesh, as you said a moment ago, then the natures were not
   confounded, but remained unimpaired. And as long as we hold thus we
   shall perceive too the harmony of the Evangelists, for while the one
   proclaims the divine attributes of the one only begotten--the Lord
   Christ--the other sets forth His human qualities. So too Christ our
   Lord Himself teaches us, at one time calling Himself Son of God and at
   another Son of man: at one time He gives honour to His Mother as to her
   that gave Him birth; [1249] at another He rebukes her as her Lord.
   [1250] At one time He finds no fault with them that style Him Son of
   David; at another He teaches the ignorant that He is not only David's
   Son but also David's Lord. [1251] He calls Nazareth and Capernaum His
   country, [1252] and again He exclaims "Before Abraham was I am." [1253]
   You will find the divine Scripture full of similar passages, and they
   all point not to one nature but to two.

   Eran.--He who contemplates two natures in the Christ divides the one
   only begotten into two sons.

   Orth.--Yes; and he who says Paul is made up of soul and body makes two
   Pauls out of one.

   Eran.--The analogy does not hold good.

   Orth.--I know it does not, [1254] for here the union is a natural union
   of parts that are coæval, created, and fellow slaves, but in the case
   of the Lord Christ all is of good will, of love to man, and of grace.
   Here too, though the union is natural, the proper qualities of the
   natures remain unimpaired.

   Eran.--If the proper qualities of the natures remain distinct, how does
   the soul together with the body crave for food?

   Orth.--The soul does not crave for food. How could it when it is
   immortal? But the body, which derives its vital force from the soul,
   feels its need, and desires to receive what is lacking. So after toil
   it longs for rest, after waking for sleep, and so with the rest of its
   desires. So forthwith after its dissolution, since it has no longer its
   vital energy, it does not even crave for what is lacking, and, ceasing
   to receive it, it undergoes corruption.

   Eran.--You see that to thirst and to hunger and similar appetites
   belong to the soul.

   Orth.--Did these belong to the soul it would suffer hunger and thirst,
   and the similar wants, even after its release from the body.

   Eran.--What then do you say to be proper to the soul? [1255]

   Orth.--The reasonable, the absolute, the immortal, the invisible.

   Eran.--And what of the body?

   Orth.--The complex, the visible, the mortal.

   Eran.--And we say that man is composed of these?

   Orth.--Yes.

   Eran.--Then we define [1256] man as a mortal reasonable being.

   Orth.--Agreed.

   Eran.--And we give names to him from both these attributes.

   Orth.--Yes.

   Eran.--As then in this case we make no distinction, but call the same
   man both reasonable and mortal, so also should we do in the case of the
   Christ, and apply to Him both the divine and the human.

   Orth.--This is our argument, although you do not accurately express it.
   For look you. When we are pursuing the argument about the human soul,
   do we only mention what is appropriate to its energy and nature?

   Eran.--This only.

   Orth.--And when our discussion is about the body, do we not only recall
   what is appropriate to it?

   Eran.--Quite so.

   Orth.--But, when our discourse touches the whole being, then we have no
   difficulty in adducing both sets of qualities, for the properties both
   of the body and of the soul are applicable to man.

   Eran.--Unquestionably.

   Orth.--Well; just in this way should we speak of the Christ, and, when
   arguing about His natures, give to each its own, and recognise some as
   belonging to the Godhead, and some as to the manhood. But when we are
   discussing the Person we must then make what is proper to the natures
   common, and apply both sets of qualities to the Saviour, and call the
   same Being both God and Man, both Son of God and Son of Man--both
   David's Son and David's Lord, both Seed of Abraham and Creator of
   Abraham, and so on.

   Eran.--That the person of the Christ is one, and that both the divine
   and the human are attributable to Him, you have quite rightly said, and
   I accept this definition of the Faith; but your real position, that in
   discussing the natures we must give to each its own properties, seems
   to me to dissolve the union. It is for this reason that I object to
   accept these and similar arguments.

   Orth.--Yet when we were enquiring about soul and body you thought the
   distinction of these terms admirable, and forthwith gave it your
   approbation. Why then do you refuse to receive the same rule in the
   case of the Godhead and manhood of the Lord Christ? Do you go so far as
   to object to comparing the Godhead and the manhood of the Christ to
   soul and body? So, while you grant an unconfounded union to soul and
   body, do you venture to say that the Godhead and manhood of the Christ
   have undergone commixture and confusion?

   Eran.--I hold the Godhead of the Christ aye, and His flesh too, to be
   infinitely higher in honour than soul and body; but after the union I
   do assert one nature.

   Orth.--But now is it not impious and shocking, while maintaining that a
   soul united to a body is in no way subject to confusion, to deny to the
   Godhead of the Lord of the universe the power to maintain its own
   nature unconfounded or to keep within its proper bounds the humanity
   which He assumed? Is it not, I say, impious to mix the distinct, and to
   commingle the separate? The idea of one nature gives ground for
   suspicion of this confusion.

   Eran.--I am equally anxious to avoid the term confusion, but I shrink
   from asserting two natures lest I fall into a dualism of sons.

   Orth.--I am equally anxious to escape either horn of the dilemma, both
   the impious confusion and the impious distinction; for to me it is
   alike an unhallowed thought to split the one Son in two and to gainsay
   the duality of the natures. But now in truth's name tell me. Were one
   of the faction of Arius or Eunomius to endeavour, while disputing with
   you, to belittle the Son, and to describe Him as less than and inferior
   to the Father, by the help of all their familiar arguments and
   citations from the divine Scripture of the text "Father, if it be
   possible, let this cup pass from me" [1257] and that other, "Now is my
   soul troubled" [1258] and other like passages, how would you dispose of
   his objections? How could you show that the Son is in no way diminished
   in dignity by these expressions and is not of another substance, but
   begotten of the substance of the Father?

   Eran.--I should say that the divine Scripture uses some terms according
   to the theology and some according to the oeconomy, and that it is
   wrong to apply what belongs to the oeconomy to what belongs to the
   theology. [1259]

   Orth.--But your opponent would retort that even in the Old Testament
   the divine Scripture says many things oeconomically, as for instance,
   "Adam heard the voice of the Lord God walking," [1260] and "I will go
   down now and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry
   of it which has come to me; and if not I will know," [1261] and again,
   "Now I know that thou fearest God" [1262] and the like.

   Eran.--I might answer to this that there is a great distinction between
   the oeconomies. In the Old Testament there is an oeconomy of words; in
   the New Testament of deeds.

   Orth.--Then your opponent would ask of what deeds?

   Eran.--He shall straightway hear of the deeds of the making flesh. For
   the Son of God on being made man both in word and deed at one time
   exhibits the flesh, at another the Godhead: as of course, in the
   passage quoted, He shews the weakness of the flesh and of the soul, the
   sense namely of fear.

   Orth.--But if he were to go on to say, "But he did not take a soul but
   only a body; for the Godhead instead of a soul being united to the body
   performed all the functions of the soul," with what arguments could you
   meet his objections?

   Eran.--I could bring proofs from the divine Scripture shewing how God
   the Word took not only flesh but also soul.

   Orth.--And what proofs of this shall we find in Scripture?

   Eran.--Have you not heard the Lord saying "I have power to lay it down,
   and I have power to take it again....I lay it down of myself that I
   might take it again." [1263] And again, "Now is my soul troubled."
   [1264] And again, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death,"
   [1265] and again David's words as interpreted by Peter "His soul was
   not left in hell neither did His flesh see corruption." [1266] These
   and similar passages clearly point out that God the Word assumed not
   only a body but also a soul.

   Orth.--You have quoted this testimony most appositely and properly, but
   your opponent might reply that even before the incarnation God said to
   the Jews, "Fasting and holy day and feasts my soul hateth." [1267] Then
   he might go on to argue that as in the Old Testament He mentioned a
   soul, though He had not a soul, so He does in the New.

   Eran.--But he shall be told again how the divine Scripture, when
   speaking of God, mentions even parts of the body as "Incline thine ear
   and hear" [1268] and "Open thine eyes and see" [1269] and "The mouth of
   the Lord hath spoken it" [1270] and "Thy hands have made me and
   fashioned me" [1271] and countless other passages.

   If then after the incarnation we are forbidden to understand soul to
   mean soul, it is equally forbidden to hold body to mean body. Thus the
   great mystery of the oeconomy will be found to be mere imagination; and
   we shall in no way differ from Marcion, Valentinus and Manes, the
   inventors of all these figments.

   Orth.--But if a follower of Apollinarius were suddenly to intervene in
   our discussion and were to ask "Most excellent Sir; what kind of soul
   do you say that Christ assumed?" what would you answer?

   Eran.--I should first of all say that I know only one soul of man; then
   I should answer, "But if you reckon two souls, the one reasonable and
   the other without reason, I say that the soul assumed was the
   reasonable. Yours it seems is the unreasonable, inasmuch as you think
   that our salvation was incomplete."

   Orth.--But suppose he were to ask for proof of what you say?

   Eran.--I could very easily give it. I shall quote the oracles of the
   Evangelists "The Child Jesus grew and waxed strong in spirit and the
   grace of God was upon him" [1272] and again "Jesus increased in wisdom
   and in stature and in favour with God and men." [1273] I should say
   that these have nothing to do with Godhead for the body increased in
   stature, and in wisdom the soul--not that which is without reason, but
   the reasonable. God the Word then took on Him a reasonable soul.

   Orth.--Good Sir, you have bravely broken through the three fold phalanx
   of your foes; but that union, and the famous commixture and confusion,
   not in two ways only but in three, you have scattered and undone; and
   not only have you pointed out the distinction between Godhead and
   manhood, but you have in two ways distinguished the manhood by pointing
   out that the soul is one thing and the body another, so that no longer
   two, according to our argument, but three natures of our Saviour Jesus
   Christ may be understood.

   Eran.--Yes; for did not you say that there is another substance of the
   soul besides the nature of the body?

   Orth.--Yes.

   Eran.--How then does the argument seem absurd to you?

   Orth.--Because while you object to two, you have admitted three
   natures.

   Eran.--The contest with our antagonists compels us to this, for how
   could any one in any other way argue against those who deny the
   assumption of the flesh, or of the soul, or of the mind, but by
   adducing proofs on these points from the divine Scripture? And how
   could any one confute them who in their readiness strive to belittle
   the Godhead of the only Begotten but by pointing out that the divine
   Scripture speaks sometimes theologically and sometimes oeconomically.

   Orth.--What you now say is true. It is what I, nay what all say, who
   keep whole the apostolic rule. You yourself have become a supporter of
   our doctrines.

   Eran.--How do I support yours, while I refuse to acknowledge two sons?

   Orth.--When did you ever hear of our affirming two sons?

   Eran.--He who asserts two natures asserts two sons.

   Orth.--Then you assert three sons, for you have spoken of three
   natures.

   Eran.--In no other way was it possible to meet the argument of my
   opponents.

   Orth.--Hear this same thing from us too; for both you and I confront
   the same antagonists.

   Eran.--But I do not assert two natures after the union.

   Orth.--And yet after many generations of the union a moment ago you
   used the same words. Explain to us however in what sense you assert one
   nature after the union. Do you mean one nature derived from both or
   that one nature remains after the destruction of the other?

   Eran.--I maintain that the Godhead remains and that the manhood was
   swallowed up by it. [1274]

   Orth.--Fables of the Gentiles, all this, and follies of the Manichees.
   I am ashamed so much as to mention such things. The Greeks had their
   gods' swallowings [1275] and the Manichees wrote of the daughter of
   light. But we reject such teaching as being as absurd as it is impious,
   for how could a nature absolute and uncompounded, comprehending the
   universe, unapproachable and infinite, have absorbed the nature which
   it assumed?

   Eran.--Like the sea receiving a drop of honey, for straightway the
   drop, as it mingles with the ocean's water, disappears.

   Orth.--The sea and the drop are different in quantity, though alike in
   quality; the one is greatest, the other is least; the one is sweet and
   the other is bitter; but in all other respects you will find a very
   close relationship. The nature of both is moist, liquid, and fluid.
   Both are created. Both are lifeless yet each alike is called a body.
   There is nothing then absurd in these cognate natures undergoing
   commixture, and in the one being made to disappear by the other. In the
   case before us on the contrary the difference is infinite, and so great
   that no figure of the reality can be found. I will however endeavour to
   point out to you several instances of substances which are mixed
   without being confounded, and remain unimpaired.

   Eran.--Who in the world ever heard of an unmixed mixture?

   Orth.--I shall endeavour to make you admit this.

   Eran.--Should what you are about to advance prove true we will not
   oppose the truth.

   Orth.--Answer then, dissenting or assenting as the argument may seem
   good to you.

   Eran.--I will answer.

   Orth.--Does the light at its rising seem to you to fill all the
   atmosphere except where men shut up in caverns might remain bereft of
   it?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And does all the light seem to you to be diffused through all
   the atmosphere?

   Eran.--I am with you so far.

   Orth.--And is not the mixture diffused through all that is subject to
   it?

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--But, now, this illuminated atmosphere, do we not see it as light
   and call it light?

   Eran.--Quite so.

   Orth.--And yet when the light is present we sometimes are aware of
   moisture and aridity; frequently of heat and cold.

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And after the departure of the light the atmosphere afterwards
   remains alone by itself.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Consider this example too. When iron is brought in contact with
   fire it is fired.

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--And the fire is diffused through its whole substance?

   Eran.--Well?

   Orth.--How, then, does not the complete union, and the mixture
   universally diffused, change the iron's nature?

   Eran.--But it changes it altogether. It is now reckoned no longer as
   iron, but as fire, and indeed it has the active properties of fire.

   Orth.--But does not the smith call it iron, and put it on the anvil and
   smite it with his hammer?

   Eran.--Unquestionably.

   Orth.--Then the nature of the iron was not damaged by contact with the
   fire. If then, in natural bodies, instances may be found of an
   unconfounded mixture, it is sheer folly in the case of the nature which
   knows neither corruption nor change to entertain the idea of confusion
   and destruction of the assumed nature, and all the more so when this
   nature was assumed to bring blessing on the race.

   Eran.--What I assert is not the destruction of the assumed nature, but
   its change into the substance of Godhead.

   Orth.--Then the human race is no longer limited as heretofore?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--When did it undergo this change?

   Eran.--After the complete union.

   Orth.--And what date do you assign to this?

   Eran.--I have said again and again, that of the conception.

   Orth.--Yet after the conception He was an unborn babe in the womb;
   after His birth. He was a babe [1276] and was called a babe, and was
   worshipped by shepherds, and in like manner became a boy, and was so
   called by the angel. [1277] Do you acknowledge all this? or do you
   think I am inventing fables?

   Eran.--This is taught in the history of the divine gospels, and cannot
   be gainsaid.

   Orth.--Now let us investigate what follows. We acknowledge, do we not,
   that the Lord was circumcised?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--Of what was there a circumcision? Of flesh or Godhead?

   Eran.--Of the flesh.

   Orth.--Of what was then the growth and increase in wisdom and stature?

   Eran.--This, of course, is not applicable to Godhead.

   Orth.--Nor hunger and thirst?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--Nor walking about, and being weary, and falling asleep?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--If then the union took place at the conception, and all these
   things came to pass after the conception and the birth, then, after the
   union, the manhood did not lose its own nature.

   Eran.--I have not stated my meaning exactly. It was after the
   resurrection from the dead that the flesh underwent the change into
   Godhead.

   Orth.--Then, after the resurrection, nothing of all that indicates its
   nature remained in it?

   Eran.--If it remained, the divine change did not take place.

   Orth.--How then was it that He shewed His hands and His feet to the
   disciples who disbelieved?

   Eran.--Just as He came in when the doors were shut.

   Orth.--But He came in when the doors were shut just as He came out from
   the womb, though the virgin's bolts and bars were undrawn, and just as
   He walked upon the sea. Then according to your argument not even yet
   had the change of nature taken place?

   Eran.--The Lord shewed His hands to the Apostles in the same way as He
   wrestled with Jacob.

   Orth.--No; the Lord does not allow us to understand it in this sense.
   The disciples thought they saw a spirit, but the Lord dispelled this
   idea, and shewed the nature of the flesh, for He said "Why are ye
   troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and
   my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not
   flesh and bones, as ye see me have." [1278] And observe the exactness
   of the language. He does not say "is not flesh and bones," but "has not
   flesh and bones," in order to point out that the nature of the
   possessor and the nature of that which is possessed are distinct and
   separate. Just in the same way that which took and that which was taken
   are separate and distinct, and the Christ is beheld made one of both.
   Thus the part possessing is entirely different from the part possessed;
   and yet does not divide into two persons Him who is an object of
   thought in them. The Lord, indeed, while the disciples were still in
   doubt, asked for food and took and ate it, not consuming the food only
   in appearance, nor satisfying to the need of the body.

   Eran.--But one of these alternatives must be accepted; either He
   partook because He needed, or else, needing not, He seemed to eat, and
   did not really partake of food.

   Orth.--His body now become immortal required no food. Of them that rise
   the Lord says: "they neither marry nor are given in marriage but are as
   Angels." [1279] The apostles however bear witness that He partook of
   the food, for the blessed Luke in the preface to the Acts says "being
   assembled together with the apostles the Lord commanded them that they
   should not depart from Jerusalem" [1280] and the very divine Peter says
   more distinctly: "Who did eat and drink with Him after He rose from the
   dead." [1281] For since eating is proper to them that live this present
   life, of necessity the Lord by means of eating and drinking proved the
   resurrection of the flesh to them that did not acknowledge it to be
   real. This same course He pursued in the case of Lazarus and of Jairus'
   daughter. For when He had raised up the latter He ordered that
   something should be given her to eat [1282] and He made Lazarus sit
   with Him at the table [1283] and so shewed the reality of the rising
   again.

   Eran.--If we grant that the Lord really ate, let us grant that after
   the resurrection all men partake of food.

   Orth.--What was done by the Saviour through a certain oeconomy is not a
   rule and law of nature. This follows from the fact that He did other
   things by oeconomy which shall by no means be the lot of them that live
   again.

   Eran.--What do you mean?

   Orth.--Will not the bodies of them that rise become incorruptible and
   immortal?

   Eran.--So the divine Paul has taught us. "It is sown" he says "in
   corruption; it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonour; it
   is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power; it
   is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body." [1284]

   Orth.--But the Lord, who raises the bodies of all men, unmaimed and
   unmarred (for lameness of limb and blindness of eye are unknown among
   them that are risen), [1285] left in His own body the prints of the
   nails, and the wound in His side, whereof are witnesses both the Lord
   Himself and the hand of Thomas.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--If then after the resurrection the Lord both partook of food,
   and shewed His hands and His feet to His disciples, and in them the
   prints of the nails, and His side with the mark of the wound in it, and
   said to them, "Handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh and bones
   as ye see me have" [1286] it follows that after His resurrection the
   nature of His body was preserved and was not changed into another
   substance.

   Eran.--Then after the resurrection it is mortal and subject to
   suffering?

   Orth.--By no means; it is incorruptible, impassible, and immortal.

   Eran.--If it is incorruptible, impassible, and immortal, it has been
   changed into another nature.

   Orth.--Therefore the bodies of all men will be changed into another
   substance, for all will be incorruptible and immortal. Or have you not
   heard the words of the Apostle, "For this corruptible must put on
   incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality"? [1287]

   Eran.--I have heard.

   Orth.--Therefore the nature remains, but its corruption is changed into
   incorruption, and its mortal into immortality. But let us look at the
   matter in this way; we call a body that is sick and a body that is
   whole, in the same way, a body.

   Eran.--Unquestionably.

   Orth.--Wherefore?

   Eran.--Since both partake of the same substance.

   Orth.--Yet we see in them a very great difference, for the one is
   whole, perfect, and unhurt; the other has either lost an eye, or has a
   broken leg, or has undergone some other suffering.

   Eran.--But to the same nature belong both health and sickness.

   Orth.--So the body is called substance; disease and health are called
   accident.

   Eran.--Of course. For these things are accidents of the body, and again
   cease to be so.

   Orth.--In the same way corruption and death must be called accidents,
   and not substances, for they too are accidents and cease to be so.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--So the body of the Lord rose incorruptible, impassible, and
   immortal, and is worshipped by the powers of heaven, and is yet a body
   having its former limitation.

   Eran.--In these points you seem to say sooth, but after its assumption
   into heaven I do not think that you will deny that it was changed into
   the nature of Godhead.

   Orth.--I would not so say persuaded only by human arguments, for I am
   not so rash as to say anything concerning which divine Scripture is
   silent. But I have heard the divine Paul exclaiming "God hath appointed
   a day in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by that man
   whom He hath ordained whereof He hath given assurance unto all men in
   that He hath raised Him from the dead," [1288] and I have learnt from
   the holy Angels that He will come in like manner as the disciples saw
   Him going into heaven. [1289] Now they saw His nature not unlimited.
   For I have heard the words of the Lord, "Ye shall see the Son of Man
   coming in the clouds of heaven," [1290] and I acknowledge that what is
   seen of men is limited, for the unlimited nature is invisible.
   Furthermore to sit upon a throne of glory and to set the lambs upon the
   right and the kids upon the left [1291] indicates limitation.

   Eran.--Then He was not unlimited even before the incarnation, for the
   prophet saw Him surrounded by the Seraphim. [1292]

   Orth.--The prophet did not see the substance of God, but a certain
   appearance accommodated to his capacity. After the resurrection,
   however, all the world will see the very visible nature of the judge.

   Eran.--You promised that you would adduce no argument without evidence,
   but you are introducing arguments adapted to us.

   Orth.--I have learnt these things from the divine Scripture. I have
   heard the words of the prophet Zechariah "They shall look on Him whom
   they pierced," [1293] and how shall the event follow the prophecy
   unless the crucifiers recognise the nature which they crucified? And I
   have heard the cry of the victorious martyr Stephen, "Behold I see the
   heavens opened and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God,"
   [1294] and he saw the visible, not the invisible nature.

   Eran.--These things are thus written, but I do not think that you will
   be able to show that the body, after the ascension into heaven, is
   called body by the inspired writers.

   Orth.--What has been already said indicates the body perfectly plainly;
   for what is seen is a body; but I will nevertheless point out to you
   that even after the assumption the body of the Lord is called a body.
   Hear the teaching of the Apostle, "For our conversation is in Heaven
   from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus, who shall
   change our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
   body." [1295] It was not changed into another nature, but remained a
   body, full however of divine glory, and sending forth beams of light.
   The bodies of the saints shall be fashioned like unto it. But if it was
   changed into another nature, their bodies will be likewise changed, for
   they shall be fashioned like unto it. But if the bodies of the saints
   preserve the character of their nature, then also the body of the Lord
   in like manner keeps its own nature unchanged.

   Eran.--Then will the bodies of the saints be equal with the body of the
   Lord?

   Orth.--In its incorruption and its immortality they too will share.
   Moreover in its glory they will participate, as says the Apostle, "If
   so be that we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified together."
   [1296] It is in quantity that the vast difference may be found, a
   difference as great as between sun and stars, or rather between master
   and slaves, and that which gives and that which receives light. Yet has
   He given a share of His own name to His servants and as He is Light,
   calls His saints light, for "Ye," He says, "are the Light of the
   world," [1297] and being named servants and being named "Sun of
   Righteousness" [1298] He says of his servants "Then shall the righteous
   shine forth as the Sun." [1299] It is therefore according to quality,
   not according to quantity, that the bodies of the saints shall be
   fashioned like unto the body of the Lord. Now I have shewn you plainly
   what you bade me. Further, if you please, let us look at the matter in
   yet another way.

   Eran.--One ought "to stir every stone," as the proverb says, [1300] to
   get at the truth; above all when it is a question of divine doctrines.

   Orth.--Tell me now; the mystic symbols which are offered to God by them
   who perform priestly rites, of what are they symbols?

   Eran.--Of the body and blood of the Lord.

   Orth.--Of the real body or not?

   Eran.--The real.

   Orth.--Good. For there must be the archetype of the image. So painters
   imitate nature and paint the images of visible objects.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--If, then, the divine mysteries are antitypes of the real body,
   [1301] therefore even now the body of the Lord is a body, not changed
   into nature of Godhead, but filled with divine glory.

   Eran.--You have opportunely introduced the subject of the divine
   mysteries for from it I shall be able to show you the change of the
   Lord's body into another nature. Answer now to my questions.

   Orth.--I will answer.

   Eran.--What do you call the gift which is offered before the priestly
   invocation?

   Orth.--It were wrong to say openly; perhaps some uninitiated are
   present.

   Eran.--Let your answer be put enigmatically.

   Orth.--Food of grain of such a sort.

   Eran.--And how name we the other symbol?

   Orth.--This name too is common, signifying species of drink.

   Eran.--And after the consecration how do you name these?

   Orth.--Christ's body and Christ's blood.

   Eran.--And do you believe that you partake of Christ's body and blood?

   Orth.--I do.

   Eran.--As, then, the symbols of the Lord's body and blood are one thing
   before the priestly invocation, and after the invocation are changed
   and become another thing; so the Lord's body after the assumption is
   changed into the divine substance.

   Orth.--You are caught in the net you have woven yourself. For even
   after the consecration the mystic symbols are not deprived of their own
   nature; they remain in their former substance figure and form; they are
   visible and tangible as they were before. But they are regarded as what
   they are become, and believed so to be, and are worshipped [1302] as
   being what they are believed to be. Compare then the image with the
   archetype, and you will see the likeness, for the type must be like the
   reality. For that body preserves its former form, figure, and
   limitation and in a word the substance of the body; but after the
   resurrection it has become immortal and superior to corruption; it has
   become worthy of a seat on the right hand; it is adored by every
   creature as being called the natural body of the Lord.

   Eran.--Yes; and the mystic symbol changes its former appellation; it is
   no longer called by the name it went by before, but is styled body. So
   must the reality be called God, and not body.

   Orth.--You seem to me to be ignorant--for He is called not only body
   but even bread of life. So the Lord Himself used this name [1303] and
   that very body we call divine body, and giver of life, and of the
   Master and of the Lord, teaching that it is not common to every man but
   belongs to our Lord Jesus Christ Who is God and Man. "For Jesus Christ"
   is "the same yesterday, to-day, and forever." [1304]

   Eran.--You have said a great deal about this, but I follow the saints
   who have shone of old in the Church; show me then, if you can, these in
   their writings dividing the natures after the union.

   Orth.--I will read you their works, and I am sure you will be
   astonished at the countless mentions of the distinction which in their
   struggle against impious heretics they have inserted in their writings.
   Hear now those whose testimony I have already adduced speaking openly
   and distinctly on these points.

   Testimony of the holy Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, and martyr:--

   From the Epistle to the Smyrnæans: [1305] "I acknowledge and believe
   Him after His resurrection to be existent in the flesh: and when He
   came to them that were with Peter He said to them Take; handle me and
   see, for I am not a bodiless dæmon.' [1306] And straightway they took
   hold of him and believed."

   Of the same from the same epistle:--

   "And after His Resurrection He ate with them, and drank with them, as
   being of the flesh, although He was spiritually one with the Father."

   Testimony of Irenæus, the ancient bishop of Lyons;--

   From the third Book of his work "Against Heresies." (Chap. XX.)

   "As we have said before, He united man to God. For had not a man
   vanquished man's adversary, the enemy would not have been vanquished
   aright; and again, had not God granted the boon of salvation we should
   not have possessed it in security. And had not man been united to God,
   he could not have shared in the incorruption. For it behoved the
   mediator of God and men, by means of His close kinship to either, to
   bring them both into friendship and unanimity, and to set man close to
   God and to make God known to men."

   Of the same from the third book of the same treatise (Chapter XVIII):--

   "So again in his Epistle he says Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the
   Christ is born of God,' [1307] recognising one and the same Jesus
   Christ to whom the gates of heaven were opened, on account of His
   assumption in the flesh. Who in the same flesh in which He also
   suffered shall come revealing the glory of the Father."

   Of the same from the fourth book (Chapter VII):--

   "As Isaiah saith He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root.
   Israel shall blossom and bud and fill the face of the world with
   fruit.' [1308] So his fruit being scattered through the whole world,
   they who erst brought forth good fruit (for of them was produced the
   Christ in the flesh and the apostles) were abandoned and removed. And
   now they are no longer fit for bringing forth fruit."

   Of the same from the same book (Chapter LIX):--

   "And he judges also them of Ebion. [1309] How can they be saved unless
   it was God who wrought their salvation on earth, or how shall man come
   to God unless God came to man?"

   Of the same from the same book (Chapter LXIV):--

   "They who preach that Emmanuel was of the Virgin set forth the union of
   God the Word with His creature."

   Of the same from the same treatise (Book V. Chap. I.):--

   "Now these things came to pass not in seeming but in essential truth,
   for if He appeared to be man though He was not man then the Spirit of
   God did not continue to be what in truth It is; for the Spirit is
   invisible; nor was there any truth in Him, for He was not what He
   appeared to be. And we have said before that Abraham and the rest of
   the prophets beheld Him in prophecy prophesying what was destined to
   come to pass in actual sight. If then now too He appeared to be of such
   a character, though in reality He was not what He appeared, then a kind
   of prophetic vision would have been given to men, and we must still
   look for yet another advent in which He will really be what He is now
   seen to be in prophecy. Now we have demonstrated that there is no
   difference between the statements that He only appeared in seeming and
   that He took nothing from Mary, for He did not really even possess
   flesh and blood whereby He redeemed us, unless He renewed in Himself
   the old creation of Adam. The sect of Valentinus are therefore vain in
   teaching thus that they may cast out the life of the flesh."

   Testimony of the holy Hippolytus, bishop and martyr, from his work on
   the distribution of the talents: [1310] --

   "Any one might say that these and those who uphold otherwise are
   neighbours, erring as they do in the same manner, for even they either
   confess that the Christ appeared in life as mere man, denying the
   talent of His Godhead, or else acknowledging Him as God, on the other
   hand they deny the man, representing that He deluded the sight of them
   that beheld Him by unreal appearances; and that He wore manhood not as
   a Man but was rather a mere imaginary semblance, as Marcion and
   Valentinus and the Gnostics teach, wrenching away the Word from the
   flesh, and rejecting the one talent, the incarnation."

   Of the same from his letter to a certain Queen: [1311] --

   "He calls Him the first fruits of them that sleep,' as being the first
   born from the dead,' [1312] and He, after His resurrection, wishing to
   show that that which was risen was the same as that which had undergone
   death, when the disciples were doubting, called Thomas to Him, and
   said, Come hither handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh and
   blood as ye see me have.'" [1313]

   Of the same from his discourse on Elkanah and Hannah:--

   "Wherefore three seasons of the year typified the Saviour Himself that
   He might fulfil the mysteries predicted about Him. In the Passover,
   that He might shew Himself as the sheep doomed to be sacrificed and
   shew a true Passover as says the Apostle, Christ, God, [1314] our
   Passover was sacrificed for us.' At Pentecost that He might announce
   the kingdom of heaven ascending Himself first into heaven and offering
   to God man as a gift."

   Of the same from his work on the great Psalm: [1315] --

   "He who drew from the nethermost hell man first formed of the earth
   when lost and held fast in bonds of death; He who came down from above
   and lifted up him that was down; He who became Evangelist of the dead,
   ransomer of souls and resurrection of them that were entombed; this was
   He who became succourer of vanquished man in Himself, like man
   firstborn Word; visiting the first formed Adam in the Virgin; the
   spiritual seeking the earthy in the womb; the ever-living him who by
   disobedience died; the heavenly calling the earthly to the world above,
   the highborn meaning to make the slave free by His own obedience; He
   who turned to adamant man crumbled into dust and made serpents' meat;
   He who made man hanging on a tree of wood Lord over him who had
   conquered Him and so by a tree of wood is proved victorious."

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "They who do not now recognise the Son of God in the flesh will one day
   recognise Him when He comes as judge in glory, though now in an
   inglorious body suffering wrong."

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "Moreover the apostles when they had come to the sepulchre on the third
   day did not find the body of Jesus, just as the children of Israel went
   up on the mountain, and could not find the tomb of Moses."

   Of the same from his interpretation of Psalm II.:--

   "When He had come into the world He was manifested as God and Man. His
   manhood is easy of perception because He is ahungered and aweary, in
   toil He is athirst, in fear He flees, [1316] in prayer He grieves; He
   falls asleep upon a pillow, He prays that the cup of suffering may pass
   from Him, being in an agony He sweats, He is strengthened by an angel,
   betrayed by Judas, dishonoured by Caiaphas, set at nought by Herod,
   scourged by Pilate, mocked by soldiers, nailed to a cross by Jews, He
   commends His spirit to the Father with a cry, He leans His head as He
   breathes His last, He is pierced in the side with a spear and rolled in
   fine linen, is laid in a tomb, and on the third day He is raised by the
   Father. No less plainly may His divinity be seen when He is worshipped
   by angels, gazed on by shepherds, waited for by Simeon, testified to by
   Anna, sought out by Magi, pointed out by a Star, at the wedding feast
   makes water wine, rebukes the sea astir by force of winds, and on the
   same sea walks, makes a man blind from birth see, raises Lazarus who
   had been four days dead, works many and various wonders, remits sins
   and gives power to His disciples."

   Of the same from his work on Psalm XXIV.:--

   "He comes to the heavenly gates, angels travel with Him and the gates
   of the heavens are shut. For He hath not yet ascended into heaven. Now
   first to the heavenly powers flesh appears ascending. The Word then
   goes forth to the powers from the angels that speed before the Lord and
   Saviour, Lift the Gates ye princes and be ye lift up ye everlasting
   doors and the King of glory shall come in.'" [1317]

   Testimony of the holy Eustathius, bishop of Antioch and confessor.

   From his work on The Titles of the Psalms:--

   "He predicted that He would sit upon a holy throne, shewing that He has
   been set forth on the same throne as the divine Spirit on account of
   the God that dwells in Him continually."

   Of the same from his work upon the Soul:--

   "Before His passion in each case He predicted His bodily death, saying
   that He would be betrayed to the father of the High Priest, and
   announcing the trophy of the Cross. And after the passion, when He had
   risen on the third day from the dead, His disciples being in doubt as
   to His resurrection, He appeared to them in His very body and confessed
   that He had complete flesh and bones, submitting to their sight His
   wounded side and shewing them the prints of the nails."

   Of the same from his discourse on "The Lord formed me in the beginning
   of His ways": [1318] --

   "Paul did not say conformed to the Son of God' but conformed to the
   image of His Son' [1319] in order to point out a distinction between
   the Son and His image, for the Son, wearing the divine tokens of His
   Father's Excellence, is an image of His Father; for since like are
   generated of like, offspring appear as very images of their parents,
   but the manhood which He wore is an image of the Son, as images even of
   different colours are painted on wax, [1320] some being wrought by hand
   and some by nature and likeness. Moreover the very law of truth
   announces this, for the bodiless spirit of wisdom is not conformed to
   bodily men, but the express image [1321] made man by the spirit bearing
   the same number of members with all the rest, and clad in similar
   form."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "That he speaks of the body as conformed to those of men he teaches
   more clearly in his Epistle to the Philippians, our conversation' he
   says is in Heaven from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord
   Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned
   like unto His glorious body.' [1322] And if by changing the form of the
   vile body of men He fashions it like unto His own body, then the false
   teaching of our opponents is shewn to be in every way worthless."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "But as being born of the Virgin He is said to have been made man of
   the woman, [1323] so He is described as being made under the law
   because of His sometimes walking by the precepts of the law, as for
   instance when His parents zealously urged His circumcision, when He was
   a child eight days old, as relates the evangelist Luke, afterwards they
   brought Him to present Him to the Lord,' bringing the offerings of
   purification' to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in
   the law of the Lord a pair of turtle doves or two young pigeons.'
   [1324] As then the gifts of purification were offered on His behalf
   according to the law, and He underwent circumcision on the eighth day,
   the Apostle very properly writes that He was thus brought under the
   law. Not indeed that the Word was subject to the law, (as our
   calumnious opponents suppose) being Himself the law, nor did God, who
   by one breath can cleanse and hallow all things, need sacrifices of
   purification. But He took from the Virgin the members of a man and
   became subject to the law and was purified according to the rite of the
   firstborn, not because He submitted to this treatment from any need on
   His part of such observance, but in order that He might redeem from the
   slavery of the law them that were sold to the doom of the curse."

   Testimony of the holy Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.

   From his Second Discourse against heresies: [1325] --

   "We should not have been redeemed from sin and the curse had not the
   flesh which the Word wore been by nature that of man, for we should
   have had nothing in common with that which was not our own; just so man
   would not have been made God, had not the Word which was made flesh
   been by nature of the Father and verily and properly His. And the
   combination is of this character that to the natural God may be joined
   the natural man, and so his salvation and deification be secure.
   Therefore let them that deny Him to be naturally of the Father, and own
   Son of His substance, deny too that He took very flesh of man from the
   Virgin Mary."

   Of the same from his Epistle to Epictetus:--

   "If on account of the Saviour's Body being, and being described in the
   Scriptures as being, derived from Mary, and a human Body, they fancy
   that a quaternity is substituted for a Trinity, as though some addition
   were made by the body, they are quite wrong; they put the creature on a
   par with the Creator, and suppose that the Godhead is capable of being
   added to. They fail to see that the Word was not made flesh on account
   of any addition to Godhead, but that the flesh may rise. Not for the
   aggrandisement of the Word did He come forth from Mary, but that the
   human race may be redeemed. How can they think that the body ransomed
   and quickened by the Word can add anything in the way of Godhead to the
   Word that quickened it?"

   Of the same from the same Epistle:--

   "Let them be told that if the Word had been a creature, the creature
   would not have assumed a body to quicken it. For what help can
   creatures get from a creature standing itself in need of salvation? But
   the Word, Himself Creator, was made maker of created things, and
   therefore in the fulness of the ages He attached the creature to
   Himself, that once more as a Creator He might renew it, and might be
   able to create it afresh."

   From the longer Discourse "De Fide":--

   "This also we add concerning the words Sit thou on my right hand,'
   [1326] that they are said of the Lord's body. For if the Lord saith, do
   not I fill heaven and earth,' [1327] as says Jeremiah, and God contains
   all things, and is contained of none, on what kind of throne does He
   sit? It is therefore the body to which He says Sit thou on my right
   hand,' of which too the devil with his wicked powers was foe, and Jews
   and Gentiles too. Through this body too He was made and was called High
   Priest and Apostle through the mystery whereof He gave to us, saying
   This is my Body for you' [1328] and my Blood of the New Testament' (not
   of the Old), shed for you." [1329] Now Godhead hath neither body nor
   blood; but the manhood which He bore of Mary was the cause of them, of
   whom the Apostles said Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among
   you.'" [1330]

   Of the same from his book against the Arians:--

   "And when he says Wherefore God hath also highly exalted Him and given
   Him a name which is above every name' [1331] he speaks of the temple of
   the body, not of the Godhead, for the Most High is not exalted, but the
   flesh of the Most High is exalted, and to the flesh of the Most High He
   gave a name which is above every name. Nor did the Word of God receive
   the designation of God as a favour, but His flesh was held divine as
   well as Himself."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "And when he says the Holy Ghost was not yet because that Jesus was not
   yet glorified,' [1332] he says that His flesh was not yet glorified,
   for the Lord of glory is not glorified, but the flesh itself receives
   glory of the glory of the Lord as it mounts with Him into Heaven;
   whence he says the spirit of adoption was not yet among men, because
   the first fruits taken from men had not yet ascended into heaven.
   Wherever then the Scripture says that the Son received and was
   glorified, it speaks because of His manhood, not His Godhead."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "So that He is very God both before His being made man and after His
   being made mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ united to the Father
   in spirit, and to us in flesh, who mediated between God and men, and
   who is not only man but also God."

   Testimony of the Holy Ambrosius, bishop of Milan.

   In his Exposition of the Faith:--

   "We confess that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten Son of God,
   was begotten before all ages, without beginning, of the Father, and
   that in these last days the same was made flesh of the holy Virgin
   Mary, assumed the manhood, in its perfection, of a reasonable soul and
   body, of one substance with the Father as touching His Godhead and of
   one substance with us as touching His manhood. For union of two perfect
   natures hath been after an ineffable manner. Wherefore we acknowledge
   one Christ, one Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; knowing that being
   coeternal with His own Father as touching His Godhead, by virtue of
   which also He is creator of all, He deigned, after the assent of the
   Holy Virgin, when she said to the angel Behold the handmaid of the
   Lord, be it unto me according to thy word' [1333] to build after an
   ineffable fashion a temple out of her for Himself, and to unite this
   temple to Himself by her conception, not taking and uniting with
   Himself a body coeternal with His own substance, and brought from
   heaven, but of the matter of our substance, that is of the Virgin. God
   the Word was not turned into flesh; His appearance was not unreal;
   keeping ever His own substance immutably and invariably He took the
   first fruits of our nature, and united them to Himself. God the Word
   did not take His beginning from the Virgin, but being coeternal with
   His own Father He of infinite kindness deigned to unite to Himself the
   first fruits of our nature, undergoing no mixture but in either
   substance appearing one and the same, as it is written Destroy this
   temple and in three days I will raise it up.' [1334] For the divine
   Christ, as touching my substance which he took is destroyed, and the
   same Christ raises the destroyed temple as touching the divine
   substance in which also He is Creator of all things. Never at any time
   after the Union which He deigned to make with Himself from the moment
   of the conception did He depart from His own temple, nor indeed through
   His ineffable love for mankind could depart.

   "The same Christ is both passible and impassible; as touching His
   manhood passible and as touching His Godhead impassible. Behold behold
   me, it is I, I have undergone no change'--and when God the Word had
   raised His own temple and in it had wrought out the resurrection and
   renewal of our nature, He shewed this nature to His disciples and said
   Handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me,'
   not be' but have.' [1335] So He says, referring to both the possessor
   and the possessed in order that you may perceive that what had taken
   place was not mixture, not change, not variation, but union. On this
   account too He shewed the prints of the nails and the wound of the
   spear and ate before His disciples to convince them by every means that
   the resurrection of our nature had been renewed in Him; and further
   because in accordance with the blessed substance of His Godhead
   unchanged, impassible, immortal, He lived in need of nought, He by
   concession permitted all that can be felt to be brought to His own
   temple, and by His own power raised it up, and by means of His own
   temple made perfect the renewal of our nature.

   "Them therefore that assert that the Christ was mere man, that God the
   Word was passible, or changed into flesh, or that the body which He had
   was consubstantial, or that He brought it from Heaven, or that it was
   an unreality; or assert that God the Word being mortal needed to
   receive His resurrection from the Father, or that the body which He
   assumed was without a soul, or manhood without a mind, or that the two
   natures of the Christ became one nature by confusion and commixture;
   them that deny that our Lord Jesus Christ was two natures unconfounded,
   but one person, as He is one Christ and one Son, all these the catholic
   and apostolic Church condemns."

   Of the same: [1336] --

   "If then the flesh of all was in Christ or hath been in Christ subject
   to wrongs, how can it be held to be of one essence with the Godhead?
   For if the Word and the flesh which derives its nature from earth are
   of one essence, then the Word and the soul which He took in its
   perfection are of one essence, for the Word is of one nature with God
   both according to the Word of the Father, and the confession of the Son
   Himself in the words, I and my Father are one.' [1337] Thus the Father
   must be held to be of the same substance with the body. Why any longer
   are ye wroth with the Arians, who say that the Son is a creature of
   God, while you assert yourselves that the Father is of one substance
   with His creatures?"

   Of the same from his letter to the Emperor Gratianus: [1338] --

   "Let us preserve a distinction between Godhead and flesh. One Son of
   God speaks in both, since in Him both natures exist. The same Christ
   speaks, yet not always in the same but sometimes in a different manner.
   Observe how at one time He expresses divine glory and at another human
   feeling. As God He utters the things of God, since He is the Word; as
   man He speaks with humility because He converses in my essence."

   On the same from the same book: [1339] --

   "As to the passage where we read that the Lord of glory was crucified,
   [1340] let us not suppose that He was crucified in His own glory. But
   since He is both God and man, as touching His Godhead God, and as
   touching the assumption of the flesh, a man, Jesus Christ, the Lord of
   Glory, is said to have been crucified. For He partakes of either
   nature--that is the human and the divine. In the nature of manhood He
   underwent the passion in order that He who suffered might be said to be
   without distinction both Lord of Glory and Son of Man. As it is written
   He that came down from Heaven.'" [1341]

   Similarly of the same: [1342] --

   "Let then vain questions about words be silent, as it is written, the
   kingdom of God is not in enticing words' but in demonstration of the
   spirit.' [1343] For there is one Son of God who speaks in both ways,
   since both natures exist in Him; but although He Himself speaks He does
   not speak always in the same way; for you see in Him at one time God's
   glory, at another time man's feeling. As God He utters divine things,
   being the Word; as man He utters human things, since in this nature He
   spoke."

   Of the same from his work on the Incarnation of the Lord against the
   Apollinarians: [1344] --

   "But while we are confuting these, another set spring up who assert the
   body of the Christ and His godhead to be of one nature. What hell hath
   vomited forth so terrible a blasphemy? Really Arians are more
   tolerable, whose infidelity, on account of these men, is strengthened,
   so that with greater opposition they deny Father, Son and Holy Ghost to
   be of one substance, for they did at least endeavour to maintain the
   Godhead of the Lord and His flesh to be of one nature."

   Of the same (from the same chapter):--

   "He has frequently told me that he maintains the exposition of the
   Nicene Council, but in that examination our Fathers laid down that the
   Word of God, not the flesh, was of one substance with the Father, and
   they confessed that the Word came from the substance of the Father but
   that the flesh is of the Virgin. Why then do they hold out to us the
   name of the Nicene Council, while in reality they are introducing
   innovations of which our forefathers never entertained the thought?"

   Of the same against Apollinarius: [1345] --

   "Refuse thou to allow that the body is by nature on a par with the
   Godhead. Even though thou believe the body of the Christ to be real and
   bring it to the altar for transformation, [1346] and fail to
   distinguish the nature of the body and of the Godhead we shall say to
   thee, If thou offer rightly and fail to distinguish rightly, thou
   sinnest; hold thy peace.' [1347] Distinguish what belongs naturally to
   us, and what is peculiar to the Word. For I had not what was naturally
   His, and He had not what was naturally mine, but He took what was
   naturally mine in order to make us partakers of what was His. And He
   received this not for confusion but for completion."

   Of the same, a little further on: [1348] --

   "Let them who say that the nature of the Word has been changed into
   nature of the body say so no more, lest by the same interpretation the
   nature of the Word seem to have been changed into the corruption of
   sin. For there is a distinction between what took, and what was taken.
   Power came over the Virgin, as in the words of the angel to her, The
   power of the highest shall overshadow thee.' [1349] But what was born
   was of the body of the Virgin, and on this account the descent was
   divine but the conception human. Therefore the nature of the flesh and
   of the godhead could not be the same." [1350]

   The testimony of St. Basil, Bishop of Cæsarea.

   From his homily on Thanksgiving:--

   "Wherefore when He wept over His friend He shewed His participation in
   human nature and set us free from two extremes, suffering us neither to
   grow over soft in suffering nor to be insensible to pain. As then the
   Lord suffered hunger after solid food had been digested, and thirst
   when the moisture in His body was exhausted; and was aweary when His
   nerves and sinews were strained by His journeying, it was not that His
   divinity was weighed down with toil, but that His body showed the
   wonted symptoms of its nature. Thus too when He allowed Himself to weep
   He permitted the flesh to take is natural course."

   From the same against Eunomius:--

   "I say that being in the form of God has the same force as being in
   God's substance for as to have taken the form of a servant shews our
   Lord to have been of the substance of the manhood, so the statement
   that He was in the form of God attributes to Him the peculiar qualities
   of the divine substance." [1351]

   The testimony of the holy Gregorius, bishop of Nazianzus.

   From his discourse De nova dominica: [1352] --

   "Believe that He will come again at His glorious advent judging quick
   and dead, [1353] no longer flesh but not without a body."

   "In order that He may be seen by them that pierced Him [1354] and
   remain God without grossness."

   Of the same from his Epistle to Cledonius:--

   "God and man are two natures, as soul and body are two; but there are
   not two sons, nor yet are there here two men although Paul thus speaks
   of the outward man and the inward man. [1355] In a word the sources of
   the Saviour's being are of two kinds, since the visible is distinct
   from the invisible and the timeless from that which is of time, but He
   is not two beings. God forbid."

   Of the same from the same Exposition to Cledonius:--

   "If any one says that the flesh has now been laid aside, and that the
   Godhead is bare of body, and that it is not and will not come with that
   which was assumed, let him be deprived of the vision of the glory of
   the advent! For where is the body now, save with Him that assumed it?
   For it assuredly has not been, as the Manichees fable, swallowed up by
   the Son, that it may be honoured through dishonour; it has not been
   poured out and dissolved in the air like a voice and stream of perfume
   or flash of unsubstantial lightning. And where is the capacity of being
   handled after the resurrection, wherein one day it shall be seen by
   them that pierced Him? For Godhead of itself is invisible."

   Of the same from the second discourse about the Son:--

   "As the Word He was neither obedient nor disobedient, for these
   qualities belong to them that are in subjection and to inferiors; the
   former of the more tractable and the latter of them that deserve
   condemnation. But in the form of a servant He accommodates Himself to
   his fellowservants and puts on a form that was not His own, bearing in
   Himself all of me with all that is mine, that in Himself He may waste
   and destroy the baser parts as wax is wasted by fire or the mist of the
   earth by the sun."

   Of the same from his discourse on the Theophany:--

   "Since He came forth from the Virgin with the assumption of two things
   mutually opposed to one another, flesh and spirit, whereof the one was
   taken into God and the other exhibited the grace of the Godhead."

   Of the same a little further on:--

   "He was sent, but as Man. For His nature was twofold, for without doubt
   He thenceforth was aweary and hungered and thirsted and suffered agony
   and shed tears after the custom of a human body."

   Of the same from his second discourse about the Son:--

   "He would be called God not of the Word, but of the visible creation,
   for how could He be God of Him that is absolutely God? Just so He is
   called Father, not of the visible creation, but of the Word. For He was
   of two-fold nature. Wherefore the one belongs absolutely to both, but
   the other not absolutely. [1356] For He is absolutely our God, but not
   absolutely our Father. And it is this conjunction of names which gives
   rise to the error of heretics. A proof of this lies in the fact that
   when natures are distinguished in thought, there is a distinction in
   names. Listen to the words of Paul. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   The Father of Glory,' [1357] --of Christ He is God, of glory Father,
   and if both are one this is so not by nature but by conjunction. What
   can be plainer than this? Fifthly let it be said that He receives life,
   authority, inheritance of nations, power over all flesh, glory,
   disciples or what you will; all these belong to the manhood."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "For there is one God and one Mediator between God and men the man
   Christ Jesus.' [1358] As man He still pleads for my salvation, because
   He keeps with Him the body which He took, till he made me God by the
   power of the incarnation--though He be no longer known according to the
   flesh that is by affections of the flesh and though He be without sin."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Is it not plain to all that as God He knows, and is ignorant, He says,
   as man? If, that is, any one distinguish the apparent from that which
   is an object of intellectual perception. For what gives rise to this
   opinion is the fact that the appellation of the Son is absolute without
   relation, it not being added of whom He is the Son; so to give the most
   pious sense to this ignorance we hold it to belong to the human, and
   not to the divine."

   Testimony of the Holy Gregorius, bishop of Nyssa.

   From his catechetical discourse:--

   "And who says this that the infinity of the Godhead is comprehended by
   the limitation of the flesh, as by some vessel?"

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "But if man's soul by necessity of its nature commingled with the body,
   is everywhere in authority, what need is there of asserting that the
   Godhead is limited by the nature of the flesh?"

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "What hinders us then, while recognising a certain unity and
   approximation of a divine nature in relation to the human, from
   retaining the divine intelligence even in this approximation, believing
   that the divine even when it exists in men is beyond all limitation?"

   Of the same from his work against Eunomius:--

   "The Son of Mary converses with brothers, but the only begotten has no
   brothers, for how could the name of only begotten be preserved among
   brothers? And the same Christ that said God is a spirit' [1359] says to
   His disciples Handle me,' [1360] to shew that the human nature only can
   be handled and that the divine is intangible; and He that said I go'
   [1361] indicates removal from place to place, while He that comprehends
   all things and by Whom,' as says the Apostle, all things were created
   and by Whom all things consist,' [1362] had among all existing things
   nothing without and beyond Himself which can stand to Him in the
   relation of motion or removal."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Being by the right hand of God exalted.' [1363] Who then was exalted?
   The lowly or the most high? And what is the lowly if it be not the
   human? And what is the most high save the divine? But God being most
   high needs no exaltation, and so the Apostle says that the human is
   exalted, exalted that is in being made both Lord and Christ.' [1364]
   Therefore the Apostle does not mean by this term He made' the
   everlasting existence of the Lord, but the change of the lowly to the
   exalted which took place on the right hand of God. By this word he
   declares the mystery of piety, for when he says by the right hand of
   God exalted' he plainly reveals the ineffable oeconomy of the mystery
   that the right hand of God which created all things, which is the Lord
   by whom all things were made and without whom nothing consists of
   things that were made, [1365] through the union lifted up to Its own
   exaltation the manhood united to It."

   Testimony of St. Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.

   From his discourse on "My Father is greater than I": [1366] --

   "Henceforth distinguish the natures; that of God and that of man. For
   He was not made man by falling away from God, nor God by increase and
   advance from man."

   Of the same from his discourse on "the Son can do nothing of Himself":
   [1367] --

   "For after the resurrection the Lord shews both--both that the body is
   not of this nature, and that the body rises, for remember the history.
   After the passion and the resurrection the disciples were gathered
   together, and when the doors were shut the Lord stood in the midst of
   them. Never at any time before the passion did He do this. Could not
   then the Christ have done this even long before? For all things are
   possible to God. [1368] But before the passion He did not do so lest
   you should suppose the incarnation an unreality or appearance, and
   think of the flesh of the Christ as spiritual, or that it came down
   from heaven and is of another substance than our flesh. Some have
   invented all these theories with the idea that thereby they reverence
   the Lord, forgetful that through their thanksgiving they blaspheme
   themselves, and accuse the truth of a lie: for I say nothing of the lie
   being altogether absurd. For if He took another body how does that
   affect mine, which stands in need of salvation? If He brought down
   flesh from heaven, how does this affect my flesh which was derived from
   earth?"

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Wherefore not before the passion, but after the passion, the Lord
   stood in the midst of the disciples when the doors were shut, that thou
   mayest know that thy natural body after being sown is raised a
   spiritual body,' [1369] and that thou mayest not suppose the body that
   is raised to be a different body. When Thomas after the resurrection
   doubted, He shews him the prints of the nails, He shews him the marks
   of the spears. But had He not power to heal Himself after the
   resurrection too, when even before the resurrection He had healed all
   men? But by shewing the prints of the nails He shews that it is this
   very body; by coming in when the doors were shut He shews that it has
   not the same qualities; the same body to fulfil the work of the
   incarnation by raising that which had become a corpse, but a changed
   body that it fall not again under corruption nor be subject again to
   death."

   Testimony of the blessed Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria.

   From his work against Origen:--

   "Our likeness which He assumed is not changed into the nature of
   Godhead nor is His Godhead turned into our likeness. For He remains
   what He was from the beginning God, and He so remains preserving our
   subsistence in Himself."

   Of the same from the same treatise:--

   "But you persist continually in your blasphemies attacking the Son of
   God, and using these words as the Son and the Father are one, so also
   are the soul which the Son took and the Son Himself one.' You are
   ignorant that the Son and the Father are one on account of their one
   substance and the same Godhead; but the soul and the Son are each of a
   different substance and different nature. For if the soul of the Son
   and the Son Himself are one in the same sense in which the Father and
   the Son are one, then the Father and the Soul will be one and the soul
   of the Son shall one day say He that hath seen Me hath seen the
   Father;' [1370] but this is not so; God forbid. For the Son and the
   Father are one because there is no distinction between their qualities,
   but the soul and the Son are distinguished alike in nature and
   substance, in that the soul which is naturally of one substance with us
   was made by Him. For if the soul and the Son are one in the same manner
   in which the Father and the Son are one, as Origen would have it, then
   the soul equally with the Son will be the brightness of God's glory and
   express image of His person.' [1371] But this is impossible; impossible
   that the Son and the soul should be one as He and the Father are one.
   And what will Origen do when again he attacks himself? For he writes,
   never could the soul distressed and exceeding sorrowful' [1372] be the
   firstborn of every creature.' [1373] For God the Word, as being
   stronger than the soul, the Son Himself, says I have power to lay it
   down and I have power to take it again.' [1374] If then the Son is
   stronger than His own soul, as is agreed, how can His soul be equal to
   God and in the form of God? For we say that He emptied Himself and took
   upon Him the form of a servant.' [1375] In the extravagance of his
   impieties Origen surpasses all other heretics, as we have shewn, for if
   the Word exists in the form of God and is equal to God and if he
   supposes thus daring to write the soul of the Saviour to be in the form
   of God and equal with God, how can the equal be greater, when the
   inferior in nature testifies to the superiority of what is beyond it?"

   Testimony of the Holy John Chrysostom, bishop of Constantinople.

   From the Discourse held in the Great Church:--

   "Thy Lord exalted man to heaven, and thou wilt not even give him a
   share of the agora. But why do I say to heaven'? He seated man on a
   kingly throne. Thou expellest him from the city."

   Of the same, on the beginning of Ps. xlii.:--

   "Up to this day Paul does not cease to say We are ambassadors for
   Christ as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's
   stead, be ye reconciled to God.' [1376] Nor did He stand here, but
   taking the first fruits of thy nature He sat down above all
   principality and power and might, and every name that is named not only
   in this world but in the world to come.' [1377] What could be equal to
   this honour? The first fruits of our race which has so much offended
   and is so dishonoured sits so high and enjoys honour so vast."

   Of the same about the division of tongues:--

   "For bethink thee what it is to see our nature riding on the Cherubim
   and all the power of heaven mustered round about it. Consider too
   Paul's wisdom and how many terms he searches for that he may set forth
   the love of Christ to men, for he does not say simply the grace, nor
   yet simply the riches, but the exceeding great riches of His grace in
   His kindness.'" [1378]

   Of the same from his Dogmatic Oration, on the theme that the word
   spoken and deeds done in humility by Christ were not so spoken and done
   on account of infirmity, but on account of differences of
   dispensation:--

   "And after His resurrection, when He saw His disciple disbelieving, He
   did not shrink from shewing him both wound and print of nails, and
   letting him lay his hand upon the scars, and said Examine and see, for
   a spirit hath not flesh and bones.' [1379] The reason of His not
   assuming the manhood of full age from the beginning, and of His
   deigning to be conceived, to be born, to be suckled, and to live so
   long upon the earth, was that by the long period of the time and all
   the other circumstances, He might give a warranty for this very thing."

   Of the same against those who assert that demons rule human affairs:--

   "Nothing was more worthless than man and than man nothing has become
   more precious. He was the last part of the reasonable creation, but the
   feet have been made the head, and through the firstfruits have been
   borne up to the kingly throne. Just as some man noble and bountiful, on
   seeing a wretch escaped from shipwreck who has saved nothing but his
   bare body from the waves, welcomes him with open hands, clothes him in
   a radiant robe, and exalts him to the highest honour, so too hath God
   done towards our nature. Man had lost all that he had, his freedom, his
   intercourse with God, his abode in Paradise, his painless life, whence
   he came forth like a man all naked from a wreck, but God received him
   and straightway clothed him, and, taking him by the hand, led him
   onward step by step and brought him up to heaven."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "But God made the gain greater than the loss, and exalted our nature to
   the royal throne. So Paul exclaims And have raised us up together and
   made us sit together in heavenly places' [1380] at His right hand."

   Of the same from his III^rd oration against the Jews:--

   "He opened the heavens; of foes he made friends; He introduced them
   into heaven; He seated our nature on the right hand of the throne; He
   gave us countless other good things."

   Of the same from his discourse on the Ascension:--

   "To this distance and height did He exalt our nature. Look where low it
   lay, and where it mounted up. Lower it was impossible to descend than
   where man descended; higher it was impossible to rise than where He
   exalted him."

   Of the same from his interpretation of the Epistle to the Ephesians:--

   "According to His good pleasure, which He had proposed in himself, that
   is which He earnestly desired, He was as it were in labour to tell us
   the mystery. And what is this mystery? That He wishes to seat man on
   high; as in truth came to pass."

   Of the same from the same interpretation:--

   "God of our Lord Jesus Christ speaks of this and not of God the Word."

   Of the same from the same interpretation:--

   "And when we were dead in sins He quickened us together in Christ;'
   [1381] again Christ stands in the midst, and the work is wonderful. If
   the first fruits live we live also. He quickened both Him and us. Seest
   thou that all these things are spoken according to the flesh?"

   Of the same from the gospel according to St. John:--

   "Why does he add and dwelt among us'? [1382] It is as though he said:
   Imagine nothing absurd from the phrase was made.' For I have not
   mentioned any change in that unchangeable nature, but of tabernacling
   [1383] and of inhabiting. Now that which tabernacles is not identical
   with the tabernacle, but one thing tabernacles in another; otherwise
   there would be no tabernacling. Nothing inhabits itself. I spoke of a
   distinction of substance. For by the union and the conjunction God the
   Word and the flesh are one without confusion or destruction of the
   substances, but by ineffable and indescribable union."

   Of the same from the gospel according to St. Matthew:--

   "Just as one standing in the space between two that are separated from
   one another, stretches out both his hands and joins them, so too did
   He, joining the old and the new, the divine nature and the human, His
   own with ours."

   Of the same from the Ascension of Christ:--

   "For so when two champions stand ready for the fight, some other
   intervening between them, at once stops the struggle, and puts an end
   to their ill will, so too did Christ. As God He was wroth, but we made
   light of His wrath, and turned away our faces from our loving Lord.
   Then Christ flung Himself in the midst, and restored both natures to
   mutual love, and Himself took on Him the weight of the punishment laid
   by the Father on us."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Lo He brought the first fruits of our nature to the Father and the
   Father Himself approved the gift, alike on account of the high dignity
   of Him that bought it and of the faultlessness of the offering. He
   received it in His own hands, He made a chair of His own throne; nay
   more He seated it on His own right hand, let us then recognise who it
   was to whom it was said Sit thou on my right hand' [1384] and what was
   that nature to which God said Dust thou art and to dust thou shalt
   return.'" [1385]

   Of the same a little further on:--

   "What arguments to use, what words to utter I cannot tell; the nature
   which was rotten, worthless, declared lowest of all, vanquished
   everything and overcame the world. To-day it hath been thought worthy
   to be made higher than all, to-day it hath received what from old time
   angels have desired; to-day it is possible for archangels to be made
   spectators of what has been for ages longed for, and they contemplate
   our nature, shining on the throne of the King in the glory of His
   immortality."

   Testimony of St. Flavianus, bishop of Antioch.

   From the Gospel according to St. Luke:--

   "In all of us the Lord writes the express image of His holiness, and in
   various ways shows our nature the way of salvation. Many and clear
   proofs does He give us both of His bodily advent and of His Godhead
   working by a body's means. For He wished to give us assurance of both
   His natures."

   Of the same on the Theophany:--

   "Who can express the noble acts of the Lord, or shew forth all His
   praise?' [1386] who could express in words the greatness of His
   goodness toward us? Human nature is joined to Godhead, while both
   natures remain independent."

   Testimony of Cyril, bishop Jerusalem.

   From his fourth catechetical oration concerning the ten dogmas.

   Of the birth from a virgin:--

   "Believe thou that this only begotten Son of God, on account of our
   sins, came down from heaven to earth, having taken on Him this manhood
   of like passions with us, and being born of holy Virgin and of Holy
   Ghost. This incarnation was effected, not in seeming and unreality, but
   in reality. He did not only pass through the Virgin, as through a
   channel, but was verily made flesh of her. Like us He really ate, and
   of the Virgin was really suckled. For if the incarnation was an
   unreality, then our salvation is a delusion. The Christ was
   twofold--the visible man, the invisible God. He ate as man, verily like
   ourselves, for the flesh that He wore was of like passions with us; He
   fed the five thousand with five loaves [1387] as God. As man He really
   died. As God He raised the dead on the fourth day. [1388] As man He
   slept in the boat. As God He walked upon the waters." [1389]

   Testimony of Antiochus, bishop of Ptolemais: [1390] --

   "Do not confound the natures and you will have a lively apprehension of
   the incarnation."

   Testimony of the holy Hilarius, bishop and confessor, [1391] in his
   ninth book, "de Fide":

   "He who knoweth not Jesus the Christ as very God and as very man,
   knoweth not in reality his own life, for we incur the same peril if we
   deny Christ Jesus or God the spirit, or the flesh of our own body.
   Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men him will I confess also
   before my Father which is in Heaven, but whosoever shall deny me before
   men him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven.' [1392]
   These things spoke the Word made flesh; these things the man Christ
   Jesus, Lord of Glory, taught, being made Mediator for the salvation of
   the Church in the very mystery whereby He mediated between God and men.
   Both being made one out of the natures united for this very purpose, He
   was one and the same through either nature, but so that in both He fell
   short in neither, lest haply by being born as man He should cease to be
   God, or by remaining God should not be man. Therefore this is the
   blessedness of the true faith among men to preach both God and man, to
   confess both word and flesh, to recognise that God was also man, and
   not to be ignorant that the flesh is also Word."

   Of the same from the same book: [1393] --

   "So the only begotten God being born man of a Virgin and in the fulness
   of the time, being Himself ordained to work out the advance of man to
   God, observed this order of things, through all the words of the
   gospels, that He might teach belief in Himself, as Son of God, and keep
   us in mind to preach Him as Son of Man. As being man He always spoke
   and acted as is proper to man, but in such a manner as never to speak
   in this same mode of speech as touching both save with the intention of
   signifying both God and Man. But hence the heretics derive a pretext
   for catching in their traps simple and ignorant men: what was spoken by
   our Lord in accordance with His manhood they falsely assert to have
   been uttered in the weakness of His divine nature, and since one and
   the same person spake all the words He used they urged that all He
   uttered He uttered about Himself. Now even we do not deny that all His
   extant words are of His own nature. But granted that the one Christ is
   man and God; granted that when man He was not then first God; granted
   that when man He was then also God, granted that after the assumption
   of the manhood in the Lord, the Word was man and the Word was God, it
   follows of necessity that there is one and the same mystery of His
   words as there is of His generation. Whenever in Him, as occasion may
   require, you distinguish the manhood from the Godhead, then also
   endeavour to separate the words of God from the words of man. And
   whenever you confess God and man, then discern the words of God and
   man. And when the words are spoken of God and man, and again of man
   wholly and wholly of God, consider carefully the occasion. If anything
   was spoken to signify what was appropriate to a particular occasion,
   apply the words to the occasion. A distinction must be observed between
   God before the manhood, man and God, man wholly and God wholly after
   the union of the manhood and Godhead. Take heed therefore not to
   confuse the mystery of the incarnation in the words and acts. For it
   must needs be that according to the quality of the kinds of natures a
   distinction lies in the manner of speech, before the manhood was born,
   in accordance with the mystery when it was still approaching death, and
   again when it was everlasting. For if in His birth and in His passion
   and in His death He acted in accordance with our nature He nevertheless
   effected all this by the power of His own nature.'"

   Of the same in the same book:--

   "Do you then see that thus God and man are confessed, so that death is
   predicated of man, and the resurrection of the flesh, of God; for
   consider the nature of God and the power of the resurrection, and
   recognise in the death the oeconomy as touching man. And since both
   death and resurrection have been brought about in their own natures,
   bear in mind, I beg you, the one Christ Jesus, who was of both. I have
   shortly demonstrated these points to you to the end that we may
   remember both natures to have been in our Lord Jesus Christ for being
   in the form of God He took the form of a servant.'" [1394]

   Testimony of the very holy bishop Augustinus.

   From his letter to Volusianus. Epistle III:

   "But now He appeared as Mediator between God and man, so as in the
   unity of His person to conjoin both natures, by combining the wonted
   with the unwonted, and the unwonted with the wonted."

   Of the same from his exposition of the Gospel according to John: [1395]
   --

   "What then, O heretic? Since Christ is also man, He speaks as man; and
   dost thou slander God? He in Himself lifts man's nature on high, and
   thou hast the hardihood to cheapen His divine nature."

   Of the same from his book on the Exposition at the Faith:--

   "It is ours to believe, but His to know, and so let God the Word
   Himself, after receiving all that is proper to man, be man, and let man
   after His assumption and reception of all that is God, be no other than
   God. It must not be supposed because He is said to have been incarnate
   and mixed that therefore His substance was diminished. God knows that
   He mixes Himself without the natural corruption, and He is mixed in
   reality. He knows also that He so received in Himself as that no
   addition of increment accrues to Himself, as also He knows He infused
   His whole self so as to incur no diminution. Let us not then, in
   accordance with our weak intelligence, and forming conjectures on the
   teaching of experience and the senses, suppose that God and man are
   mixed after the manner of things created and equal mixed together, and
   that from such a confusion as this of the Word and of the flesh a body
   as it were was made. God forbid that this should be our belief, lest we
   should suppose that after the manner of things which are confounded
   together two natures were brought into one hypostasis. [1396] For a
   mention of this kind implies destruction of both parts; but Christ
   Himself, containing but not contained, who examines us but is Himself
   beyond examination, making full but not made full, everywhere at one
   and the same time being Himself whole and pervading the universe,
   through His pouring out His own power, as being moved with mercy, was
   mingled with the nature of man, though the nature of man was not
   mingled with the divine."

   Testimony of Severianus, bishop of Gabala. [1397]

   From "the Nativity of Christ":--

   "O mystery truly heavenly and yet on earth--mystery seen and not
   apparent for so was the Christ after His birth; heavenly and yet on
   earth; holding and not held; seen and invisible; of Heaven as touching
   the nature of the Godhead, on earth as touching the nature of the
   manhood; seen in the flesh, invisible in the spirit; held as to the
   body not to be holden as to the Word."

   Testimony of Atticus, [1398] bishop of Constantinople.

   From his letter to Eupsychius:--

   "How then did it behove the Most Wise to act? By mediation of the flesh
   assumed, and by union of God the Word with man born of Mary, He is made
   of either nature, so that the Christ made one of both, as constituted
   in Godhead, abides in the proper dignity of His impassible nature, but
   in flesh, being brought near to death, at one and the same time shews
   the kindred nature of the flesh how through death to despise death, and
   by His death confirms the righteousness of the new covenant."

   Testimony of Cyril, bishop of Alexandria.

   From his letter to Nestorius: [1399] --

   "The natures which have been brought together in the true unity are
   distinct, and of both there is one God and Son, but the difference of
   the natures has not been removed in consequence of the union."

   Of the same from his letter against the Orientals: [1400] --

   "There is an union of two natures, wherefore we acknowledge one Christ,
   one Son, one Lord. In accordance with this perception of the
   unconfounded union we acknowledge the Holy Virgin as Mother of God
   [1401] because the Word of God was made flesh and was made man, and
   from the very conception united to Himself the temper taken from her."
   [1402]

   Of the same:--

   "There is one Lord Jesus Christ, even if the difference be recognised
   of the natures of which we assert the ineffable union to have been
   made."

   Of the same:--

   "Therefore, as I said, while praising the manner of the incarnation, we
   see that two natures came together in inseparable union without
   confusion and without division, [1403] for the flesh is flesh and no
   kind of Godhead, although it was made flesh of God; in like manner the
   Word is God, and not flesh, although He made the flesh His own
   according to the oeconomy."

   Of the same from his interpretation of the Epistle to the Hebrews:--

   "For although the natures which came together in unity are regarded as
   different and unequal with one another, I mean of flesh and of God,
   nevertheless the Son, Who was made of both, is one."

   Of the same from his interpretation of the same Epistle:--

   "Yet though the only begotten Word of God is said to be united in
   hypostasis to flesh, we deny there was any confusion of the natures
   with one another, and declare each to remain what it is."

   Of the same from his commentaries:--

   "The Father's Word, born of the Virgin, is named man, though being by
   nature God as partaking of flesh and blood like us [1404] for thus He
   was seen by men upon earth, without getting rid of His own nature, but
   assuming our Manhood perfect according to its own reason."

   Of the same concerning the Incarnation (Schol. c. 13):--

   "Then before the incarnation there is one Very God, and in manhood He
   remains what He was and is and will be; the one Lord Jesus Christ then
   must not be separated into man apart and into God apart, but
   recognising the difference of the natures and preserving them
   unconfounded with one another, we assert that there is one and the same
   Christ Jesus."

   Of the same after other commentaries:--

   "There is plain perception of one thing dwelling in another, namely the
   divine nature in manhood, without undergoing commixture or any
   confusion, or any change into what it was not. For what is said to
   dwell in another does not become the same as that in which it dwells,
   but is rather regarded as one thing in another. But in the nature of
   the Word and of the manhood the difference points out to us a
   difference of natures alone, for of both is perceived one Christ.
   Therefore he says that the Word Tabernacled among us,' [1405] carefully
   observing the freedom from confusion, for he recognises one only
   begotten Son who was made flesh and became man."

   Now, my dear sir, you have heard the great lights of the world; you
   have seen the beams of their teaching, and you have received exact
   instruction how, not only after the nativity, but after the passion
   which wrought salvation, and the resurrection, and the ascension, they
   have shewn the union of the Godhead and of the manhood to be without
   confusion.

   Eran.--I did not suppose that they distinguished the natures after the
   union, but I have found an infinite amount of distinction.

   Orth.--It is mad and rash against those noble champions of the faith so
   much as to wag your tongue. But I will adduce for you the words of
   Apollinarius, in order that you may know that he too asserts the union
   to be without confusion. Now hear his words.

   Testimony of Apollinarius.

   From his summary:--

   "There is an union between what is of God and what is of the body. On
   the one side is the adorable Creator Who is wisdom and power eternal;
   these are of the Godhead. On the other hand is the Son of Mary, born at
   the last time, worshipping God, advancing in wisdom, strengthened in
   power; these are of the body. The suffering on behalf of sin and the
   curse came and will not pass away nor yet be changed into the
   incorporeal."

   And again a little further on:--

   "Men are consubstantial with the unreasoning animals as far as the
   unreasoning body is concerned; they are of another substance in so far
   forth as they are reasonable. Just so God who is consubstantial with
   men according to the flesh is of another substance in so far forth as
   He is Word and Man."

   And in another place he says:--

   "Of things which are mingled together the qualities are mixed and not
   destroyed. Thus it comes to pass that some are separate from the mixed
   parts as wine from water, nor yet is there mingling with a body, nor
   yet as of bodies with bodies, but the mingling preserves also the
   unmixed, so that, as each occasion may require, the energy of the
   Godhead either acts independently or in conjunction, as was the case
   when the Lord fasted, for the Godhead being in conjunction in
   proportion to its being above need, hunger was hindered, but when it no
   longer opposed to the craving its superiority to need, then hunger
   arose, to the undoing of the devil. But if the mixture of the bodies
   suffered no change, how much more that of the Godhead?"

   And in another place he says:--

   "If the mixture with iron which makes the iron itself fire does not
   change its nature, so too the union of God with the body implies no
   change of the body, even though the body extend its divine energies to
   what is within its reach."

   To this he immediately adds:--

   "If a man has both soul and body, and these remain in unity, much more
   does the Christ, who has Godhead and body, keep both secure and
   unconfounded."

   And again a little further on:--

   "For human nature is partaker of the divine energy, as far as it is
   capable, but it is as distinct as the least from the greatest. Man is a
   servant of God, but God is not servant of man, nor even of Himself. Man
   is a creature of God, but God is not a creature of man, nor even of
   Himself."

   And again:--

   "If any one takes in reference to Godhead and not in reference to flesh
   the passage the Son doeth what He seeth the Father do,' [1406] wherein
   He Who was made flesh is distinct from the Father Who was not made
   flesh, divides two divine energies. But there is no division. So He
   does not speak in reference to Godhead."

   Again he says:--

   "As man is not an unreasoning being, on account of the contact of the
   reasoning and the unreasoning, just so the Saviour is not a creature on
   account of the contact of the creature with God uncreate."

   To this he also adds:--

   "The invisible which is united to a visible body and thereby is beheld,
   remains invisible, and it remains without composition because it is not
   circumscribed with the body, and the body, remaining in its own
   measure, accepts the union with God in accordance with its being
   quickened, nor is it that which is quickened which quickens."

   And a little further on he says:--

   "If the mixture with soul and body, although from the beginning they
   coalesce, does not make the soul visible on account of the body, nor
   change it into the other properties of the body, so as to allow of its
   being cut or lessened, how much rather God, who is not of the same
   nature as the body, is united to the body without undergoing change, if
   the body of man remains in its own nature, and this when it is animated
   by a soul, then in the case of Christ the commingling does not so
   change the body as that it is not a body."

   And further on he says again:--

   "He who confesses that soul and body are constituted one by the
   Scripture, is inconsistent with himself when he asserts that this union
   of the Word with the body is a change, such change being not even
   beheld in the case of a soul."

   Listen to him again exclaiming clearly:--

   "If they are impious who deny that the flesh of the Lord abides, much
   more are they who refuse wholly to accept His incarnation."

   And in his little book about the Incarnation he has written:--

   "The words Sit thou on my right hand' [1407] He speaks as to man, for
   they are not spoken to Him that sits ever on the throne of glory, as
   God the Word after His ascension from earth, but they are said to Him
   who hath now been exalted to the heavenly glory as man, as the Apostles
   say for David is not ascended into the heavens, but he saith himself
   the Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand.' [1408] The order
   is human, giving a beginning to the sitting; but it is a divine dignity
   to sit together with God to whom thousand thousands minister and before
   whom ten thousand times ten thousand stand.'" [1409]

   And again a little further on:--

   "He does not put His enemies under Him as God but as man, but so that
   the God who is seen and man are the same. Paul too teaches us that the
   words until I make thy foes thy footstool' [1410] are spoken to men,
   describing the success as His own of course in accordance with His
   divinity According to the working whereby He is able even to subdue all
   things unto Himself.' [1411] Behold Godhead and manhood existing
   inseparably in One Person."

   And again:--

   "Glorify me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee
   before the world was.' [1412] The word glorify' He uses as man, but His
   having this glory before the ages He reveals as God."

   And again:--

   "But let us not be humiliated as thinking the worship of the Son of God
   humiliation, even in His human likeness, but as though honouring some
   king appearing in poor raiment with his royal glory, and above all
   seeing that the very garb in which He is clad is glorified, as became
   the body of God and of the world's Saviour which is seed of eternal
   life, instrument of divine deeds, destroyer of all wickedness, slayer
   of death and prince of resurrection; for though it had its nature from
   man it derived its life from God, and its power and divine virtue from
   heaven."

   And again:--

   "Whence we worship the body as the Word; we partake of the body as of
   the spirit."

   Now it has been plainly shewn you that the author who was first to
   introduce the mixture of the natures openly uses the argument of a
   distinction between them; thus he has called the body garb, creature
   and instrument; he even went so far as to call it slave, which none of
   us has ever ventured to do. He also says that it was deemed worthy of
   the seat on the right hand, and uses many other expressions which are
   rejected by your vain heresy.

   Eran.--But why then did he who was the first to introduce the mixture
   insert so great a distinction in his arguments?

   Orth.--The power of truth forces even them that vehemently fight
   against her to agree with what she says, but, if you will, let us now
   begin a discussion about the impassibility of the Lord.

   Eran.--You know that musicians are accustomed to give their strings
   rest, and they slacken them by turning the pegs; if then things
   altogether void of reason and soul stand in need of some recreation, we
   who partake of both shall do nothing absurd if we mete out our labour
   in proportion to our power. Let us then put it off till tomorrow.

   Orth.--The divine David charges us to give heed to the divine oracles
   by night and by day; but let it be as you say, and let us keep the
   investigation of the remainder of our subject till to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1175] phutikos, of or belonging to phuton, or plant; but though phuton
   is opposed to xoon, it is also used of any creature, and here seems to
   mean no more than the soul of physical life, and nothing beyond.

   [1176] cf. p. 132.

   [1177] Gen. ii. 7

   [1178] Matt. x. 28. cf. Luke xii. 4, 5

   [1179] Gen. xlvi. 20, lxx. In the Hebrew the number is but seventy,
   including Jacob himself. St. Stephen, as was natural in a Hellenized
   Jew follows the lxx. (Acts vii. 14.) For the number 75 there were
   doubtless important traditional authorities known to the lxx.

   [1180] Acts xx. 10

   [1181] This "lost" must be qualified. The Scriptural doctrine is that
   the "image of God" though defaced and marred, is not lost or destroyed.
   After the flood the "image of God" is still quoted as against murder
   Gen. ix. 6. St. James urges it as a reason against cursing (iv. 9). cf.
   1 Cor. xi. 7. So the IXth Article declares original sin to be, not the
   nature, which is good, but the "fault and corruption of the nature of
   every man;" in short the "image of God," like the gifts of God, as
   David in Browning's "Saul" has it, "a man may waste, desecrate, never
   quite lose." cf. p. 164 and note.

   [1182] Matt. i. 21

   [1183] Luke ii. 11 tiktetai is substituted for etechthe, in addition to
   the omission of "a Saviour which is." In this verse the mss. do not
   vary.

   [1184] John i. 1

   [1185] John i. 3

   [1186] John i. 4

   [1187] Gen. vi. 3, lxx. and Marg. in R.V.

   [1188] Gal. i. 15-17

   [1189] Ps. lxv. 2

   [1190] Is. xl. 5

   [1191] Ez. xviii. 4 and 20

   [1192] Lev. v. 1

   [1193] The reference seems to be a loose combination of Numbers ix. 13.
   with Deut. xviii. 19

   [1194] Vide note on page 36.

   [1195] empsuchon

   [1196] oikonouian. cf. p. 72, note.

   [1197] John viii. 40. Note the looseness of citation.

   [1198] Acts ii. 22

   [1199] Acts xvii. 30, 31

   [1200] e oikoumene means of course the Empire and the adjacent
   countries, the "orbis veteribus notus."

   [1201] 1 Tim. ii. 5, 6

   [1202] cf. Job ix. 33. "daysman betwixt us that might lay his hand upon
   us both."

   [1203] Gal. iii. 19. cf. Deut. v. 5

   [1204] Exodus vii. 1

   [1205] Ex. vii. 1

   [1206] Hebrews vi. 20

   [1207] Hebrews vii. 1, 2, 3

   [1208] Heb. vii. 3

   [1209] The bearing of this on Theodoret's relation to Nestorianism will
   be observed.

   [1210] Is. liii. 8

   [1211] Heb. vii. 6

   [1212] Gen. i. 27

   [1213] 1 Cor. xi. 7

   [1214] Coloss. i. 15

   [1215] Hebrews vii. 3

   [1216] Gen. iv. 25

   [1217] Gen. v. 5

   [1218] Heb. vi. 20

   [1219] 1 Tim. ii. 5, 6

   [1220] oikonomia. Vide p. 72 n.

   [1221] 1 Tim. ii. 5

   [1222] 1 Cor. xv. 21

   [1223] 1 Cor. xv. 22

   [1224] Acts ii. 22

   [1225] Acts vii. 56

   [1226] 1 Peter iii. 15

   [1227] Eph. vi. 11 and 13, and observe looseness of quotation.

   [1228] Eph. vi. 14

   [1229] John x. 32

   [1230] John x. 33

   [1231] John x. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. Observe the variation in 34, and the
   omission in 38.

   [1232] Matt. xxii. 42

   [1233] Matt. xxii. 43 and 44

   [1234] Matt. xx. 31

   [1235] Matt. xv. 22

   [1236] Matt. xxi. 9

   [1237] Luke xix. 40

   [1238] 2 Tim. ii. 8

   [1239] 2 Tim. ii. 9

   [1240] Luke xxiv. 39

   [1241] The metallic compound called electron is described by Strabo p.
   146 as the mixed residuum, or scouring, (katharma) left after the first
   smelting of gold ore. Pliny (H. N. xxxiii. 23) describes it as
   containing 1 part silver to 4 gold. cf. Soph. Antig. 1038, and Herod.
   i. 50.

   [1242] John i. 1

   [1243] John i. 3

   [1244] John i. 1-3

   [1245] Matt. i. 1

   [1246] Luke iii. 23

   [1247] Matt. i. 17

   [1248] Matt. xxi. 27. A.V. "We cannot tell."

   [1249] Luke ii. 51

   [1250] John ii. 4

   [1251] Matt. xxii. 42

   [1252] Mark vi. 1

   [1253] John viii. 58

   [1254] This, it will be remembered is the analogy employed in the
   "Quicunque vult."

   [1255] All through the argument there seems to be some confusion
   between the two senses of psuche as denoting the immortal and the
   animal part of man, and so between the psuchikon and the pneumatikon.
   According to the Pauline psychology, (cf. in 1 Cor. 15) the immortal
   and invisible could not be said to be proper to the soma psuchikon.
   This "natural body" is a body of death (Rom. vii. 24) and requires to
   be redeemed (Rom. viii. 23) and changed into the "house which is from
   heaven." (2 Cor. v. 2.) Something of the same confusion attaches to the
   common use of the word "soul" to which we find the language of Holy
   Scripture frequently accommodated. On the popular language of the
   dichotomy and the more exact trichotomy of 1 Thess. v. 23 a note of Bp.
   Ellicott on that passage may well be consulted.

   [1256] "zoon logikon thneton." The definition may be compared with
   those of-- Plato.--zoon apteron, dipoun, platuonuchon; ho monon ton
   onton epistemes tes kata logous dektikon esti. Deff.
   Aristotle.--politikon zoon. Pol. I. ii. 9.

   [1257] Matt. xxvi. 39

   [1258] John xii. 27

   [1259] Consult note on page 72.

   [1260] Gen. iii. 8

   [1261] Gen. xviii. 21

   [1262] Gen. xxii. 12

   [1263] John x. 18, 17

   [1264] John xii. 27

   [1265] Matt. xxvi. 38

   [1266] Psalm xvi. 10 and Acts ii. 31

   [1267] Isaiah i. 13, 14. Sept.

   [1268] Daniel ix. 18

   [1269] Ibid

   [1270] Isaiah lviii. 14

   [1271] Ps. cxix. 73

   [1272] Luke ii. 40

   [1273] Luke ii. 52

   [1274] katapothenai i.e., was absorbed and made to disappear. Contrast
   the adsumptione Humanitatis in Deum (or "in Deo," as the older mss.
   read) of the Athanasian Creed.

   [1275] The allusion is to the fable of Saturn devouring his children at
   their birth.

   [1276] Luke ii. 12 and 16

   [1277] Matt. ii. 13

   [1278] Luke xxiv. 38, 39

   [1279] Mark xii. 25

   [1280] Acts i. 4

   [1281] Acts x. 41

   [1282] Mark v. 43

   [1283] John xii. 21

   [1284] 1 Cor. xv. 42, 43, 44

   [1285] Contrast Plato Gorgias §169 kateagota te ei tou en mele e
   diestrammena zontos kai tethneotos tauta endela, and Virgil Æn. vi.
   494. "Atque hic Priamiden laniatum corpore toto Deiphobum vidit lacerum
   crudeliter ora."

   [1286] Luke xxiv. 39

   [1287] 1 Cor. xv. 53

   [1288] Acts xvii. 31

   [1289] Acts i. 11

   [1290] Matt. xxvi. 64

   [1291] Matt. xxv. 31-33

   [1292] Isaiah vi. 2

   [1293] Zech. xii. 10

   [1294] Acts vii. 56

   [1295] Phil. iii. 20, 21. Observe omission of "Christ."

   [1296] Rom. viii. 17

   [1297] Matt. v. 14

   [1298] Malachi iv. 2

   [1299] Matt. xiii. 43

   [1300] Probably the lithos in the stone on the Draught Board. So panta
   kinein lithon is to make every effort in the game.

   [1301] tou ontos somatos antitupa esti ta theia musteria. The view of
   Orthodoxus, it will be seen, is not that of the Roman confession. cf.
   note on p. 206.

   [1302] proskuneitai

   [1303] John vi. 51

   [1304] Heb. xiii. 8

   [1305] Ad Smyr. III.

   [1306] The quotation is not from the canonical gospels. Eusebius (iii.
   36) says he does not know from what source it comes. Jerome states it
   to be derived from the gospel lately translated by him, the gospel
   according to the Hebrews (Vir. Ill. 2). Origen ascribes the words to
   the "Doctrina Petri." (de Princ. Præf. 8) Bp. Lightfoot, by whom the
   matter is fully discussed, (Ap. Fath. pt. II. Vol. ii. p. 295) thinks
   that either Jerome, more suo, was forgetful, or had a different
   recension of the gospel to the Hebrews from that used by Origen and
   Eusebius. Ignatius may be quoting a verbal tradition. Bp. Lightfoot
   further points out that Origen (l. c.) supposes the author of the
   Doctrina Petri to use this epithet asoaaton not in its philosophical
   sense (= incorporeal) but as meaning composed of some subtle substance
   and without a gross body like man. Further Origen (c. Cels. V. 5) warns
   us that to Christians the word dæmon has a special connotation, in
   reference to the powers that deceive and distract men.

   [1307] 1 John v. 1

   [1308] Isaiah xxvii. 6

   [1309] Vide note on page 38.

   [1310] The only fragment of this work.

   [1311] Several fragments of this letter will be found in Dialogue III.

   [1312] Coloss. i. 18

   [1313] Vide John xx. 27 and Luke xxiv. 39. The quotation confuses the
   words of the resurrection day and of the week after.

   [1314] 1 Cor. v. 7. The addition of ho Theos has no authority.

   [1315] Probably the cxixth Ps. It is doubtful whether the work forms
   part of a Commentary on the Pss. or is quoted from a homily on this
   special Psalm.

   [1316] The word pheugein is not used of the Saviour in the Gospel.
   Joseph was bidden pheuge eis Aigupton. When our Lord was brought to the
   cliff overhanging Nazareth dielthon dia mesou auton eporeueto

   [1317] Ps. xxiv. Sept.

   [1318] Proverbs viii. 22. Sept.

   [1319] Romans viii. 29

   [1320] The original here is corrupt.

   [1321] charakter cf. Heb. i. 3. I have used the equivalent given in
   A.V. for the Greek word of the text meaning literally stamp or
   impression, as on coin or seal, and so exact representation.

   [1322] Phil. iii. 20, 21

   [1323] Gal. iv. 4

   [1324] Luke ii. 22, 24

   [1325] Oratio Secunda contra Arianos. Ben. Ed. I. 1. 538.

   [1326] Ps. cx. 1

   [1327] Jerem. xxiii. 24

   [1328] 1 Cor. xi. 24

   [1329] Matt. xxvi. 28; Mark xiv. 24

   [1330] Acts ii. 22

   [1331] Phil. ii. 9

   [1332] John vii. 39

   [1333] Luke i. 38

   [1334] John ii. 19

   [1335] Luke xxiv. 39

   [1336] De incarnat. sacram. Chap. 6.

   [1337] John x. 30

   [1338] De Fide ii. Chap. 9.

   [1339] Chap. 7.

   [1340] 1 Cor. ii. 8

   [1341] John iii. 13

   [1342] Id. Chap. 9.

   [1343] 1 Cor. ii. 4

   [1344] De Incarn. Sac. 6.

   [1345] De incarn. sacram. Chap. 4.

   [1346] "Offeras transfigurandum altaribus." The Benedictine Editors, by
   a curious anachronism, see here a reference to transubstantiation. But
   metapoiesis, the word translated "transformation" implies no more than
   the being made to undergo a change, which may be a change in dignity
   without involving a change of substance. cf. pp. 200 and 201, where
   Orthodoxus distinctly asserts that the substance remains unchanged.
   Transubstantiation, definitely declared an article of faith in 1215,
   seems to have been first taught early in the 9th c. Vide Bp. Harold
   Browne on Art. xxviii.

   [1347] Gen. iv. 7. Sept.

   [1348] Id. Chap. 6.

   [1349] Luke i. 35. The Latin of the Benedictine edition of Ambrose
   is:-- Desinant ergo dicere naturam Verbi in Corporis naturam esse
   mutatam; ne pari interpretatione videatur natura Verbi in contagium
   mutata peccati. Aliud est enim quod assumpsit, et aliud quod assumptum
   est. Virtus venit in Virginem, sicut et Angelus ad eam dixit "quia
   Virtus Altissimi obumbrabit te." Sed natum est corpus ex Virgine; et
   ideo cælestis quidem descensio, sed humana conceptio est. Non ergo
   eadem carnis potuit esse divinitatisque natura.

   [1350] In the Greek text the last sentence is unintelligible and
   apparently corrupt. The translation follows the Latin text from which
   the version in the citation of Theodoret varies in important
   particulars. The Greek text of the quotation runs:-- Pausasthosan
   toinon hoi legontes hos he tou Logou phusis eis sarkos metabebletai
   phusin; hina me doxe metabletheisa kata ten hauten hermeneian
   gegenesthai kai he tou Logou phusis tois tou somatos pathemasi
   sumphthoros. & 169;Eteron gar esti to proslabon kai heteron esti to
   proslephthen. Dunamis elthen epi ten parthenon, hos ho angelos pros
   auten legei hoti Dunamis hupsistou episkiasei soi: & 135;ll' ek tou
   somatos en tes Parthenou to techthen; kai dia touto Theia men he
   katabasis he de sullepsis anthropine; ouk aute oun edunato tou te
   somatos pneuma kai tes theotetos phusis

   [1351] Cf. Phil. ii. 16

   [1352] The passage quoted is not in the 43rd discourse de nova dominica
   but in the 40th on Holy Baptism.

   [1353] Acts i. 11

   [1354] Zechariah xii. 10

   [1355] 2 Cor. iv. 16

   [1356] Here the text is corrupt.

   [1357] Ephes. i. 17

   [1358] 1 Tim. ii. 5

   [1359] John iv. 24

   [1360] Luke xxiv. 39

   [1361] John xiv. 28

   [1362] Coloss. i. 16, 17

   [1363] Acts ii. 33

   [1364] Acts ii. 36

   [1365] Cf. John i. 2

   [1366] John xiv. 28

   [1367] John v. 19

   [1368] Matt. xix. 26. Mark x. 27

   [1369] 1 Cor. xv

   [1370] John xiv. 9

   [1371] Hebrews i. 3

   [1372] Matt. xxvi. 38

   [1373] Coloss. i. 15

   [1374] John x. 18

   [1375] Phil. ii. 7

   [1376] 2 Cor. v. 20

   [1377] Ephes. i. 21

   [1378] Ephes. ii. 7

   [1379] Cf. Luke xxiv. 39. and John xx. 27. and cf. note on page 235.

   [1380] Ephes. ii. 6

   [1381] Ephes. ii. 5

   [1382] John i. 14 eskenosen

   [1383] skenosis

   [1384] Psalm cx. 1

   [1385] Gen. iii. 19

   [1386] Ps. cvi. 2

   [1387] Matt. xiv. 15, etc., Mark vi. 35, etc., Luke ix. 9, etc., John
   vi. 5, etc.

   [1388] John xi. 43

   [1389] Matt. vii. 24; John vi. 19

   [1390] This and another fragment in the Catena on St. John xix. 443, is
   all that survives of the works of Antiochus of Ptolemais, an eloquent
   opponent of Chrysostom at Constantinople, and like him, said to have a
   "mouth of gold."

   [1391] Hilary of Poictiers, a.d. 368. The treatise quoted is known as
   "de Trinitate," and "contra Arianos," as well as "de Fide." The Greek
   of Theodoret differs considerably from the Latin. Of the first extract
   the original is nescit plane vitam suam nescit qui Christum Jesum ut
   verum Deum ita et verum hominem ignorat. Et ejusdem periculi res est,
   Christum Jesum vel Spiritum Deum, vel carnem nostri corporis denegare.
   Omnis ergo qui confitebitur me coram hominibus, confitebor et ego eum
   coram patre meo qui est in coelis. Qui autem negaverit me coram
   hominibus, negabo et ego eum coram patre meo, qui est in coelis. Haec
   Verbum caro factum loquebatur, et homo Jesus Christus dominus
   majestatis docebat; Mediator ipse in se ad salutem Ecclesiae
   constitutus et illo ipso inter Deum et homines mediatoris sacramento
   utrumque unus existeus, dum ipse ex unitis in idipsum naturis naturae
   utriusque res eadem est; ita tamen, ut neutro careret in utroque, ne
   forte Deus esse homo nascendo desineret, et homo rursus Deus manendo
   non esset. Haec itaque humanae beatitudinis fides vera est, Deum et
   hominem praedicare, Verbum et carnem confiteri: neque Deum nescire quod
   homo sit, neque carnem ignorare quod Verbum sit.

   [1392] Matt. x. 32, 33

   [1393] Natus igitur unigenitus Deus ex Virgine homo, et secundum
   plenitudinem temporum in semetipso provecturus in Deum hominem hunc per
   omnia evangelici sermonis modum tenuit, ut se filium Dei credi doceret,
   et hominis filium prædicari admoneret: locutus et gerens homo universa
   quae Dei sunt, loquens deinde et gerens Deus universa quae hominis
   sunt; ita tamen, ut ipso illo utriusque generis sermone numquam nisi
   cum significatione et hominis locutus et Dei sit; uno tamen Deo patre
   semper ostenso, et se in natura unius Dei per nativitatis veritatem
   professo: nec tamen se Deo patri non et filii honore et hominis
   conditione subdente: cum et nativitas omnis se referat ad auctorem, et
   caro se universa secundum Deum profiteatur infirmam. Hinc itaque
   fallendi simplices atque ignorantes haereticis occasio est, ut quae ab
   eo secundum hominem dicta sunt, dicta esse secundum naturae divinae
   infirmitatem mentiantur: et quia unus atque idem est loquens omnia quae
   loquitur de se ipso omnia eum locutum esse contendant. Nec sane
   negamus, totum illum qui ejus manet, naturae suae esse sermonem. Sed si
   Jesus Christus et homo et Deus est; et neque cum homo, tum primum Deus;
   neque cum homo, tum non etiam et Deus; neque post hominem in Deo non
   totus homo totus Deus; unum atque idem necesse est dictorum ejus
   sacramentum esse, quod generis. Et cum in eo secundum tempus discernis
   hominem a Deo, Dei tamen atque hominis discerne sermonem. Et cum Deum
   atque hominem in tempore confiteberis, Dei atque hominis in tempore
   dicta dijudica. Cum vero ex homine et Deo rursus totius hominis, totius
   etiam Dei tempus intelligis, si quid illud ad demonstrationem ejus
   temporis dictum est, tempori coaptato quae dicta sunt: ut cum aliud sit
   ante hominem Deus, aliud sit homo et Deus, aliud sit post hominem et
   Deum totus homo totus Deus; non confundas temporibus; et generibus
   dispensationis sacramentum, cum pro qualitate generum ac naturarum,
   alium ei in sacramento hominis necesse est sermonem fuisse non nato,
   alium adhuc morituro, alium jam aeterno. Nostri igitur causa haec omnia
   Jesus Christus manens et corporis nostri homo natus secundum
   consuetudinem naturæ nostræ locutus est, non tamen omittens naturæ suae
   esse quod Deus est. Nam tametsi in partu ac passione ac morte naturæ
   nostræ rem peregit, res tamen ipsas omnes virtute naturæ suæ gessit.

   [1394] Phil. ii. 7

   [1395] Tract 78.

   [1396] cf. p. 36. Here upostasis = person.

   [1397] Severianus, like Antiochus of Ptolemais, was moved to leave his
   remote diocese (Gabala is now Gibili, not far south of Latakia) to try
   his fortunes as a popular preacher at Constantinople: There he met with
   success, and was kindly treated by Chrysostom, but he turned against
   his friend, and was a prime agent in the plots against him. The date of
   his death is unknown.

   [1398] Cf. p. 154, note. Atticus was a determined opponent of heresy as
   well as of Chrysostom.

   [1399] Ep. iv. Ed. Aub. V. ii. 23.

   [1400] id. vi. 157.

   [1401] The word in the text is the famous theotokos, the watchword of
   the Nestorian controversy. It may be doubtful whether either the
   English "Mother of God" or the Latin "Deipara" exactly represents the
   idea intended to be expressed by the subtler Greek. Even Nestorius did
   not object to the Theotokos when rightly understood. The explanation of
   the symbolum drawn up by Theodoret himself at Ephesus for presentation
   to the Emperor is "'Ena christon, hena hui& 232;n, hena kurion
   homologoumen. kata tauten tes asunchutou henoseos ennoian homologoumen
   ten hagian, parthenon theotokon, dia to ton theon logon sarkothenai kai
   enanthropesai kai ex autes tes sullepseos henosai heauto ton ex autes
   lephthenta naon." The great point sought to be asserted was, the union
   of the two Natures. Gregory of Nazianzus (li. 738) says Ei tis ou
   theotokon ten Marian hupolambanei choris esti tes Theotetos

   [1402] Here Cyril adopts the terms of the document given in the
   preceding note.

   [1403] asunchutos kai adiairetos. These adverbs recall the famous words
   of Hooker. Ecc. Pol. v. 54. 10. "There are but four things which concur
   to make complete the whole state of our Lord Jesus Christ: his Deity,
   his manhood, the conjunction of both, and the distinction of the one
   from the other being joined in one. Four principal heresies there are
   which have in those things withstood the truth: Arians, by bending
   themselves against the Deity of Christ; Apollinarians, by maiming and
   misinterpreting that which belongeth to his human nature; Nestorians,
   by rending Christ asunder, and dividing him into two persons; the
   followers of Eutyches, by confounding in his person those natures which
   they should distinguish. Against these there have been four most famous
   ancient general councils: the council of Nice to define against Arians;
   against Apollinarians the Council of Constantinople; the councilor
   Ephesus against Nestorians; against Eutychians the Chalcedon Council.
   In four words, alethos, teleos, adiairetos, asunchutos, truly,
   perfectly, indivisibly, distinctly; the first applied to his being God,
   and the second to his being Man, the third to his being of both One,
   and the fourth to his continuing in that one Both: we may fully by way
   of Abridgement comprise whatsoever antiquity hath at large handled
   either in declaration of Christian belief, or in refutation of the
   foresaid heresies. Within the compass of which four heads, I may truly
   affirm, that all heresies which touch but the person of Jesus Christ,
   whether they have risen in these later days, or in any age heretofore,
   may be with great facility brought to confine themselves."

   [1404] Hebrews ii. 14

   [1405] John i. 14

   [1406] John v. 19

   [1407] Ps. cx. 1

   [1408] Acts ii. 34

   [1409] Dan. vii. 10

   [1410] Acts ii. 35

   [1411] Phil. iii. 21

   [1412] John xvii. 5
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dialogue III.--The Impassible.

   Orthodoxus and Eranistes.

   Orth.--In our former discussions we have proved that God the Word is
   immutable, and became incarnate not by being changed into flesh, but by
   taking perfect human nature. The divine Scripture, and the teachers of
   the churches and luminaries of the world have clearly taught us that,
   after the union, He remained as He was, unmixed, impassible, unchanged,
   uncircumscribed; and that He preserved unimpaired the nature which He
   had taken. For the future then the subject before us is that of His
   passion, and it will be a very profitable one, for thence have been
   brought to us the waters of salvation.

   Eran.--I am also of opinion that this discourse will be beneficial. I
   shall not however consent to our former method, but I propose myself to
   ask questions.

   Orth.--And I will answer, without making any objection to the change of
   method. He who has truth on his side, not only when he questions but
   also when he is questioned, is supported by the might of the truth. Ask
   then what you will.

   Eran.--Who, according to your view, suffered the passion?

   Orth.--Our Lord Jesus Christ.

   Eran.--Then a man gave us our salvation.

   Orth.--No; for have we confessed that our Lord Jesus Christ was only
   man?

   Eran.--Now define what you believe Christ to be.

   Orth.--Incarnate Son of the living God.

   Eran.--And is the Son of God God?

   Orth.--God, having the same substance as the God Who begat Him.

   Eran.--Then God underwent the passion.

   Orth.--If He was nailed to the cross without a body, apply the passion
   to the Godhead; but if he was made man by taking flesh, why then do you
   exempt the passible from the passion and subject the impassible to it?

   Eran.--But the reason why He took flesh was that the impassible might
   undergo the passion by means of the passible.

   Orth.--You say impassible and apply passion to Him.

   Eran.--I said that He took flesh to suffer.

   Orth.--If He had had a nature capable of the Passion He would have
   suffered without flesh; so the flesh becomes superfluous.

   Eran.--The divine nature is immortal, and the nature of the flesh
   mortal, so the immortal was united with the mortal, that through it He
   might taste of death.

   Orth.--That which is by nature immortal does not undergo death, even
   when conjoined with the mortal; this is easy to see.

   Eran.--Prove it; and remove the difficulty.

   Orth.--Do you assert that the human soul was immortal, or mortal?

   Eran.--Immortal.

   Orth.--And is the body mortal or immortal?

   Eran.--Indubitably mortal.

   Orth.--And do we say that man consists of these natures?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--So the immortal is conjoined with the mortal?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--But when the connexion or union is at an end, the mortal submits
   to the law of death, while the soul remains immortal though sin has
   introduced death, or do you not hold death to be a penalty?

   Eran.--So divine Scripture teaches. For we learn that when God forbade
   Adam to partake of the tree of knowledge He added "on the day that ye
   eat thereof ye shall surely die." [1413]

   Orth.--Then death is the punishment of them that have sinned?

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Why then, when soul and body have both sinned together, does the
   body alone undergo the punishment of death?

   Eran.--It was the body that cast its evil eye upon the tree, and
   stretched forth its hands, and plucked the forbidden fruit. It was the
   mouth that bit it with the teeth, and ground it small, and then the
   gullet committed it to the belly, and the belly digested it, and
   delivered it to the liver; and the liver turned what it had received
   into blood and passed it on to the hollow vein [1414] and the vein to
   the adjacent parts and they through the rest, and so the theft of the
   forbidden food pervaded the whole body. Very properly then the body
   alone underwent the punishment of sin.

   Orth.--You have given us a physiological disquisition on the nature of
   food, on all the parts that it goes through and on the modifications to
   which it is subject before it is assimilated with the body. But there
   is one point that you have refused to observe, and that is that the
   body goes through none of these processes which you have mentioned
   without the soul. When bereft of the soul which is its yoke mate the
   body lies breathless, voiceless, motionless; the eye sees neither wrong
   nor aright; no sound of voices reaches the ears, the hands cannot stir;
   the feet cannot walk; the body is like an instrument without music. How
   then can you say that only the body sinned when the body without the
   soul cannot even take a breath?

   Eran.--The body does indeed receive life from the soul, and it
   furnishes the soul with the penal possession of sin.

   Orth.--How, and in what manner?

   Eran.--Through the eyes it makes it see amiss; through the ears it
   makes it hear unprofitable sounds; and through the tongue utter
   injurious words, and through all the other parts act ill.

   Orth.--Then I suppose we may say Blessed are the deaf; blessed are they
   that have lost their sight and have been deprived of their other
   faculties, for the souls of men so incapacitated have neither part nor
   lot in the wickedness of the body. And why, O most sagacious sir, have
   you mentioned those functions of the body which are culpable, and said
   nothing about the laudable? It is possible to look with eyes of love
   and of kindliness; it is possible to wipe away a tear of compunction,
   to hear oracles of God, to bend the ear to the poor, to praise the
   Creator with the tongue, to give good lessons to our neighbour, to move
   the hand in mercy, and in a word to use the parts of the body for
   complete acquisition of goodness.

   Eran.--This is all true.

   Orth.--Therefore the observance and transgression of law is common to
   both soul and body.

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--It seems to me that the soul takes the leading part in both,
   since it uses reasoning before the body acts.

   Eran.--In what sense do you say this?

   Orth.--First of all the mind makes, as it were, a sketch of virtue or
   of vice, and then gives to one or the other form with appropriate
   material and colour, using for its instruments the parts of the body.

   Eran.--So it seems.

   Orth.--If then the soul sins with the body; nay rather takes the lead
   in the sin, for to it is entrusted the bridling and direction of the
   animal part, why, as it shares the sin, does it not also share the
   punishment?

   Eran.--But how were it possible for the immortal soul to share death?

   Orth.--Yet it were just that after sharing the transgression, it should
   share the chastisement.

   Eran.--Yes, just.

   Orth.--But it did not do so.

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--At least in the life to come it will be sent with the body to
   Gehenna.

   Eran.--So He said "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able
   to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
   soul and body in hell." [1415]

   Orth.--Therefore in this life it escapes death, as being immortal; in
   the life to come, it will be punished, not by undergoing death, but by
   suffering chastisement in life.

   Eran.--That is what the divine Scripture says.

   Orth.--It is then impossible for the immortal nature to undergo death.

   Eran.--So it appears.

   Orth.--How then do you say, God the Word tasted death? For if that
   which was created immortal is seen to be incapable of becoming mortal,
   how is it possible for him that is without creation and eternally
   immortal, Creator of mortal and immortal natures alike, to partake of
   death?

   Eran.--We too know that His nature is immortal, but we say that He
   shared death in the flesh.

   Orth.--But we have plainly shewn that it is in no wise possible for
   that which is by nature immortal to share death, for even the soul
   created together with, and conjoined with, the body and sharing in its
   sin, does not share death with it, on account of the immortality of its
   nature alone. But let us look at this same position from another point
   of view.

   Eran.--There is every reason why we should leave no means untried to
   arrive at the truth.

   Orth.--Let us then examine the matter thus. Do we assert that of virtue
   and vice some are teachers and some are followers?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And do we say that the teacher of virtue deserves greater
   recompense?

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--And similarly the teacher of vice deserves twofold and threefold
   punishment?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And what part shall we assign to the devil, that of teacher or
   disciple?

   Eran.--Teacher of teachers, for he himself is father and teacher of all
   iniquity.

   Orth.--And who of men became his first disciples?

   Eran.--Adam and Eve.

   Orth.--And who received the sentence of death?

   Eran.--Adam and all his race.

   Orth.--Then the disciples were punished for the bad lessons they had
   learnt, but the teacher, whom we have just declared to deserve two-fold
   and three-fold chastisement, got off the punishment?

   Eran.--Apparently.

   Orth.--And though this so came about we both acknowledge and declare
   that the Judge is just.

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--But, being just, why did He not exact an account from him of his
   evil teaching?

   Eran.--He prepared for him the unquenchable flame of Gehenna, for, He
   says, "Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
   devil and his angels." [1416] And the reason why he did not here share
   death with his disciples is because he has an immortal nature.

   Orth.--Then even the greatest transgressors cannot incur death if they
   have an immortal nature.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--If then even the very inventor and teacher of iniquity did not
   incur death on account of the immortality of his nature, do you not
   shudder at the thought of saying that the fount of immortality and
   righteousness shared death?

   Eran.--Had we said that he underwent the passion involuntarily, there
   would have been some just ground for the accusation which you bring
   against us. But if the passion which is preached by us was spontaneous
   and the death voluntary, it becomes you, instead of accusing us, to
   praise the immensity of His love to man. For He suffered because He
   willed to suffer, and shared death because He wished it.

   Orth.--You seem to me to be quite ignorant of the divine nature, for
   the Lord God wishes nothing inconsistent with His nature, and is able
   to do all that He wishes, and what He wishes is appropriate and
   agreeable to His own nature.

   Eran.--We have learnt that all things are possible with God. [1417]

   Orth.--In expressing yourself thus indefinitely you include even what
   belongs to the Devil, for to say absolutely all things is to name
   together not only good, but its opposite.

   Eran.--But did not the noble Job speak absolutely when he said "I know
   that thou canst do all things and with thee nothing is impossible"?
   [1418]

   Orth.--If you read what the just man said before, you will see the
   meaning of the one passage from the other, for he says "Remember, I
   beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay and wilt thou bring me
   into dust again? Hast thou not poured me out as milk and curdled me
   like cheese? Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh and hast fenced
   me with bones and sinews, thou hast granted me life and favour." [1419]

   And then he adds:--

   "Having this in myself I know that thou canst do all things and that
   with thee nothing is impossible." [1420] Is it not therefore all that
   belongs to these things that he alleges to belong to the incorruptible
   nature, to the God of the universe?

   Eran.--Nothing is impossible to Almighty God.

   Orth.--Then according to your definition sin is possible to Almighty
   God?

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--Wherefore?

   Eran.--Because He does not wish it.

   Orth.--Wherefore does He not wish it?

   Eran.--Because sin is foreign to His nature.

   Orth.--Then there are many things which He cannot do, for there are
   many kinds of transgression.

   Eran.--Nothing of this kind can be wished or done by God.

   Orth.--Nor can those things which are contrary to the divine nature.

   Eran.--What are they?

   Orth.--As, for instance, we have learnt that God is intelligent and
   true Light.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And we could not call Him darkness or say that He wished to
   become, or could become, darkness.

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--Again, the Divine Scripture calls His nature invisible.

   Eran.--It does.

   Orth.--And we could never say that It is capable of being made visible.

   Eran.--No, surely.

   Orth.--Nor comprehensible.

   Eran.--No; for He is not so.

   Orth.--No; for He is incomprehensible, and altogether unapproachable.

   Eran.--You are right.

   Orth.--And He that is could never become non-existent.

   Eran.--Away with the thought!

   Orth.--Nor yet could the Father become Son.

   Eran.--Impossible.

   Orth.--Nor yet could the unbegotten become begotten.

   Eran.--How could He.

   Orth.--And the Father could never become Son?

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--Nor could the Holy Ghost ever become Son or Father.

   Eran.--All this is impossible.

   Orth.--And we shall find many other things of the same kind, which are
   similarly impossible, for the Eternal will not become of time, nor the
   Uncreate created and made, nor the infinite finite, and the like.

   Eran.--None of these is possible.

   Orth.--So we have found many things which are impossible to Almighty
   God.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--But not to be able in any of these respects is proof not of
   weakness, but of infinite power, and to be able would certainly be
   proof not of power but of impotence.

   Eran.--How do you say this?

   Orth.--Because each one of these proclaims the unchangeable and
   invariable character of God. For the impossibility of good becoming
   evil signifies the immensity of the goodness; and that He that is just
   should never become unjust, nor He that is true a liar, exhibits the
   stability and the strength that there is in truth and righteousness.
   Thus the true light could never become darkness; He that is could never
   become nonexistent, for the existence is perpetual and the light is
   naturally invariable. And so, after examining all other examples, you
   will find that the not being able is declaratory of the highest power.
   That things of this kind are impossible in the case of God, the divine
   Apostle also both perceived and laid down, for in his Epistle to the
   Hebrews [1421] he says, "that by two immutable things, in which it was
   impossible for God to lie we might have a strong consolation." [1422]
   He shews that this incapacity is not weakness, but very power, for he
   asserts Him to be so true that it is impossible for there to be even a
   lie in Him. So the power of truth is signified through its want of
   power. And writing to the blessed Timothy, the Apostle adds "It is a
   faithful saying, for if we be dead with Him we shall also live with
   Him, if we suffer we shall also reign with Him; if we deny Him He will
   also deny us, if we believe not yet He abideth faithful, He cannot deny
   Himself." [1423] Again then the phrase "He cannot" is indicative of
   infinite power, for even though all men deny Him He says God is
   Himself, and cannot exist otherwise than in His own nature, for His
   being is indestructible. This is what is meant by the words "He cannot
   deny Himself." Therefore the impossibility of change for the worse
   proves infinity of power.

   Eran.--This is quite true and in harmony with the divine words.

   Orth.--Granted then that with God many things are
   impossible,--everything, that is, which is repugnant to the divine
   nature,--how comes it that while you omit all the other qualities which
   belong to the divine nature, goodness, righteousness, truth,
   invisibility, incomprehensibility, infinity, and eternity, and the rest
   of the attributes which we assert to be proper to God, you maintain
   that His immortality and impassibility alone are subject to change, and
   in them concede the possibility of variation and give to God a capacity
   indicative of weakness?

   Eran.--We have learnt this from the divine Scripture. The divine John
   exclaims "God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son,"
   [1424] and the divine Paul, "For if when we were enemies we were
   reconciled to God by the death of His Son, much more being reconciled
   we shall be saved by His life." [1425]

   Orth.--Of course all this is true, for these are divine oracles, [1426]
   but remember what we have often confessed.

   Eran.--What?

   Orth.--We have confessed that God the Word the Son of God did not
   appear without a body, but assumed perfect human nature.

   Eran.--Yes; this we have confessed.

   Orth.--And He was called Son of Man because He took a body and human
   soul.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ is verily our God; for of these
   two natures the one was His from everlasting and the other He assumed.

   Eran.--Indubitably.

   Orth.--While, then, as man He underwent the passion, as God He remained
   incapable of suffering.

   Eran.--How then does the divine Scripture say that the Son of God
   suffered?

   Orth.--Because the body which suffered was His body. But let us look at
   the matter thus; when we hear the divine Scripture saying "And it came
   to pass when Isaac was old his eyes were dim so that he could not see,"
   [1427] whither is our mind carried and on what does it rest, on Isaac's
   soul or on his body?

   Eran.--Of course on his body.

   Orth.--Do we then conjecture that his soul also shared in the affection
   of blindness?

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--We assert that only his body was deprived of the sense of sight?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And again when we hear Amaziah saying to the prophet Amos, "Oh
   thou seer go flee away into the land of Judah," [1428] and Saul
   enquiring: "Tell me I pray thee where the seer's house is," [1429] we
   understand nothing bodily.

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--And yet the words used are significant of the health of the
   organ of sight.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Yet we know that the power of the Spirit when given to purer
   souls inspires prophetic grace and causes them to see even hidden
   things, and, in consequence of their thus seeing, they are called seers
   and beholders.

   Eran.--What you say is true.

   Orth.--And let us consider this too.

   Eran.--What?

   Orth.--When we hear the story of the divine evangelists narrating how
   they brought to God a man sick of the palsy, laid upon a bed, do we say
   that this was paralysis of the parts of the soul or of the body?

   Eran.--Plainly of the body.

   Orth.--And when while reading the Epistle to the Hebrews we light upon
   the passage where the Apostle says "Wherefore lift up the hands which
   hang down and the feeble knees and make straight paths for your feet
   lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be
   healed," [1430] do we say that the divine Apostle said these things
   about the parts of the body?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--Shall we say that he was for removing the feebleness and
   infirmity of the soul and stimulating the disciples to manliness?

   Eran.--Obviously.

   Orth.--But we do not find these things distinguished in the divine
   Scripture, for in describing the blindness of Isaac he made no
   reference to the body, but spoke of Isaac as absolutely blind, nor in
   describing the prophets as seers and beholders did he say that their
   souls saw and beheld what was hidden, but mentioned the persons
   themselves.

   Eran.--Yes; this is so.

   Orth.--And he did not point out that the body of the paralytic was
   palsied, but called the man a paralytic.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And even the divine Apostle made no special mention of the
   souls, though it was these that he purposed to strengthen and to rouse.

   Eran.--No; he did not.

   Orth.--But when we examine the meaning of the words, we understand
   which belongs to the soul and which to the body.

   Eran.--And very naturally; for God made us reasonable beings.

   Orth.--Then let us make use of this reasoning faculty in the case of
   our Maker and Saviour, and let us recognise what belongs to His Godhead
   and what to His manhood.

   Eran.--But by doing this we shall destroy the supreme union.

   Orth.--In the case of Isaac, of the prophets, of the man sick of the
   palsy, and of the rest, we did so without destroying the natural union
   of the soul and of the body; we did not even separate the souls from
   their proper bodies, but by reason alone distinguished what belonged to
   the soul and what to the body. Is it not then monstrous that while we
   take this course in the case of souls and bodies, we should refuse to
   do so in the case of our Saviour, and confound natures which differ not
   in the same proportion as soul from body, but in as vast a degree as
   the temporal from the eternal and the Creator from the created?

   Eran.--The divine Scripture says that the Son of God underwent the
   passion.

   Orth.--We deny that it was suffered by any other, but none the less,
   taught by the divine Scripture, we know that the nature of the Godhead
   is impassible. We are told of impassibility and of passion, of manhood
   and of Godhead, and we therefore attribute the passion to the passible
   body, and confess that no passion was undergone by the nature that was
   impassible.

   Eran.--Then a body won our salvation for us.

   Orth.--Yes; but not a mere man's body, but that of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, the only begotten Son of God. If you regard this body as
   insignificant and of small account, how can you hold its type to be an
   object of worship and a means of salvation? and how can the archetype
   be contemptible and insignificant of that of which the type is adorable
   and honourable?

   Eran.--I do not look on the body as of small account, but I object to
   dividing it from the Godhead.

   Orth.--We, my good sir, do not divide the union but we regard the
   peculiar properties of the natures, and I am sure that in a moment you
   will take the same view.

   Eran.--You talk like a prophet.

   Orth.--No; not like a prophet, but as knowing the power of truth. But
   now answer me this. When you hear the Lord saying "I and my Father are
   one," [1431] and "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father," [1432] do
   you say that this refers to the flesh or to the Godhead?

   Eran.--How can the flesh and the Father possibly be of one substance?

   Orth.--Then these passages indicate the Godhead?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And so with the text, "In the beginning was the Word and the
   Word was God," [1433] and the like.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Again when the divine Scripture says, "Jesus therefore being
   wearied with his journey sat thus on the well," [1434] of what is the
   weariness to be understood, of the Godhead or of the body?

   Eran.--I cannot bear to divide what is united.

   Orth.--Then it seems you attribute the weariness to the divine nature?

   Eran.--I think so.

   Orth.--But then you directly contradict the exclamation of the prophet
   "He fainteth not neither is weary; there is no searching of His
   understanding. He giveth power to the faint and to them that have no
   might he increaseth strength." [1435] And a little further on "But they
   that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up
   with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary and they shall
   walk and not faint." [1436] Now how can He who bestows upon others the
   boon of freedom from weariness and want, possibly be himself subject to
   hunger and thirst?

   Eran.--I have said over and over again that God is impassible, and free
   from all want, but after the incarnation He became capable of
   suffering.

   Orth.--But did He do this by admitting the sufferings in His Godhead,
   or by permitting the passible nature to undergo its natural sufferings
   and by suffering proclaim that what was seen was no unreality, but was
   really assumed of human nature? But now let us look at the matter thus:
   we say that the divine nature was uncircumscribed.

   Eran.--Aye.

   Orth.--And uncircumscribed nature is circumscribed by none.

   Eran.--Of course not.

   Orth.--It therefore needs no transition for it is everywhere.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And that which needs no transition needs not to travel.

   Eran.--That is clear.

   Orth.--And that which does not travel does not grow weary.

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--It follows then that the divine nature, which is
   uncircumscribed, and needs not to travel, was not weary.

   Eran.--But the divine Scripture says that Jesus was weary, and Jesus is
   God; "And our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things." [1437]

   Orth.--But the exact expression of the divine Scripture is that Jesus
   "was wearied" not "is wearied." [1438] We must consider how one and the
   other can be applied to the same person.

   Eran.--Well; try to point this out, for you are always for forcing on
   us the distinction of terms.

   Orth.--I think that even a barbarian might easily make this
   distinction. The union of unlike natures being conceded, the person of
   Christ on account of the union receives both; to each nature its own
   properties are attributed; to the uncircumscribed immunity from
   weariness, to that which is capable of transition and travel weariness.
   For travelling is the function of the feet; of the muscles to be
   strained by over exercise.

   Eran.--There is no controversy about these being bodily affections.

   Orth.--Well then; the prediction which I made, and you scoffed at, has
   come true; for look; you have shewn us what belongs to manhood, and
   what belongs to Godhead.

   Eran.--But I have not divided one son into two.

   Orth.--Nor do we, my friend; but giving heed to the difference of the
   natures, we consider what befits godhead, and what is proper to a body.

   Eran.--This distinction is not the teaching of the divine Scripture; it
   says that the Son of God died. So the Apostle;--"For if when we were
   enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son." [1439] And
   he says that the Lord was raised from the dead for "God" he says
   "raised the Lord from the dead." [1440]

   Orth.--And when the divine Scripture says "And devout men carried
   Stephen to his burial and made great lamentation over him" [1441] would
   any one say that his soul was committed to the grave as well as his
   body?

   Eran.--Of course not.

   Orth.--And when you hear the Patriarch Jacob saying "Bury me with my
   Fathers," [1442] do you suppose this refers to the body or to the soul?

   Eran.--To the body; without question.

   Orth.--Now read what follows.

   Eran.--"There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife. There they buried
   Isaac and Rebekah his wife and there I buried Leah." [1443]

   Orth.--Now, in the passages which you have just read, the divine
   Scripture makes no mention of the body, but as far as the words used
   go, signifies soul as well as body. We however make the proper
   distinction and say that the souls of the patriarchs were immortal, and
   that only their bodies were buried in the double cave. [1444]

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And when we read in the Acts how Herod slew James the brother of
   John with a sword, [1445] we are not likely to hold that his soul died.

   Eran.--No; how could we? We remember the Lord's warning "Fear not them
   which kill the body but are not able to kill the soul." [1446]

   Orth.--But does it not seem to you impious and monstrous in the case of
   mere men to avoid the invariable connexion of soul and body, and in the
   case of scriptural references to death and burial, to distinguish in
   thought the soul from the body and connect them only with the body,
   while in trust in the teaching of the Lord you hold the soul to be
   immortal, and then when you hear of the passion of the Son of God to
   follow quite a different course? Are you justified in making no mention
   of the body to which the passion belongs, and in representing the
   divine nature which is impassible, immutable and immortal as mortal and
   passible? While all the while you know that if the nature of God the
   Word is capable of suffering, the assumption of the body was
   superfluous.

   Eran.--We have learnt from the Divine Scriptures that the Son of God
   suffered.

   Orth.--But the divine apostle interprets the Passion, and shews what
   nature suffered.

   Eran.--Show me this at once and clear the matter up.

   Orth.--Are you not acquainted with the passage in the Epistle to the
   Hebrews in which the divine Paul [1447] says "For which cause He is not
   ashamed to call them brethren saying I will declare thy name unto my
   brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto Thee.' And
   again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me.'" [1448]

   Eran.--Yes, I know this, but this does not give us what you promised.

   Orth.--Yes: even these suggest what I promised to shew. The word
   brotherhood signifies kinship, and the kinship is due to the assumption
   of the nature, and the assumption openly proclaims the impassibility of
   the Godhead. But to understand this the more plainly read what follows.

   Eran.--"Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and
   blood, He also Himself likewise took part of the same that through
   death He might destroy him that hath the power of death...and deliver
   them who through fear of death were all their life subject to bondage."
   [1449]

   Orth.--This, I think, needs no explanation; it teaches clearly the
   mystery of the oeconomy.

   Eran.--I see nothing here of what you promised to prove.

   Orth.--Yet the divine Apostle teaches plainly that the Creator, pitying
   this nature not only seized cruelly by death, but throughout all life
   made death's slave, effected the resurrection through a body for our
   bodies, and, by means of a mortal body, undid the dominion of death;
   for since His own nature was immortal He righteously wished to stay the
   sovereignty of death by taking the first fruits of them that were
   subject to death, and while He kept these first fruits (i.e. the body)
   blameless and free from sin, on the one hand He gave death license to
   lay hands on it and so satisfy its insatiability, while on the other,
   for the sake of the wrong done to this body, he put a stop to the
   unrighteous sovereignty usurped over all the rest of men. These
   firstfruits unrighteously engulfed He raised again and will make the
   race to follow them.

   Set this explanation side by side with the words of the Apostle, and
   you will understand the impassibility of the Godhead.

   Eran.--In what has been read there is no proof of the divine
   impassibility.

   Orth.--Nay: does not the statement of the divine Apostle, that the
   reason of His making the children partakers of the flesh and blood was
   that through death He might destroy him that hath the power of death,
   distinctly signify the impassibility of the Godhead, and the
   passibility of the flesh, and that because the divine nature could not
   suffer He assumed the nature that could and through it destroyed the
   power of the devil?

   Eran.--How did He destroy the power of the devil and the dominion of
   death through the flesh?

   Orth.--What arms did the devil use at the beginning when he enslaved
   the nature of men?

   Eran.--The means by which he took captive him who had been constituted
   citizen of Paradise, was sin.

   Orth.--And what punishment did God assign for the transgression of the
   commandment?

   Eran.--Death.

   Orth.--Then sin is the mother of death, and the devil its father.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--War then was waged against human nature by sin. Sin seduced them
   that obeyed it to slavery, brought them to its vile father, and
   delivered them to its very bitter offspring.

   Eran.--That is plain.

   Orth.--So with reason the Creator, with the intention of destroying
   either power, assumed the nature against which war was being waged,
   and, by keeping it clear of all sin, both set it free from the
   sovereignty of the devil, and, by its means, destroyed the devil's
   dominion. For since death is the punishment of sinners, and death
   unrighteously and against the divine law seized the sinless body of the
   Lord, He first raised up that which was unlawfully detained, and then
   promised release to them that were with justice imprisoned.

   Eran.--But how do you think it just that the resurrection of Him who
   was unlawfully detained should be shared by the bodies which had been
   righteously delivered to death?

   Orth.--And how do you think it just that, when it was Adam who
   transgressed the commandment, his race should follow their forefather?

   Eran.--Although the race had not participated in the famous
   transgression, yet it committed other sins, and for this cause incurred
   death.

   Orth.--Yet not sinners only but just men, patriarchs, prophets,
   apostles, and men who have shone bright in many kinds of virtue have
   come into death's meshes.

   Eran.--Yes; for how could a family sprung of mortal parents remain
   immortal? Adam after the transgression and the divine sentence, and
   after coming under the power of death, knew his wife, and was called
   father; having himself become mortal he was made father of mortals;
   reasonably then all who have received mortal nature follow their
   forefather.

   Orth.--You have shewn very well the reason of our being partakers of
   death. The same however must be granted about the resurrection, for the
   remedy must be meet for the disease. When the head of the race was
   doomed, all the race was doomed with him, and so when the Saviour
   destroyed the curse, human nature won freedom; and just as they that
   shared Adam's nature followed him in his going down into Hades, so all
   the nature of men will share in newness of life with the Lord Christ in
   His resurrection.

   Eran.--The decrees of the Church must be given not only declaratorily
   but demonstratively. Tell me then how these doctrines are taught in the
   divine Scripture.

   Orth.--Listen to the Apostle writing to the Romans, and through them
   teaching all mankind: "For if through the offence of one many be dead,
   much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man,
   Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that
   sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was by one to condemnation,
   but the free gift is of many offences unto justification. For if by one
   man's offence death reigned by one; much more they which receive
   abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life
   by one, Jesus Christ" [1450] and again: "Therefore as by the offence of
   one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the
   righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification
   of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners so by
   the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." [1451] And when
   introducing to the Corinthians his argument about the resurrection he
   shortly reveals to them the mystery of the oeconomy, and says: "But now
   is Christ risen from the dead and become the first fruits of them which
   slept. For since by man came death by man came also the resurrection of
   the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
   alive." [1452] So I have brought you proofs from the divine oracles.
   Now look at what belongs to Adam compared with what belongs to Christ,
   the disease with the remedy, the wound with the salve, the sin with the
   wealth of righteousness, the ban with the blessing, the doom with the
   delivery, the transgression with the observance, the death with the
   life, hell with the kingdom, Adam with Christ, the man with the Man.
   And yet the Lord Christ is not only man but eternal God, but the divine
   Apostle names Him from the nature which He assumed, because it is in
   this nature that he compares Him with Adam. The justification, the
   struggle, the victory, the death, the resurrection are all of this
   human nature; it is this nature which we share with Him; in this nature
   they who have exercised themselves beforehand in the citizenship of the
   kingdom shall reign with Him. Of this nature I spoke, not dividing the
   Godhead, but referring to what is proper to the manhood.

   Eran.--You have gone through long discussions on this point, and have
   strengthened your argument by scriptural testimony, but if the passion
   was really of the flesh, how is it that when he praises the divine love
   to men, the Apostle exclaims, "He that spared not His own Son but
   delivered Him up for us all," [1453] what son does he say was delivered
   up?

   Orth.--Watch well your words. There is one Son of God, wherefore He is
   called only begotten.

   Eran.--If then there is one Son of God, the divine Apostle called him
   own Son.

   Orth.--True.

   Eran.--Then he says that He was delivered up.

   Orth.--Yes, but not without a body, as we have agreed again and again.

   Eran.--It has been agreed again and again that He took body and soul.

   Orth.--Therefore the Apostle spoke of what relates to the body.

   Eran.--The divide Apostle says distinctly "Who spared not his own Son."

   Orth.--When then you hear God saying to Abraham "Because thou hast not
   withheld thy son thy only son," [1454] do you allege that Isaac was
   slain?

   Eran.--Of course not.

   Orth.--And yet God said "Thou hast not withheld," and the God of all is
   true.

   Eran.--The expression "thou hast not withheld" refers to the readiness
   of Abraham, for he was ready to sacrifice the lad, but God prevented
   it.

   Orth.--Well; in the story of Abraham you were not content with the
   letter, but unfolded it and made the meaning clear. In precisely the
   same manner examine the meaning of the words of the Apostle. You will
   then see that it was by no means the divine nature which was not
   withheld, but the flesh nailed to the Cross. And it is easy to perceive
   the truth even in the type. Do you regard Abraham's sacrifice as a type
   of the oblation offered on behalf of the world?

   Eran.--Not at all, nor yet can I make words spoken rhetorically in the
   churches a rule of faith.

   Orth.--You ought by all means to follow teachers of the Church, but,
   since you improperly oppose yourself to these, hear the Saviour Himself
   when addressing the Jews; "Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day
   and he saw it and was glad." [1455] Note that the Lord calls His
   passion "a day."

   Eran.--I accept the Lord's testimony and do not doubt the type.

   Orth.--Now compare the type with the reality and you will see the
   impassibility of the Godhead even in the type. Both in the former and
   in the latter there is a Father; both in the former and the latter a
   well beloved Son, each bearing the material for the sacrifice. The one
   bore the wood, the other the cross upon his shoulders. It is said that
   the top of the hill was dignified by the sacrifice of both. There is a
   correspondence moreover between the number of days and nights and the
   resurrection which followed, for after Isaac had been slain by his
   father's willing heart, on the third day after the bountiful God had
   ordered the deed to be done, he rose to new life at the voice of Him
   who loves mankind. [1456] A lamb was seen caught in a thicket,
   furnishing an image of the cross, and slain instead of the lad. Now if
   this is a type of the reality, and in the type the only begotten Son
   did not undergo sacrifice, but a lamb was substituted and laid upon the
   altar and completed the mystery of the oblation, why then in the
   reality do you hesitate to assign the passion to the flesh, and to
   proclaim the impassibility of the Godhead?

   Eran.--In your observations upon this type you represent Isaac as
   living again at the divine command. There is nothing therefore unseemly
   if, fitting the reality to the type, we declare that God the Word
   suffered and came to life again.

   Orth.--I have said again and again that it is quite impossible for the
   type to match the archetypal reality in every respect, and this may
   also be easily understood in the present instance. Isaac and the lamb,
   as touching the difference of their natures, suit the image, but as
   touching the separation of their divided persons [1457] they do so no
   longer. We preach so close an union of Godhead and of manhood as to
   understand one person [1458] undivided, and to acknowledge the same to
   be both God and man, visible and invisible, circumscribed and
   uncircumscribed, and we apply to one of the persons all the attributes
   which are indicative alike of Godhead and of manhood. Now since the
   lamb, an unreasoning being, and not gifted with the divine image,
   [1459] could not possibly prefigure the restoration to life, the two
   divide between them the type of the mystery of the oeconomy, and while
   one furnishes the image of death, the other supplies that of the
   resurrection. We find precisely the same thing in the Mosaic
   sacrifices, for in them too may be seen a type outlined in anticipation
   of the passion of salvation.

   Eran.--What Mosaic sacrifice foreshadows the reality?

   Orth.--All the Old Testament, so to say, is a type of the New. It is
   for this reason that the divine Apostle plainly says--"the Law having a
   shadow of good things to come" [1460] and again "now all these things
   happened unto them for ensamples." [1461] The image of the archetype is
   very distinctly exhibited by the lamb slain in Egypt, and by the red
   heifer burned without the camp, and moreover referred to by the Apostle
   in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he writes "Wherefore Jesus also
   that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without
   the gate." [1462]

   But of this no more for the present. I will however mention the
   sacrifice in which two goats were offered, the one being slain, and the
   other let go. [1463] In these two goats there is an anticipative image
   of the two natures of the Saviour;--in the one let go, of the
   impassible Godhead, in the one slain, of the passible manhood.

   Eran.--Do you not think it irreverent to liken the Lord to goats?

   Orth.--Which do you think is a fitter object of avoidance and hate, a
   serpent or a goat?

   Eran.--A serpent is plainly hateful, for it injures those who come
   within its reach, and often hurts people who do it no harm. A goat on
   the other hand comes, according to the Law, in the list of animals that
   are clean and may be eaten.

   Orth.--Now hear the Lord likening the passion of salvation to the
   brazen serpent. He says: "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
   wilderness even so must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever
   believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life." [1464] If a
   brazen serpent was a type of the crucified Saviour, of what impropriety
   are we guilty in comparing the passion of salvation with the sacrifice
   of the goats?

   Eran.--Because John called the Lord "a lamb," [1465] and Isaiah called
   Him "lamb" and "sheep." [1466]

   Orth.--But the blessed Paul calls Him "sin" [1467] and "curse." [1468]
   As curse therefore He satisfies the type of the accursed serpent; as
   sin He explains the figure of the sacrifice of the goats, for on behalf
   of sin, in the Law, a goat, and not a lamb, was offered. So the Lord in
   the Gospels likened the just to lambs, but sinners to kids; [1469] and
   since He was ordained to undergo the passion not only on behalf of just
   men, but also of sinners, He appropriately foreshadows His own offering
   through lambs and goats.

   Eran.--But the type of the two goats leads us to think of two persons.

   Orth.--The passibility of the manhood and the impassibility of the
   Godhead could not possibly be prefigured both at once by one goat. The
   one which was slain could not have shewn the living nature. So two were
   taken in order to explain the two natures. The same lesson may well be
   learnt from another sacrifice.

   Eran.--From which?

   Orth.--From that in which the lawgiver bids two pure birds be
   offered--one to be slain, and the other, after having been dipped in
   the blood of the slain, to be let go. Here also we see a type of the
   Godhead and of the manhood--of the manhood slain and of the godhead
   appropriating the passion.

   Eran.--You have given us many types, but I object to enigmas.

   Orth.--Yet the divine Apostle says that the narratives are types.
   [1470] Hagar is called a type of the old covenant; Sarah is likened to
   the heavenly Jerusalem; Ishmael is a type of Israel, and Isaac of the
   new people. So you must accuse the loud trumpet of the Spirit for
   giving its enigmas for us all.

   Eran.--Though you urge any number of arguments, you will never induce
   me to divide the passion. I have heard the voice of the angel saying to
   Mary and her companions, "Come, see the place where the Lord lay."
   [1471]

   Orth.--This is quite in accordance with our common customs; we speak of
   the part by the name which belongs to all the parts. When we go into
   the churches where are buried the holy apostles or prophets or martyrs,
   we ask from time to time, "Who is it who lies in the shrine?" and those
   who are able to give us information say in reply, Thomas, it may be,
   the Apostle, [1472] or John the Baptist, [1473] or Stephen the
   protomartyr, [1474] or any other of the saints, mentioning them by
   name, though perhaps only a few scanty relics of them lie here. But no
   one who hears these names which are common to both body and soul will
   imagine that the souls also are shut up in the chests; everybody knows
   that the chests contain only the bodies or even small portions of the
   bodies. The holy angel spoke in precisely the same manner when he
   described the body by the name of the person.

   Eran.--But how can you prove that the angel spoke to the women about
   the Lord's body?

   Orth.--In the first place, the tomb itself suffices to settle the
   question, for to a tomb is committed neither soul nor Godhead whose
   nature is uncircumscribed; tombs are made for bodies. Furthermore this
   is plainly taught by the divine Scripture, for so the holy Matthew
   narrates the event, "When the even was come there came a rich man of
   Arimathæa named Joseph who also himself was Jesus' disciple: he went to
   Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to
   be delivered, and when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a
   clean linen cloth, and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn
   out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
   sepulchre and departed." [1475] See how often he mentions the body in
   order to stop the mouths of them who blaspheme the Godhead. The same
   course is pursued by the thrice blessed Mark, whose narrative I will
   also quote. "And now when the even was come, because it was the
   preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath, Joseph of Arimathæa,
   an honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God,
   came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus. And
   Pilate marvelled if He were already dead; and calling unto him the
   centurion, he asked him whether He had been any while dead. And when he
   knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph, and he brought
   fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped Him in the linen, and laid
   Him in a sepulchre," [1476] and so on. Observe with admiration, the
   harmony of terms, and how consistently and continuously the word body
   is introduced. The illustrious Luke, too, relates just in the same way
   how Joseph begged the body and after he had received it treated it with
   due rites. [1477] By the divine John we are told yet more, "Joseph of
   Arimathæa being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews,
   besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus; and Pilate
   gave him leave. He came therefore and took the body of Jesus. And there
   came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and
   brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes about a hundred pound weight. Then
   took they the body of Jesus and wound it in linen clothes with the
   spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. Now in the place where He
   was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre,
   wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus therefore because
   of the Jews' preparation day, for the sepulchre was nigh at hand."
   [1478] Observe how often mention is made of the body; how the
   Evangelist shows that it was the body which was nailed to the cross,
   the body begged by Joseph of Pilate, the body taken down from the tree,
   the body wrapped in linen clothes with the myrrh and aloes, and then
   the name of the person given to it; and Jesus said to have been laid in
   a tomb. Thus the angel said, "Come see the place where the Lord lay,"
   [1479] naming the part by the name of the whole; and we constantly do
   just the same. In this place, we say, such an one was buried; not the
   body of such an one. Every one in his senses knows that we are speaking
   of the body, and such a mode of speech is customary in divine
   Scripture. Aaron, we read, died and they buried him on Mount Hor.
   [1480] Samuel died and they buried him at Ramah, [1481] and there are
   many similar instances. The same use is followed by the divine Apostle
   when speaking of the death of the Lord. "I delivered unto you first of
   all," he writes, "that which I also received how that Christ died for
   our sins according to the Scriptures; and that He was buried, and that
   He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures," [1482] and so
   on.

   Eran.--In the passages we have just now read the Apostle does not
   mention a body, but Christ the Saviour of us all. You have brought
   evidence against your own side, and wounded yourself with your own
   weapon.

   Orth.--You seem to have very quickly forgotten the long discourse in
   which I proved to you over and over again that the body is spoken of by
   the name of the person. This is what is now done by the divine Apostle,
   and it can easily be proved from this very passage. Now let us look at
   it. Why did the divine writer write thus to the Corinthians?

   Eran.--They had been deceived by some into believing that there is no
   resurrection. When the teacher of the world learnt this he furnished
   them with his arguments about the resurrection of the bodies.

   Orth.--Why then does he introduce the resurrection of the Lord, when he
   wishes to prove the resurrection of the bodies?

   Eran.--As sufficient to prove the resurrection of us all.

   Orth.--In what is His death like the death of the rest; that by His
   resurrection may be proved the resurrection of all?

   Eran.--The reason of the incarnation, suffering, and death of the only
   begotten Son of God, was that He might destroy death. Thus, after
   rising, by His own resurrection He preaches the resurrection of all.

   Orth.--But who, hearing of a resurrection of God, would ever believe
   that the resurrection of all men would be exactly like it? The
   difference of the natures does not allow of our believing in the
   argument of the resurrection. He is God and they are men, and the
   difference between God and men is incalculable. They are mortal, and
   subject to death, like to the grass and to the flower. He is almighty.

   Eran.--But after His incarnation God the Word had a body, and through
   this He proved His likeness to men.

   Orth.--Yes; and for this reason the suffering and the death and the
   resurrection are all of the body, and in proof of this the divine
   Apostle in another place promises renewal of life to all, and to them
   that believe in the resurrection of their Saviour, yet look upon the
   general resurrection of all as fable, he exclaims, "Now if Christ be
   preached that He rose from the dead, how say some among you that there
   is no resurrection of the dead? But if there is no resurrection of the
   dead, then is Christ not risen, and if Christ he not risen...your faith
   is vain, you are yet in your sins." [1483] And from the past he
   confirms the future, and from what is disbelieved he disproves what is
   believed, for he says, If the one seems impossible to you, then the
   other will be false; if the one seems real and true, then let the other
   in like manner seem true, for here too a resurrection of the body is
   preached, and this body is called the first fruits of those. The
   resurrection of this body after many arguments he affirms directly,
   "But now is Christ risen from the dead and become the firstfruits of
   them that slept, for since by man came death, by man came also the
   resurrection of the dead, for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ
   shall all be made alive," [1484] and he does not only confirm the
   argument of the resurrection, but also reveals the mystery of the
   oeconomy. He calls Christ man that he may prove the remedy to be
   appropriate to the disease.

   Eran.--Then the Christ is only a man.

   Orth.--God forbid. On the contrary, we have again and again confessed
   that He is not only man but eternal God. But He suffered as man, not as
   God. And this the divine Apostle clearly teaches us when he says "For
   since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
   dead." [1485] And in his letter to the Thessalonians, he strengthens
   his argument concerning the general resurrection by that of our Saviour
   in the passage "For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even
   them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him." [1486]

   Eran.--The Apostle proves the general resurrection by means of the
   Lord's resurrection, and it is clear that in this case also what died
   and rose was a body. For he would never have attempted to prove the
   general resurrection by its means unless there had been some relation
   between the substance of the one and the other. I shall never consent
   to apply the passion to the human nature alone. It seems agreeable to
   my view to say that God the Word died in the flesh.

   Orth.--We have frequently shewn that what is naturally immortal can in
   no way die. If then He died He was not immortal; and what perils lie in
   the blasphemy of the words.

   Eran.--He is by nature immortal, but He became man and suffered.

   Orth.--Therefore He underwent change, for how otherwise could He being
   immortal submit to death? But we have agreed that the substance of the
   Trinity is immutable. Having therefore a nature superior to change, He
   by no means shared death.

   Eran.--The divine Peter says "Christ hath suffered for us in the
   flesh." [1487]

   Orth.--This agrees with what we have said, for we have learnt the rule
   of dogmas from the divine Scripture.

   Eran.--How then can you deny that God the Word suffered in the flesh?

   Orth.--Because we have not found this expression in the divine
   Scripture.

   Eran.--But I have just quoted you the utterance of the great Peter.

   Orth.--You seem to ignore the distinction of the terms.

   Eran.--What terms? Do you not regard the Lord Christ as God the Word?

   Orth.--The term Christ in the case of our Lord and Saviour signifies
   the incarnate Word the Immanuel, God with us, [1488] both God and man,
   but the term "God the Word" so said signifies the simple nature before
   the world, superior to time, and incorporeal. Wherefore the Holy Ghost
   that spake through the holy Apostles nowhere attributes passion or
   death to this name.

   Eran.--If the passion is attributed to the Christ, and God the Word
   after being made man was called Christ, I hold that he who states God
   the Word to have suffered in the flesh is in no way unreasonable.

   Orth.--Hazardous and rash in the extreme is such an attempt. But let us
   look at the question in this way. Does the divine Scripture state God
   the Word to be of God and of the Father?

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--And it describes the Holy Ghost as being in like manner of God?

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--But it calls God the Word only begotten Son.

   Eran.--It does.

   Orth.--It nowhere so names the Holy Ghost.

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--Yet the Holy Ghost also has Its subsistence of the Father and
   God.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--We grant then that both the Son and the Holy Ghost are both of
   God the Father; but would you dare to call the Holy Ghost Son?

   Eran.--Certainly not.

   Orth.--Why?

   Eran.--Because I do not find this term in the divine Scripture.

   Orth.--Or begotten?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--Wherefore?

   Eran.--Because I no more learn this in the divine Scripture.

   Orth.--But what name can properly be given to that which is neither
   begotten nor created?

   Eran.--We style it uncreated and unbegotten.

   Orth.--And we say that the Holy Ghost is neither created nor begotten.

   Eran.--By no means.

   Orth.--Would you then dare to call the Holy Ghost unbegotten?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--But why refuse to call that which is naturally uncreate, but not
   begotten, unbegotten?

   Eran.--Because I have not learnt so from the divine Scripture, and I am
   greatly afraid of saying, or using language which Scripture does not
   use.

   Orth.--Then, my good sir, I maintain the same caution in the case of
   the passion of salvation; do you too avoid all the divine names which
   Scripture has avoided in the case of the passion, and do not attribute
   the passion to them.

   Eran.--What names?

   Orth.--The passion is never connected with the name "God."

   Eran.--But even I do not affirm that God the Word suffered apart from a
   body, but say that He suffered in flesh.

   Orth.--You affirm then a mode of passion, not impassibility. No one
   would ever say this even in the case of a human body. For who not
   altogether out of his senses would say that the soul of Paul died in
   flesh? This could never be said even in the case of a great villain;
   for the souls even of the wicked are immortal. We say that such or such
   a murderer has been slain, but no one would ever say that his soul had
   been killed in the flesh. But if we describe the souls of murderers and
   violators of sepulchres as free from death, far more right is it to
   acknowledge as immortal the soul of our Saviour, in that it never
   tasted sin. If the souls of them who have most greatly erred have
   escaped death on account of their nature, how could that soul, whose
   nature was immortal and who never received the least taint of sin, have
   taken death's hook?

   Eran.--It is quite useless for you to give me all these long arguments.
   We are agreed that the soul of the Saviour is immortal.

   Orth.--But of what punishment are you not deserving, you who say that
   the soul, which is by nature created, is immortal, and are for making
   the divine substance mortal for the Word; you who deny that the soul of
   the Saviour tasted death in the flesh, and dare to maintain that God
   the Word, Creator of all things, underwent the passion?

   Eran.--We say that He underwent the passion impassibly.

   Orth.--And what man in his senses would ever put up with such
   ridiculous riddles? Who ever heard of an impassible passion, or of an
   immortal mortality? The impassible has never undergone passion, and
   what has undergone passion could not possibly be impassible. But we
   hear the exclamation of the divine Paul: "Who only hath immortality
   dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto." [1489]

   Eran.--Why then do we say that the invisible powers too and the souls
   of men, aye and the very devils, are immortal?

   Orth.--We do say so; that God is absolutely immortal. He is immortal
   not by partaking of substance, but in substance; He does not possess an
   immortality which He has received of another. It is He Himself who has
   bestowed their immortality on the angels and on them that thou hast
   just now mentioned. How, moreover, when the divine Paul styles Him
   immortal and says that He only hath immortality, can you attribute to
   Him the passion of death?

   Eran.--We say that He tasted death after the incarnation.

   Orth.--But over and over again we have confessed Him immutable. If
   being previously immortal He afterwards underwent death through the
   flesh, a change having preceded His undergoing death; if His life left
   Him for three days and three nights, how do such statements fall short
   of the most extreme impiety? For I think that not even they that are
   struggling against impiety can venture to let such words fall from
   their lips without peril.

   Eran.--Cease from charging us with impiety. Even we say that not the
   divine nature suffered but the human; but we do say that the divine
   shared with the body in suffering.

   Orth.--What can you mean by sharing in suffering? Do you mean that when
   the nails were driven into the body the divine nature felt the sense of
   pain?

   Eran.--I do.

   Orth.--Both now and in our former investigations we have shewn that the
   soul does not share all the faculties of the body but that the body
   while it receives vital force has the sense of suffering through the
   soul. And even supposing us to grant that the soul shares in pain with
   the body we shall none the less find the divine nature to be
   impassible, for it was not united to the body instead of a soul. Or do
   you not acknowledge that He assumed a soul?

   Eran.--I have often acknowledged it.

   Orth.--And that He assumed a reasonable Soul?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--If then together with the body He assumed the soul, and we grant
   that the soul shared in suffering with the body, then the soul, not the
   Godhead, shared the passion with the body; it shared the passion,
   receiving pangs by means of the body. But possibly somebody might agree
   to the soul sharing suffering with the body, but might deny its sharing
   death, because of its having an immortal nature. On this account the
   Lord said "Fear not them which kill the body but are not able to kill
   the soul." [1490] If then we deny that the soul of the Saviour shared
   death with the body, how could any one accept the blasphemy you and
   your friends presumptuously promulgate when you dare to say that the
   divine nature participated in death? This is the more inexcusable when
   the Lord points out at one time that the body [1491] was being offered,
   at another that the soul was being troubled. [1492]

   Eran.--And where doth the Lord shew that the body was being offered? Or
   are you going to bring me once more that well worn passage "Destroy
   this temple and in three days I will raise it up"? [1493] Or with your
   conceited self-sufficiency are you going to quote me the words of the
   Evangelist? "But He spake of the temple of his body. When therefore He
   was risen from the dead His disciples remembered that He had said this
   unto them and they believed the Scripture and the words which He had
   said." [1494]

   Orth.--If you have such a detestation of the divine words which preach
   the mystery of the incarnation, why, like Marcion and Valentinus and
   Manes, do you not destroy texts of this kind? For this is what they
   have done. But if this seems to you rash and impious, do not turn the
   Lord's words into ridicule, but rather follow the Apostles in their
   belief after the resurrection that the Godhead raised again the temple
   which the Jews had destroyed.

   Eran.--If you have any good evidence to adduce, give over gibing and
   fulfil your promise.

   Orth.--Remember specially those words of the gospels in which the Lord
   made a comparison between manna and the true bread.

   Eran.--I remember.

   Orth.--In that passage after speaking at some length about the bread of
   life, he added, "The bread that I will give is my flesh which I will
   give for the life of the world." [1495] In these words may be
   understood alike the bounty of the Godhead and the boon of the flesh.

   Eran.--One quotation is not enough to settle the question.

   Orth.--The Ethiopian eunuch had not read much of the Bible, but when he
   had found one witness from the prophets he was guided by it to
   salvation. But not all Apostles and prophets and all the preachers of
   the truth who have lived since then are enough to convince you.
   Nevertheless I will bring you some further testimony about the Lord's
   body. You cannot but know that passage in the Gospel history where,
   after eating the passover with His disciples, our Lord pointed to the
   death of the typical lamb and taught what body corresponded with that
   shadow. [1496]

   Eran.--Yes I know it.

   Orth.--Remember then what it was which our Lord took and broke, and
   what He called it when He had taken it.

   Eran.--I will answer in mystic language for the sake of the
   uninitiated. After taking and breaking it and giving it to His
   disciples He said, "This is my body which was given for you" [1497] or
   according to the apostle "broken" [1498] and again, "This is my blood
   of the New Testament which is shed for many." [1499]

   Orth.--Then when exhibiting the type of the passion He did not mention
   the Godhead?

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--But He did mention the body and blood.

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--And the body was nailed to the Cross?

   Eran.--Even so.

   Orth.--Come, then; look at this. When after the resurrection the doors
   were shut and the Lord came to the holy disciples and beheld them
   affrighted, what means did He use to destroy their fear and instead of
   fear to infuse faith?

   Eran.--He said to them "Behold my hands and my feet that it is I
   myself; handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye
   see me have." [1500]

   Orth.--So when they disbelieved He shewed them the body?

   Eran.--He did.

   Orth.--Therefore the body rose?

   Eran.--Clearly.

   Orth.--And I suppose what rose was what had died?

   Eran.--Even so.

   Orth.--And what had died was what was nailed to the cross?

   Eran.--Of necessity.

   Orth.--Then according to your own argument the body suffered?

   Eran.--Your series of arguments forces us to this conclusion.

   Orth.--Consider this too. Now I will be questioner, and do you answer
   as becomes a lover of the truth.

   Eran.--I will answer.

   Orth.--When the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, and that
   wonderful sight and sound collected thousands to the house, what did
   the chief of the apostles in the speech he then made say concerning the
   Lord's resurrection?

   Eran.--He quoted the divine David, and said that he had received
   promises from God that the Lord Christ should be born of the fruit of
   his loins and that in trust in these promises he prophetically foresaw
   His resurrection, and plainly said that His soul was not left in Hades
   and that His flesh did not see corruption. [1501]

   Orth.--His resurrection therefore is of these.

   Eran.--How can any one in his senses say that there is a resurrection
   of the soul which never died?

   Orth.--How comes it that you who attribute the passion, the death and
   the resurrection to the immutable and uncircumscribed Godhead have
   suddenly appeared before us in your right mind and now object to
   connecting the word resurrection with the soul?

   Eran.--Because the word resurrection is applicable to what has fallen.

   Orth.--But the body does not obtain resurrection apart from a soul, but
   being renewed by the divine will, and conjoined with its yokefellow, it
   receives life. Was it not thus that the Lord raised Lazarus?

   Eran.--It is plain that not the body alone rises.

   Orth.--This is more distinctly taught by the divine Ezekiel, [1502] for
   he points out how the Lord commanded the bones to come together, and
   how all of them were duly fitted together, and how He made sinews and
   veins and arteries grow with all the flesh pertaining to them and the
   skin that clothes them all, and then ordered the souls to come back to
   their own bodies.

   Eran.--This is true.

   Orth.--But the Lord's body did not undergo this corruption, but
   remained unimpaired, and on the third day recovered its own soul.

   Eran.--Agreed.

   Orth.--Then the death was of what had suffered?

   Eran.--Without question.

   Orth.--And when the great Peter mentioned the resurrection, and the
   divine David too, they said that His soul was not left in Hell, but
   that His body did not undergo corruption?

   Eran.--They did.

   Orth.--Then it was not the Godhead which underwent death, but the body
   by severance from the soul?

   Eran.--I cannot brook these absurdities.

   Orth.--But you are fighting against your own arguments; it is your own
   words which you are calling absurd.

   Eran.--You slander me; not one of these words is mine.

   Orth.--Suppose any one to ask what is the animal which is at once
   reasonable and mortal, and suppose some one else to answer--man; which
   of the two would you call interpreter of the saying? The questioner or
   the answerer?

   Eran.--The answerer.

   Orth.--Then I was quite right in calling the arguments yours? For you,
   I ween, in your answers, by rejecting some points and accepting others,
   confirmed them.

   Eran.--Then I will not answer any longer; do you answer.

   Orth.--I will answer.

   Eran.--What do you say to those words of the Apostle "Had they known it
   they would not have crucified the Lord of glory"? [1503] in this
   passage he mentions neither body nor soul.

   Orth.--Therefore you must not put the words "in the flesh" in it,--for
   this is your ingenious invention for decrying the Godhead of the
   Word--but must attribute the passion to the bare Godhead of the Word.

   Eran.--No; no. He suffered in the flesh, but His incorporeal nature was
   not capable of suffering by itself.

   Orth.--Ah! but nothing must be added to the Apostle's words.

   Eran.--When we know the Apostle's meaning there is nothing absurd in
   adding what is left out.

   Orth.--But to add anything to the divine words is wild and rash. To
   explain what is written and reveal the hidden meaning is holy and
   pious.

   Eran.--Quite right.

   Orth.--We two then shall do nothing unreasonable and unholy in
   examining the mind of the Scriptures.

   Eran.--No.

   Orth.--Let us then look together into what seems to be hidden.

   Eran.--By all means.

   Orth.--Did the great Paul call the divine James the Lord's brother?
   [1504]

   Eran.--He did.

   Orth.--But in what sense are we to regard him as brother? By
   relationship of His godhead or of His manhood?

   Eran.--I will not consent to divide the united natures.

   Orth.--But you have often divided them in our previous investigations,
   and you shall do the same thing now. Tell me; do you say that God the
   Word was only begotten Son?

   Eran.--I do.

   Orth.--And only begotten means only Son.

   Eran.--Certainly.

   Orth.--And the only begotten cannot have a brother?

   Eran.--Of course not, for if He had had a brother He would not be
   called the only begotten.

   Orth.--Then they were wrong in calling James the brother of the Lord.
   For the Lord was only begotten, and the only begotten cannot have a
   brother.

   Eran.--No, but the Lord is not incorporeal and the proclaimers of the
   truth are referring only to what touches the godhead.

   Orth.--How then would you prove the word of the apostle true?

   Eran.--By saying that James was of kin with the Lord according to the
   flesh.

   Orth.--See how you have brought in again that division which you object
   to.

   Eran.--It was not possible to explain the kinship in any other way.

   Orth.--Then do not find fault with those who cannot explain similar
   difficulties in any other way.

   Eran.--Now you are getting the argument off the track because you want
   to shirk the question.

   Orth.--Not at all, my friend. That will be settled too by the points we
   have investigated. Now look; when you were reminded of James the
   brother of the Lord, you said that the relationship referred not to the
   Godhead but to the flesh.

   Eran.--I did.

   Orth.--Well, now that you are told of the passion of the cross, refer
   this too to the flesh.

   Eran.--The Apostle called the crucified "Lord of Glory," [1505] and the
   same Apostle called the Lord "brother of James."

   Orth.--And it is the same Lord in both cases. If then you are right in
   referring the relationship to the flesh you must also refer the passion
   to the flesh, for it is perfectly ridiculous to regard the relationship
   without distinction and to refer the passion to Christ without
   distinction.

   Eran.--I follow the Apostle who calls the crucified "Lord of glory."

   Orth.--I follow too, and believe that He was "Lord of glory." For the
   body which was nailed to the wood was not that of any common man but of
   the Lord of glory. But we must acknowledge that the union makes the
   names common. Once more: do you say that the flesh of the Lord came
   down from heaven?

   Eran.--Of course not.

   Orth.--But was formed in the Virgin's womb?

   Eran.--Yes.

   Orth.--How, then, does the Lord say "If ye shall see the Son of man
   ascend up where He was before," [1506] and again "No man hath ascended
   up to heaven but He that came down from heaven, even the Son of man
   which is in heaven?" [1507]

   Eran.--He is speaking not of the flesh, but of the Godhead.

   Orth.--Yes; but the Godhead is of the God and Father. How then does He
   call him Son of man?

   Eran.--The peculiar properties of the natures are shared by the person,
   for on account of the union the same being is both Son of man and Son
   of God, everlasting and of time, Son of David and Lord of David, and so
   on with the rest.

   Orth.--Very right. But it is also important to recognise the fact that
   no confusion of natures results from both having one name. Wherefore we
   are endeavouring to distinguish how the same being is Son of God and
   also Son of man, and how He is "the same yesterday, to-day, and for
   ever," [1508] and by the reverent distinction of terms we find that the
   contradictions are in agreement.

   Eran.--You are right.

   Orth.--You say that the divine nature came down from heaven and that in
   consequence of the union it was called the Son of man. Thus it behoves
   us to say that the flesh was nailed to the tree, but to hold that the
   divine nature even on the cross and in the tomb was inseparable from
   this flesh, though from it it derived no sense of suffering, since the
   divine nature is naturally incapable of undergoing both suffering and
   death and its substance is immortal and impassible. It is in this sense
   that the crucified is styled Lord of Glory, by attribution of the title
   of the impassible nature to the passible, since, as we know, a body is
   described as belonging to this latter.

   Now let us examine the matter thus. The words of the divine Apostle are
   "Had they known it they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory."
   [1509] They crucified the nature which they knew, not that of which
   they were wholly ignorant: had they known that of which they were
   ignorant they would not have crucified that which they knew: they
   crucified the human because they were ignorant of the divine. Have you
   forgotten their own words. "For a good work we stone thee not but for
   blasphemy, and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God."
   [1510] These words are a plain proof that they recognised the nature
   they saw, while of the invisible they were wholly ignorant: had they
   known that nature they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

   Eran.--That is very probable, but the exposition of the faith laid down
   by the Fathers in council at Nicæa says that the only begotten Himself,
   very God, of one substance with the Father, suffered and was crucified.

   Orth.--You seem to forget what we have agreed on again and again.

   Eran.--What do you mean?

   Orth.--I mean that after the union the holy Scripture applies to one
   person terms both of exaltation and of humiliation. But possibly you
   are also ignorant that the illustrious Fathers first mentioned His
   taking flesh and being made man, and then afterwards added that He
   suffered and was crucified, and thus spoke of the passion after they
   had set forth the nature capable of passion.

   Eran.--The Fathers said that the Son of God, Light of Light, of the
   substance of the Father, suffered and was crucified.

   Orth.--I have observed more than once that both the Divine and the
   human are ascribed to the one Person. It is in accordance with this
   position that the thrice blessed Fathers, after teaching how we should
   believe in the Father, and then passing on to the person of the Son,
   did not immediately add "and in the Son of God," although it would have
   very naturally followed that after defining what touches God the Father
   they should straightway have introduced the name of Son. But their
   object was to give us at one and the same time instruction on the
   theology and on the oeconomy, [1511] lest there should be supposed to
   be any distinction between the Person of the Godhead and the Person of
   the Manhood. On this account they added to their statement concerning
   the Father that we must believe also in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son
   of God. Now after the incarnation God the Word is called Christ, for
   this name includes alike all that is proper to the Godhead and to the
   manhood. We recognise nevertheless that some properties belong to the
   one nature and some to the others, and this may at once be understood
   from the actual terms of the Creed. For tell me: to what do you apply
   the phrase "of the substance of the Father"? to the Godhead, or to the
   nature that was fashioned of the seed of David?

   Eran.--To the Godhead, as is plain.

   Orth.--And the clause "Very God of very God"; to which do you hold this
   belongs, to the Godhead or to the manhood?

   Eran.--To the Godhead.

   Orth.--Therefore neither the flesh nor the soul is of one substance
   with the Father, for they are created, but the Godhead which formed all
   things.

   Eran.--True.

   Orth.--Very well, then. And when we are told of passion and of the
   cross we must recognise the nature which submitted to the passion; we
   must avoid attributing it to the impassible, and must attribute it to
   that nature which was assumed for the distinct purpose of suffering.
   The acknowledgment on the part of the most excellent Fathers that the
   divine nature was impassible; and their attribution of the passion to
   the flesh is proved by the conclusion of the creed, which runs "But
   they who state there was a time when He was not, and before He was
   begotten He was not, and He was made out of the non-existent, or who
   allege that the Son of God was of another essence or substance mutable
   or variable, these the holy catholic and apostolic Church
   anathematizes." See then what penalties are denounced against them that
   attribute the passion to the divine nature. [1512]

   Eran.--They are speaking in this place of mutation and variation.

   Orth.--But what is the passion but mutation and variation? For if,
   being impassible before His incarnation, He suffered after His
   incarnation, He assuredly suffered by undergoing mutation; and if being
   immortal before He became man, He tasted death, as you say, after being
   made man, He underwent a complete alteration by being made mortal after
   being immortal. But expressions of this kind, and their authors with
   them, have all been expelled by the illustrious Fathers from the bounds
   of the Church, and cut off like rotten limbs from the sound body. We
   therefore exhort you to fear the punishment and abhor the blasphemy.

   Now I will show you that in their own writings the holy Fathers have
   held the opinions we have expressed. Of the witnesses I shall bring
   forward some took part in that great Council; some flourished in the
   Church after their time; some illuminated the world long before. But
   their harmony is broken neither by difference of periods nor by
   diversity of language; like the harp their strings are several and
   separate but like the harp they make one harmonious music.

   Eran.--I was anxious for and shall be delighted at such citations.
   Instruction of this kind cannot be gainsaid, and is most useful.

   Orth.--Now; open your ears and receive the streams that flow from the
   spiritual springs.

   Testimony of the holy Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, and martyr.

   From his Epistle to the Smyrnæans:--

   "They do not admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not
   confess the Eucharist to be flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ which
   suffered for our sins and which of His goodness the Father raised."
   [1513]

   Testimony of Irenæus, bishop of Lyons.

   From his third book against heresies (Chap. xx.):--

   "It is clear then that Paul knew no other Christ save Him that suffered
   and was buried and rose and was born, whom he calls man, for after
   saying, If Christ be preached that He rose from the dead,' [1514] he
   adds, giving the reason of His incarnation, For since by man came death
   by man came also the resurrection of the dead,' [1515] and on all
   occasions in reference to the passion, the manhood and the dissolution
   of the Lord, he uses the name of Christ as in the text, Destroy not him
   with thy meat for whom Christ died,' [1516] and again, But now in
   Christ ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh in the blood of
   Christ,' [1517] and again, Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of
   the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every
   one that hangeth on a tree.'" [1518]

   Of the same from the same work. (Chapter xxi.):--

   "For as He was Man that He might be tempted, so was He Word that He
   might be glorified. In His temptation, His crucifixion and His dying,
   the Word was inoperative; but in His victory, His patience, His
   goodness, His resurrection and His assumption it was co-operative with
   the manhood."

   Of the same from the fifth book of the same work:--

   "When with His own blood the Lord had ransomed us, and given His soul
   on behalf of our souls, and His flesh instead of our flesh."

   The testimony of the holy Hippolytus, bishop and martyr.

   From his letter to a certain Queen:--

   "So he calls Him The firstfruits of them that slept,' [1519] and The
   first born of the dead.' [1520] When He had risen and was wishful to
   show that what had risen was the same body which died, when the
   Apostles doubted, He called to Him Thomas and said Handle me and see;
   for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have.'" [1521]

   Of the same from the same letter:--

   "By calling Him firstfruits He bore witness to what we have said, that
   the Saviour, after taking the flesh of the same material, raised it,
   making it firstfruits of the flesh of the just, in order that all we
   that believe might have expectation of our resurrection through trust
   in Him that is risen."

   Of the same from his discourse on the two thieves:--

   "The body of the Lord gave both to the world,--the holy blood and the
   sacred water."

   Of the same from the same discourse:--

   "And the body being, humanly speaking, a corpse, has in itself great
   power of life, for there flowed from it what does not flow from dead
   bodies--blood and water,--that we might know what vital force lies in
   the indwelling power in the body, so that it is a corpse evidently
   unlike others, and is able to pour forth for us causes of life." [1522]

   Of the same from the same discourse:--

   "Not a bone of the holy Lamb is broken. The type shews that the passion
   cannot touch the power, for the bones are the power of the body."

   Testimony of the holy Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, and confessor.

   From his book on the soul:--

   "Their impious calumny can be refuted in a few words; they may be
   right, unless He voluntarily gave up His own body to the destruction of
   death for the sake of the salvation of men. First of all they attribute
   to Him extraordinary infirmity in not being able to repel His enemies
   assault."

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "Why do they, in the concoction of their earth-born deceits, make much
   of proving that the Christ assumed a body without a soul? In order that
   if they could seduce any to lay down that this is the case, then, by
   attributing to the divine Spirit variations of affection, they might
   easily persuade them that the mutable is not begotten of the immutable
   nature."

   Of the same from his discourse on "the Lord created me in the beginning
   of His ways": [1523] --

   "The man Who died rose on the third day, and, when Mary was eager to
   lay hold of His holy limbs, He objected and cried Touch me not. [1524]
   For I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say
   unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father and to my God and
   your God.' [1525] Now the words I am not yet ascended to my Father,'
   were not spoken by the Word and God, who came down from heaven, and was
   in the bosom of the Father, nor by the Wisdom which contains all
   created things, but were uttered by the man who was compacted of
   various limbs, who had risen from the dead, who had not yet after His
   death gone back to the Father, and was reserving for Himself the first
   fruits of His progress."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "As he writes he expressly describes the man who was crucified as Lord
   of Glory, declaring Him to be Lord and Christ, just as the Apostles
   with one voice when speaking to Israel in the flesh say Therefore let
   all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same
   Jesus, Whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.' [1526] He so made
   Jesus Christ who suffered. He did not so make the Wisdom nor yet the
   Word who has the might of dominion from the beginning, but Him who was
   lifted up on high and stretched out His hands upon the Cross."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "For if He is incorporeal and not subject to manual contact, nor
   apprehended by eyes of flesh, He undergoes no wound, He is not nailed
   by nails, He has no part in death, He is not hidden in the ground, He
   is not shut in a grave, He does not rise from a tomb."

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "No man taketh it from me....I have power to lay it down and I have
   power to take it again.' [1527] If as God He had the double power, He
   yet yielded to them who were striving of evil counsel to destroy the
   temple, but by His resurrection He restored it in greater splendour. It
   is proved by incontrovertible evidence that He of Himself rose and
   renewed His own house, and the great work of the Son is to be ascribed
   to the divine Father; for the Son does not work without the Father, as
   is declared in the unimpeachable utterances of the holy Scriptures.
   Wherefore at one time the divine Parent is described as having raised
   the Christ from the dead, at another time the Son promises to raise His
   own temple. If then from what has previously been laid down the divine
   spirit of the Christ is proved to be impassible, in vain do the
   accursed assail the apostolic definitions. If Paul says that the Lord
   of Glory was crucified, clearly referring to the manhood, we must not
   on this account refer suffering to the divine. Why then do they put
   these two things together, saying that the Christ was crucified from
   infirmity?"

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "But had it been becoming to attribute to Him any kind of infirmity,
   any one might have said that it was natural to attach these qualities
   to the manhood, though not to the fulness of the Godhead, or to the
   dignity of the highest wisdom, or to Him who according to Paul is
   described as God over all." [1528]

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "This then is the manner of the infirmity according to which He is
   described by Paul as coming to death, for the man lives by God's power
   when plainly associated with God's spirit, since from the preceding
   statements He who is believed to be in Him is proved to be also the
   power of the Most High."

   Of the same from the same:--

   "As by entering the Virgin's womb He did not lessen His power, so
   neither by the fastening of His body to the wood of the cross is His
   spirit defiled. For when the body was crucified on high the divine
   Spirit of wisdom dwelt even within the body, trod in heavenly places,
   filled all the earth, reigned over the depths, visited and judged the
   soul of every man, and continued to do all that God continually does,
   for the wisdom that is on high is not prisoned and contained within
   bodily matter, just as moist and dry material are contained within
   their vessels and are contained by but do not contain them. But this
   wisdom, being a divine and ineffable power, embraces and confirms alike
   all that is within and all that is without the temple, and thence
   proceeding beyond comprehends and sways at once all matter."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "But if the sun being a visible body, apprehended by the senses,
   endures everywhere such adverse influences without changing its order,
   or feeling any blow, be it small or great; can we suppose the
   incorporeal Wisdom to be defiled and to change its nature because its
   temple is nailed to the cross or destroyed or wounded or corrupted? The
   temple suffers, but the substance abides without spot, and preserves
   its entire dignity without defilement."

   Of the same from his work on the titles of the Psalms of Degrees:--

   "The Father who is perfect, infinite, incomprehensible, and is
   incapable alike of adornment or disfigurement, receives no acquired
   glory; nor yet does His Word, who is God begotten of Him, through whom
   are angels and heaven and earth's boundless bulk and all the form and
   matter of created things; but the man Christ raised from the dead is
   exalted and glorified to the open discomfiture of His foes."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "They however who have lifted up hatred against Him, though they be
   fenced round with the forces of His foes, are scattered abroad, while
   the God and Word gloriously raised His own temple."

   Of the same from his interpretation of the 92nd Psalm:--

   "Moreover the prophet Isaiah following the tracks of His sufferings,
   among other utterances exclaims with a mighty voice And we saw Him and
   He had no form nor beauty. His form was dishonoured and rejected among
   the sons of men,' [1529] thus distinctly showing that the marks of
   indignity and the sufferings must be applied to the human but not to
   the divine. And immediately afterwards he adds Being a man under
   stroke, and able to bear infirmity.' [1530] He it is who after
   suffering outrage was seen to have no form or comeliness, then again
   was changed and clothed with beauty, for the God dwelling in Him was
   not led like a lamb to death and slaughtered like a sheep, for His
   nature is invisible."

   Testimony of the Holy Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, and confessor.

   From his letter to Epictetus:--

   "Whoever reached such a pitch of impiety as to think and say that the
   Godhead itself of one substance with the Father was circumcised, and
   from perfect became imperfect; and to deny that what was crucified on
   the tree was the body, asserting it on the contrary to be the very
   creative substance of wisdom?"

   Of the same from the same treatise:--

   "The Word associated with Himself and brought upon Himself what the
   humanity of the Word suffered, that we might be able to share in the
   Godhead of the Word. And marvellous it was that the sufferer and He who
   did not suffer were the same; sufferer in that His own body suffered
   and He was in it while suffering, but not suffering because the Word,
   being by nature God, was impassible. And He Himself the incorporeal was
   in the passible body, and the body contained in itself the impassible
   Word, destroying the infirmities of His body."

   Of the same from the same letter:--

   "For being God and Lord of Glory, He was in the body ingloriously
   crucified; but the body suffered when smitten on the tree, and water
   and blood flowed from its side; but being temple of the Word, it was
   full of the Godhead. Wherefore when the sun saw its Creator suffering
   in His outraged body, it drew in its rays, and darkened the earth. And
   that very body with a mortal nature rose superior to its own nature, on
   account of the Word within it, and is no longer touched by its natural
   corruption, but clothed with the superhuman Word, became
   incorruptible."

   Of the same from his greater discourse on the Faith:--

   "Was what rose from the dead, man or God? Peter, the Apostle, who knows
   better than we, interprets and say, and when they had fulfilled all
   that was written of Him they took Him down from the tree and laid Him
   in a sepulchre, but God raised Him from the dead.' [1531] Now the dead
   body of Jesus which was taken down from the tree, which had been laid
   in a sepulchre, and entombed by Joseph of Arimathæa, is the very body
   which the Word raised, saying, Destroy this temple, and in three days I
   will raise it up.' [1532] It is He who quickens all the dead, and
   quickened the man Christ Jesus, born of Mary, whom He assumed. For if
   while on the cross [1533] He raised corpses of the saints that had
   previously undergone dissolution, much more can God the everliving Word
   raise the body, which He wore, as says Paul, For the word of God is
   quick and powerful.'" [1534]

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Life then does not die, but quickens the dead; for as the light is not
   injured in a dark place, so life cannot suffer when it has visited a
   mortal nature, for the Godhead of the Word is immutable and invariable
   as the Lord says in the prophecy about Himself I am the Lord I change
   not.'" [1535]

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Living He cannot die but on the contrary quickens the dead. He is
   therefore, by the Godhead derived from the Father, a fount of light;
   but He that died, or rather rose from the dead, our intercessor, who
   was born of the Virgin Mary, whom the Godhead of the Word assumed for
   our sake, is man."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "It came to pass that Lazarus fell sick and died; but the divine Man
   did not fall sick nor against His own will did He die, but of His own
   accord came to the dispensation of death, being strengthened by God the
   Word who dwelt within Him, and who said No man taketh it from me but I
   lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down and I have power to
   take it again.' [1536] The Godhead then which lays down and takes the
   life of man which He wore is of the Son, for in its completeness He
   assumed the manhood, in order that in its completeness He might quicken
   it, and, with it, the dead."

   Of the same from his discourse against the Arians:--

   "When therefore the blessed Paul says the Father raised' the Son from
   the dead' [1537] John tells us that Jesus said Destroy this temple and
   in three days I will raise it up...but He spake' of His own body.'
   [1538] So it is clear to them that take heed that at the raising of the
   body the Son is said by Paul to have been raised from the dead, for he
   refers what concerns the body to the Son's person, and just so when he
   says the Father gave life to the Son' [1539] it must be understood that
   the life was given to the Flesh. For if He Himself is life how can the
   life receive life?"

   Of the same from his work on the Incarnation:--

   "For when the Word was conscious that in no other way could the ruin of
   men be undone save by death to the uttermost, and it was impossible
   that the Word who is immortal and Son of the Father should die, to
   effect His end He assumes a body capable of death, that this body,
   being united to the Word, who is over all, might, in the stead of all,
   become subject to death, and because of the indwelling Word might
   remain incorruptible, and so by the grace of the resurrection
   corruption for the future might lose its power over men. Thus offering
   to death, as a sacrifice and victim free from every spot, the body
   which He had assumed, by His corresponding offering He straightway
   destroyed death's power over all His kind; for being the Word of God
   above and beyond all men, He rightly offered and paid His own temple
   and bodily instrument, as a ransom for all souls due to death. And thus
   by means of the like (body) being associated with all men, the
   incorruptible Son of God rightly clothed all men with incorruption by
   the promise of the resurrection, for the corruption inherent in death
   no longer has any place with men, for the sake of the Word who dwelt in
   them by the means of the one body."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Wherefore, after His divine manifestations in His works, now also on
   behalf of all He offered sacrifice, yielding to death His own temple
   instead of all, that He might make all men irresponsible and free from
   the ancient transgression, and, exhibiting His own body as
   incorruptible firstfruits of the resurrection of mankind, might shew
   Himself stronger than death. For the body, as having a common
   substance--for it was a human body, although by a new miracle its
   constitution was of the Virgin alone--being mortal, died after the
   example of its like; but by the descent of the Word into it no longer
   suffered corruption, according to its own nature, but, on account of
   God the Word who dwelt within it, was delivered from corruption."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Whence, as I have said, since it was not possible for the Word being
   immortal to die, He took upon Himself a body capable of death, in order
   that He might offer this same body for all, and He Himself in His
   suffering on behalf of all through His descent into this body might
   destroy Him that hath the power of death.'" [1540]

   Of the same from the same work: [1541] --

   "For the body in its passion, as is the nature of bodies, died, but it
   had the promise of incorruption through the Word that dwelt within it.
   For when the body died the Word was not injured; but He was Himself
   impassible, incorruptible, and immortal, as being God's Word, and being
   associated with the body He kept from it the natural corruption of
   bodies, as says the Spirit to Him thou wilt not suffer thy Holy One to
   see corruption.'" [1542]

   The testimony of the holy Damasus, bishop of Rome: [1543] --

   "If any one say that, in the passion of the Cross, God the Son of God
   suffered pain, and not the flesh with the soul, which the form of the
   servant put on and assumed, as the Scripture saith, Let him be
   anathema."

   Testimony of the holy Ambrosius, bishop of Milan.

   From his book on the Catholic faith:--

   "There are some men who have reached such a pitch of impiety as to
   think that the Godhead of the Lord was circumcised, and from perfect
   was made imperfect; and that the divine substance, Creator of all
   things, and not the flesh, was on the tree."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "The flesh suffered; but the Godhead is free from death. He yielded His
   body to suffer according to the law of human nature. For how can God
   die, when the soul cannot die? Fear not,' He says, them which kill the
   body but are not able to kill the soul.' [1544] If then the soul cannot
   be slain how can the Godhead be made subject to death?"

   Testimony of the holy Basilius, bishop of Cæsarea:--

   "It is perfectly well known to every one who has the least acquaintance
   with the meaning of the words of the Apostle that he is not delivering
   to us a mode of theology but is explaining the reasons of the oeconomy,
   [1545] for he says God hath made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified
   both Lord and Christ.' [1546] Thus he is plainly directing his argument
   to His human and visible nature."

   Testimony of the holy Gregorius, bishop of Nazianzus.

   From his letter to the blessed Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople:--

   "The saddest thing in what has befallen the churches is the boldness of
   the utterances of Apollinarius and his party. I cannot understand how
   your Holiness has allowed them to arrogate to themselves the power of
   assembling on the same terms with us."

   And a little further on:--

   "I will no longer call this serious; it is indeed saddest of all that
   the only begotten God Himself, Judge of all who exist, the Prince of
   Life, the Destroyer of Death, is made by him mortal and alleged to
   receive suffering in His own Godhead. He represents the Godhead to have
   shared with the body in the dissolution of that three days death of the
   body, and so after the death to have been again raised by the Father."

   Of the same from his former exposition to Cledonius:--

   "It is the contention of the Arians that the manhood was without a
   soul, that they may refer the passion to the Godhead and represent the
   same power as both moving the body and suffering."

   Of the same from his discourse about the Son:--

   "It remained for us to treat of what was commanded Him and of His
   keeping the commandments and doing all things pleasing to Him; and
   further of His perfection, exaltation, and learning obedience by all
   that He suffered, [1547] His priesthood, His offering, His betrayal,
   His entreaty to Him that hath power to save Him from death, His agony,
   His bloody sweat, His prayer and similar manifestations, were it not
   clear to all that all these expressions in connexion with His Passion
   in no way signify the nature which was immutable and above suffering."

   Of the same from his Easter Discourse (Or. ii.):--

   "Who is this that cometh from Edom?' [1548] and from the earth, and how
   can the garments of the bloodless and bodiless be red as of one that
   treadeth in the wine-fat? Urge in reply the beauty of the garment of
   the body which suffered and was made beautiful in suffering, and was
   made splendid by the Godhead, than which nothing is lovelier nor more
   fair."

   Testimony of Gregory, bishop of Nyssa.

   From his catechetical oration:--

   "And this is the mystery of the dispensation of God concerning the
   manhood and of the resurrection from the dead, not to prevent the soul
   from being separated from the body by death according to the necessary
   law of human nature, and to bring them together again through the
   resurrection."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "The flesh which received the Godhead, and which through the
   resurrection was exalted with the Godhead, is not formed of another
   material, but of ours; so, just as in the case of our own body, the
   operation of one of the senses moves to general sensation the whole man
   united to that part, in like manner just as though all nature were one
   single animal, the resurrection of the part pervades the whole, being
   conveyed from the part to the whole by what is continuous and united in
   nature. What then do we find extraordinary in the mystery that the
   upright stoops to the fallen to raise up him that lies low?"

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "It would be natural also in this part not to heed the one and neglect
   the other; but in the immortal to behold the human, and to be curiously
   exact about the diviner quality in the manhood."

   Of the same from his work against Eunomius:--

   "'Tis not the human nature which raises Lazarus to life. 'Tis not the
   impassible power which sheds tears over the dead. The tear belongs to
   the man; the life comes from the very life. The thousands are not fed
   by human poverty; omnipotence does not hasten to the fig tree. Who was
   weary in the way, and who by His word sustains all the world without
   being weary? What is the brightness of His glory, what was pierced by
   the nails? What form is smitten in the passion, what is glorified for
   everlasting? The answer is plain and needs no interpretation."

   Of the same from the same treatise:--

   "He blames them that refer the passion to the human nature. He wishes
   himself wholly to subject the Godhead itself to the passion, for the
   proposition being twofold and doubtful, whether the divinity or the
   humanity was concerned in the passion, the denial of the one becomes
   the positive condemnation of the other. While therefore they blame them
   who see the passion in the humanity, they will bestow unqualified
   praise on them that maintain the Divinity of the Son of God to be
   passible. But the point established by these means becomes a
   confirmation of their own absurdity of doctrine; for if, as they
   allege, the Godhead of the Son suffers while that of the Father in
   accordance with its substance is conserved in complete impassibility,
   it follows that the impassible nature is at variance with the nature
   which sustains suffering."

   The testimony of the holy Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.

   From his discourse on the text "Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
   heareth my word and believeth on Him that sent me hath everlasting
   life": [1549] --

   "Whose then are the sufferings? Of the flesh. Therefore if you give to
   the flesh the suffering, give it also the lowly words; and ascribe the
   exalted words to Him to Whom you assign the miracles. For the God when
   He is in the act of working wonders naturally speaks in high and lofty
   language worthy of His works and the man when He is suffering fitly
   utters lowly words corresponding with His sufferings."

   Of the same from his discourse on "My Father is greater than I": [1550]
   --

   "But when you give the sufferings to the flesh and the miracles to God,
   you must of necessity, though unwillingly, give the lowly words to the
   man born of Mary, and the high and lofty words becoming God, to the
   Word who existed in the beginning. The reason why I utter sometimes
   lofty words and sometimes lowly is that by the lofty I may show the
   nobility of the indwelling Word, and by the lowly make known the
   infirmity of the lowly flesh. So at one time I call myself equal to the
   Father and at another I call the Father greater; and in this I am not
   inconsistent with myself, but I shew that I am God and man; God by the
   lofty and man by the lowly. And if you wish to know in what sense my
   Father is greater than I, I spoke in the flesh and not in the person of
   the Godhead."

   Of the same from his discourse on "If it be possible let this cup pass
   from me": [1551] --

   "Ascribe not then the sufferings of the flesh to the impassible God,
   for I, O heretic, am God, and man; God, as the miracles prove; man as
   is shewn by the sufferings. Since then I am God and man, tell me, who
   was it who suffered? If God suffered, you have spoken blasphemy; but if
   the flesh suffered, why do you not attribute the passion to Him to whom
   you ascribe the dread? For while one is suffering another feels on
   dread; while man is being crucified God is not troubled."

   Of the same from his discourse against the Arians:--

   "And not to prolong what I am saying, I will shortly ask you, O
   heretic, did He who was begotten of God before the ages suffer, or
   Jesus who was born of David in the last days? If the Godhead suffered,
   thou hast spoken blasphemy; if, as the truth is, the manhood suffered,
   for what reason do you hesitate to attribute the passion to man?"

   Of the same from his discourse concerning the Son:--

   "Peter said, God hath made this Jesus both Lord and Christ' [1552] and
   said too, this Jesus whom ye crucified God hath raised up.' [1553] Now
   it was the manhood, not the Godhead, which became a corpse, and He who
   raised it was the Word, the power of God, who said in the Gospel,
   Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.' [1554] So
   when it is said that God hath made Him who became a corpse and rose
   from the dead both Lord and Christ, what is meant is the flesh, and not
   the Godhead of the Son."

   Of the same from his discourse on "The Son can do nothing of Himself":
   [1555] --

   "For He had not such a nature as that His life could be held by
   corruption, since His Godhead was not forcibly reduced to suffering.
   For how could it? But the manhood was renewed in incorruption. So he
   says For this mortal must put on immortality and this corruptible must
   put on incorruption.' [1556] You observe the accuracy; he points
   distinctly to this mortal' that you may not entertain the idea of the
   resurrection of any other flesh."

   Testimony of the holy Flavianus, bishop of Antioch.

   On Easter Day:--

   "Wherefore also the cross is boldly preached by us, and the Lord's
   death confessed among us, though in nothing did the Godhead suffer, for
   the divine is impassible, but the dispensation was fulfilled by the
   body."

   Of the same on Judas the traitor:--

   "When therefore you hear of the Lord being betrayed, do not degrade the
   divine dignity to insignificance, nor attribute to divine power the
   sufferings of the body. For the divine is impassible and invariable.
   For if through His love to mankind He took on Him the form of a
   servant, He underwent no change in nature. But being what He ever was,
   he yielded the divine [1557] body to experience death."

   Testimony of Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria.

   From his Heortastic Volume:--

   "Of unreasoning beings the souls are not taken and replaced: they share
   in the corruption of the bodies, and are dissolved into dust. But after
   the Saviour at the time of the cross had taken the soul from His own
   body, He restored it to the body again when He rose from the dead. To
   assure us of this He uttered the words of the psalmist, the predictive
   exclamation, Thou wilt not leave my soul in Hell nor suffer thine Holy
   One to see corruption.'" [1558]

   Testimony of the blessed Gelasius, bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine:--

   "He was bound, He was wounded, He was crucified, He was handled, He was
   marked with scars, He received a lance's wound, and all these
   indignities were undergone by the body born of Mary, while that which
   was begotten from the Father before the ages none was able to harm, for
   the Word had no such nature. For how can any one constrain Godhead? How
   wound it? How make red with blood the incorporeal nature? How surround
   it with grave bands? Grant now what you cannot contravene and,
   constrained by invincible reason, honour Godhead."

   Testimony of the holy John, bishop of Constantinople.

   From his discourse on the words "My Father worketh hitherto and I
   work": [1559] --

   "What sign shewest Thou unto us seeing that Thou doest these things?'
   [1560] What then does He reply Himself? Destroy this temple,' He says,
   and in three days I will raise it up,' [1561] speaking of His own body,
   but they did not understand Him."

   And a little further on:--

   "Why does not the evangelist pass this by? Why did he add the
   correction, But He spake of the temple of his body'? [1562] for He did
   not say destroy this body,' but temple' that He might shew the
   indwelling God. Destroy this temple which is far more excellent than
   that of the Jews. The Jewish temple contained the Law; this temple
   contains the Lawgiver; the former the letter that killeth; the latter
   the spirit that giveth life." [1563]

   Of the same from the discourse "That what was spoken and done in
   humility was not so done and spoken on account of infirmity of power
   but different dispensations":--

   "How then does He say If it be possible'? [1564] He is pointing out to
   us the infirmity of the human nature, which did not choose to be torn
   away from this present life, but stepped back and shrank on account of
   the love implanted in it by God in the beginning for the present life.
   If then when the Lord Himself so often spoke in such terms, some have
   dared to say that He did not take flesh, what would they have said if
   none of these words had been spoken by Him?"

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "Observe how they spoke of His former age. Ask the heretic the question
   Does God dread? Does He draw back? Does He shrink? Does He sorrow? and
   if he says yes, stand off from him for the future, rank him down below
   with the devil, aye lower even than the devil, for even the devil will
   not dare to say this. But, should he say that each of these things is
   unworthy of God, reply--neither does God pray; for apart from these it
   will be yet another absurdity should the words be the words of God, for
   the words indicate not only an agony, but also two wills; one of the
   Son and another of the Father, opposed to one another. For the words
   Not as I will, but as Thou wilt,' are the words of one indicating
   this."

   Of the same from the same work:--

   "For if this be spoken of the Godhead there arises a certain
   contradiction, and many absurdities are thereby produced. If on the
   contrary it be spoken of the flesh, the expressions are reasonable, and
   no fault can be found with them. For the unwillingness of the flesh to
   die incurs no condemnation; such is the nature of the flesh and He
   exhibits all the properties of the flesh except sin, and indeed in full
   abundance, so as to stop the mouths of the heretics. When therefore He
   says If it be possible let this cup pass from me' and not as I will but
   as Thou wilt,' He only shews that He is really clothed with the flesh
   which fears death, for it is the nature of the flesh to fear death, to
   draw back and to suffer agony. Now He leaves it abandoned and stripped
   of its own activity, that by shewing its weakness He may convince us
   also of its nature. Sometimes however He conceals it, because He was
   not mere man."

   Testimony of Severianus, bishop of Gabala.

   From his discourse on the seals:--

   "The Jews withstand the apparent, ignorant of the non-apparent; they
   crucify the flesh; they do not destroy the Godhead. For if my words are
   not destroyed together with the letter which is the clothing of speech,
   how could God the Word, the fount of life, die together with the flesh?
   The passion belongs to the body, but impassibility to the dignity."

   See then how they whose husbandry is in the East and in the West, as
   well as in the South and in the North, have all been shewn by us to
   condemn your vain heresy, and all openly to proclaim the impassibility
   of the divine Nature. See how both tongues, I mean both Greek and
   Latin, make one harmonious confession about the things of God.

   Eran.--I am myself astonished at their harmony, but I observe a
   considerable difference in the terms they use.

   Orth.--Do not be angry. The very force of their fight against their
   adversaries is the cause of their seeming immoderate. The same thing is
   to be observed in the case of planters; when they see a plant bent one
   way or another, they are not satisfied with bringing it to a straight
   line, but bend it still further in the opposite direction, that by its
   being bent still further from the straight it may attain its upright
   stature. But that you may know that the very promoters and supporters
   of this manifold heresy strive to surpass even the heretics of old by
   the greatness of their blasphemies, listen once more to the writings of
   Apollinarius which proclaim the impassibility of the divine nature, and
   confess the passion to be of the body.

   Testimony of Apollinarius.

   From his summary:--

   "John spoke of the temple which was destroyed, namely the body of Him
   that raised it, and the body is entirely united to Him and He is not
   another among them. And if the body of the Lord was one with the Lord,
   the properties of the body were constituted His properties on account
   of the body."

   And again:--

   "And the truth is that His conjunction with the body does not take
   place by circumscription of the Word, so that He has nothing beyond His
   incorporation. Wherefore even in death immortality abides with Him; for
   if He transcends this composition, so does He also the dissolution. Now
   death is dissolution. But He was not comprehended in the composition;
   had He been so, the universe would have been made void; nor in the
   dissolution did He, like the soul, suffer the deprivation which
   succeeds dissolution."

   And again:--

   "As the Saviour says that the dead bodies go forth from their tombs,
   though their souls do not go forth thence, just so He says that He
   Himself will rise from the dead, although it is only His body that
   rises."

   In another similar work he writes:--

   "Of man is the rising from the dead; of God is the raising. Now Christ
   both rose and raised, for He was God and man. Had the Christ been only
   man He would not have quickened the dead, and if He had been only God,
   He would not on His own account apart from the Father have quickened
   any of the dead. But Christ did both; the same being is both God and
   man. If the Christ had been only man He would not have saved the world;
   if He had been only God He would not have saved it through suffering,
   but Christ did both, so He is God and man. If the Christ had been only
   man or if only God He could not have been a Mediator between men and
   God."

   And a little further on:--

   "Now flesh is an instrument of life fitted to the capacity for
   suffering in accordance with the divine will. Words are not proper to
   the Flesh, nor are deeds. Being made subject to the capacity for
   suffering, as is natural to the flesh, it prevails over the suffering
   because it is the flesh of God."

   And again a little further on:--

   "The Son took flesh of the Virgin and travelled to the world. This
   flesh He filled with the Holy Ghost to the sanctification of us all. So
   He delivered death to death and destroyed death through the
   resurrection to the raising of us all."

   From his tract concerning the faith:--

   "Since the passions are concerned with the flesh His power possessed
   its own impassibility, so to refer the passion to the power is an
   impious error."

   And in his tract about the incarnation he further writes:--

   "Here then He shews that it was the same man who rose from the dead and
   God who reigns over all creation."

   You see now that one of the professors of vain heresy plainly preaches
   the impassibility of the Godhead, calls the body a temple, and persists
   in maintaining that this body was raised by God the Word.

   Eran.--I have heard and I am astonished; and I am really ashamed that
   our doctrines should appear less tenable than the innovation of
   Apollinarius.

   Orth.--But I will bring you a witness from yet another heretical herd
   distinctly preaching the impassibility of the Godhead of the only
   begotten.

   Eran.--Whom do you mean?

   Orth.--You have probably heard of Eusebius the Phoenician, who was
   bishop of Emesa by Lebanon. [1565]

   Eran.--I have met with some of his writings, and found him to be a
   supporter of the doctrines of Arius.

   Orth.--Yes; he did belong to that sect, but in his endeavour to prove
   that the Father was greater than the only begotten he declares the
   Godhead of the depreciated Son to be impassible and for this opinion he
   contended with long and extraordinary perseverance.

   Eran.--I should be very much obliged if you would quote his words too.

   Orth.--To comply with your wish I will adduce somewhat longer evidence.
   Now listen to what he says, and fancy that the man himself is
   addressing us.

   Testimony of Eusebius of Emesa:--

   "Wherefore does he fear death? Lest he suffer anything from death? For
   what was death to Him? Was it not the severance of the power from the
   flesh? Did the power receive a nail that it should fear? If our soul
   suffers not the body's infirmities when united with it, but the eye
   grows blind and yet the mind retains its force; and a foot is cut off
   and yet the reasoning power does not halt--and this nature evidences,
   and the Lord sets His seal on, in the words Fear not them which kill
   the body but are not able to kill the soul' (and if they cannot kill
   the soul, it is not because they do not wish, but because they are not
   able, though they would like to make the soul share the suffering of
   the body yoked with it)--shall He who created the soul and formed the
   body suffer as the body suffers, although He does take upon Himself the
   body's sufferings? But Christ suffered for us, and we lie not. And the
   bread that I will give is my flesh.' [1566] This He gave for us.

   "That which can be mastered was mastered; that which can be crucified
   was crucified, but He that had power alike to dwell in it and to leave
   it said Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit,' [1567] not into the
   hands of them who were trying to hasten His death. I am not fond of
   controversy; I rather avoid it; with all gentleness I wish to enquire
   into the points at issue between us as between brothers. Do not I say
   truly that the power could not be subject to the sufferings of the
   flesh? I say nothing; let him who will say what the power suffered. Did
   it fail? See the danger. Was it extinct? See the blasphemy. Did it no
   longer exist? This is the death of power. Tell me what can so master it
   that it suffered and I withdraw. But, if you cannot tell me, why do you
   object to my not telling you? What you cannot tell me, that it did not
   receive. Drive a nail into a soul and I will admit that it can be
   driven into power. But it was in sympathy. Tell me what you mean by in
   sympathy.' As a nail went into the flesh, so pain into the power. Let
   us understand was in sympathy' in this sense. Then pain was felt by the
   power which was not smitten. For pain always follows on suffering. But
   if a body often despises pain while the mind is sound, on account of
   the vigour of its thought, then in this case let some one explain
   impartially what suffered and what suffered with or was in sympathy.
   What then? Did not Christ die for us? How did He die? Father, into thy
   hands I commend my Spirit.' [1568] The Spirit departed; the body
   remained; the body remained without breath. Did He not die then? He
   died for us. The Shepherd offered the sheep, the Priest offered the
   sacrifice, He gave Himself for us. He that spared not His own Son but
   delivered Him up for us all.' [1569] I do not reject the words, but I
   want the meaning of the words. The Lord says that the bread of God came
   down from Heaven, [1570] and though I cannot express it more clearly on
   account of the mysteries, He says in explanation It is my flesh.' Did
   the flesh of the Son come down from heaven? No. How then does He say,
   and that in explanation, the bread of God lives and came down from
   Heaven? He refers the properties of the power to the flesh, because the
   power which assumed the flesh came down from heaven. Change the terms
   then; He refers to the power what the flesh suffers. How did Christ
   suffer for us? He was spat upon, He was smitten on the cheek, they put
   a crown about His brow, His hands and feet were pierced. All these
   sufferings were of the body, but they are referred to Him that dwelt
   therein. Throw a stone at the Emperor's statue. What is the cry? You
   have insulted the Emperor.' Tear the Emperor's robe. What is the cry?
   You have rebelled against the Emperor.' Crucify Christ's body. What is
   the cry? Christ died for us.' But what need of me and thee? Let us go
   to the Evangelists. How have you received from the Lord how the Lord
   died? They read Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit.' [1571] The
   Spirit on high, the body on the Cross for us. So far as His body is
   attributed to Himself He offered the sheep."

   Of the same from the same book:--

   "He came to save our nature; not to destroy His own. If I consent to
   say that a camel flies, you directly count it strange, because it does
   not fit in with its nature; and you are quite right. And if I say that
   men live in the sea you will not accept it; you are quite right. It is
   contrary to nature. As then if I say strange things about these natures
   you count it strange; if I say that the Power which was before the
   ages, by nature incorporeal, in dignity impassible, which exists with
   the Father and by the Father's side, on His right hand and in glory, if
   I say that this incorporeal nature suffers, will you not stop your
   ears? If you will not stop your ears when you hear this, I shall stop
   my heart. Can we do anything to an angel? Smite him with a sword? Or
   cut him in pieces? Why do I say to an angel? Can we to a soul? Does a
   soul receive a nail? A soul is neither cut nor burnt. Do you ask why?
   Because it was so created. Are His works impassible and He Himself
   passible? I do not reject the oeconomy; on the contrary, I welcome the
   ill-treatment. Christ died for us and was crucified. So it is written;
   so the nature admitted. I do not blot out the words nor do I blaspheme
   the nature. But this is not true. Very well, then let something truer
   be said. The teacher is a benefactor, never harsh, never an enemy,
   unless the pupil be headstrong. Have you anything good to say? My ears
   are gratefully open. Does any one want to quarrel? Let him quarrel at
   his leisure. Could the Jews crucify the Son of God and make the power
   itself a dead body? Can the living die? The death of this power is its
   failure. Even when we die, our body is left. But if we make that power
   a dead body we reduce it to non-existence. I am afraid you cannot hear.
   If the body die, the soul is separated from it and remains; but if the
   soul die, since it has no body, it altogether ceases to exist. A soul
   by dying altogether ceases to be. For the death of the immortals is a
   contradiction of their existence. Consider the alternative; for I do
   not dare even to mention it. We say these things as we understand them,
   but if any one is contentions, we lay down no law. But I know one
   thing, that every man must reap the fruit of his opinions. Each man
   comes to God and brings before Him what he has said and thought about
   Him. Do not suppose that God reads books, or is troubled by having to
   recollect what you said or who heard you: all is made manifest. The
   judge is on the throne. Paulus [1572] is brought before Him. Thou
   saidst I was a man; thou hast no life with Me. Thou knewest not Me; I
   know not thee.' Up comes another. Thou saidst I was one of the things
   that are created. [1573] Thou knewest not My dignity; I know not thee.'
   Up comes another. Thou saidst that I did not assume a body. Thou madest
   light of My grace. Thou shalt not share My immortality.' Up comes
   another. Thou saidst that I was not born of a Virgin to save the body
   of the Virgin; thou shalt not be saved.' Each one reaps the fruit of
   his opinions about the faith."

   You see the other sect of your teachers, in which you supposed that you
   had learnt the suffering of the Godhead of the only Begotten, abhors
   this blasphemy, preaches the impassibility of the Godhead, and quits
   the ranks of them who dare to attribute the passion to it.

   Eran.--Yes; I am astonished at the conflict, and I admire the man's
   sense and opinions.

   Orth.--Then, my good Sir, imitate the bees. As you flit in mental
   flight about the meads of the divine Scripture, among the fair flowers
   of these illustrious Fathers, build us in your heart the honey-comb of
   the faith. If haply you find anywhere herbage bitter and not fit to
   eat, like these fellows Apollinarius and Eusebius, but still not quite
   without something that may be meet for making honey, it is reasonable
   that you should sip the sweet and leave the poisonous behind, like bees
   who lighting often on baneful bushes leave all the deadly bane behind
   and gather all the good. We give you this advice, dear friend, in
   brotherly kindness. Receive it and you will do well. And if you hearken
   not we will say to you in the word of the apostle "We are pure." [1574]
   We have spoken, as the prophet says, what we have been commanded.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1413] Gen. ii. 17

   [1414] The vena cava, by which the blood returns to the heart. The
   physiology of Eranistes would be held in the main "orthodox" even now,
   and shews that Theodoret was well abreast of the science accepted
   before the discovery of the circulation of the blood.

   [1415] Matt. x. 28

   [1416] Matt. xxv. 41

   [1417] Matt. xix. 26; Mark x. 27

   [1418] Job x. 13, lxx.

   [1419] Job x. 9-12

   [1420] Job x. 13, lxx.

   [1421] Cf. note on Page 37. From the middle of the IIIrd century onward
   we find acceptation of the Pauline authorship. Among writers who quote
   the Ep. as St. Paul's are Cyril of Jerusalem, the two Gregories, Basil,
   and Chrysostom, as well as Theodoret.

   [1422] Heb. vi. 18

   [1423] 2 Tim. ii. 11-13

   [1424] John iii. 16

   [1425] Romans v. 10

   [1426] cf. note on page 155.

   [1427] Gen. xxvii. 1

   [1428] Amos vii. 12

   [1429] 1 Sam. ix. 18

   [1430] Heb. xii. 12, 13

   [1431] John x. 30

   [1432] John xiv. 9

   [1433] John i. 1

   [1434] John iv. 6

   [1435] Isaiah xl. 28, 29. cf. Sept.

   [1436] Isaiah xl. 31

   [1437] 1 Cor. viii. 6

   [1438] The text of John iv. 6 is kekopiakos ekathezeto, i.e., after
   being weary sate down. kopion ekathezeto would = "while being weary
   sate down." The force of the passage seems to be that Scripture states
   our Lord to have been wearied once,--not to be wearied now; though of
   course in classical Greek legei (historicè) auton kopian might mean
   "said that he was in a state of weariness."

   [1439] Rom. v. 10

   [1440] Acts xiii. 30

   [1441] Acts viii. 2

   [1442] Gen. xlix. 29

   [1443] Gen. xlix. 31

   [1444] "The Machpelah," always in Hebrew with the article htkphlh =
   "the double (cave)." It is interesting to contrast the heathen idea,
   that the shadow goes to Hades while the self is identified with the
   body, with the Christian belief, that the self lives while the body is
   buried e.g. Homer (Il. i. 4) says that while the famous "wrath" sent
   many heroes' souls to Hades, it made "them" a prey to dogs and birds.
   cf. xxiii. 72. "psuchai eidola kamonton."

   [1445] Acts xii. 2

   [1446] Matt. x. 28

   [1447] Vide note on Pages 37 and 220.

   [1448] Heb. ii. 11, 12, 13

   [1449] Heb. ii. 14, 15

   [1450] Rom. v. 15, 16, 17

   [1451] Rom. v. 18, 19

   [1452] 1 Cor. xv. 20, 21, 22

   [1453] Rom. xiii. 32

   [1454] Gen. xxii. 16

   [1455] John viii. 56

   [1456] The sacrifice of Isaac so far as his father's part in it is
   concerned is regarded as having actually taken place at the moment of
   his felt willingness to obey. In the interval of the journey to Mount
   Moriah Isaac is dead to his father.

   [1457] hupostasis

   [1458] prosopon

   [1459] It is to be noted that Theodoret thus apparently regards the
   divine image as consisting in the intelligence or logos. And in the
   implication that Isaac had the divine image, he expresses the
   Scriptural view that this was marred, not lost, by the fall.

   [1460] Heb. x. 1

   [1461] 1 Cor. x. 11

   [1462] Heb. xiii. 12

   [1463] Lev. xvi

   [1464] John iii. 14, 15

   [1465] John i. 29, 36

   [1466] Is. liii. 7

   [1467] 2 Cor. v. 21

   [1468] Gal. iii. 13

   [1469] Matt. xxv. 32

   [1470] Gal. iv. 24et seqq.

   [1471] Matt. xxviii. 6

   [1472] St. Thomas was buried at Edessa. Soc. iv. 18, Chrys. Hom. in
   Heb. 26.

   [1473] Vide p. 96.

   [1474] St. Stephen's remains were said to have been found at Jerusalem,
   and widely dispersed. cf. Dict. Christ. Ant. II. 1929.

   [1475] Matt. xxvii. 57-60

   [1476] Mark xv. 42-46

   [1477] Luke xxiii. 50 et Seqq.

   [1478] John xix. 38-42

   [1479] Matt. xxviii. 6

   [1480] Deut. x. 6

   [1481] 1 Sam. xxv. 1

   [1482] 1 Cor. xv. 3, 4

   [1483] 1 Cor. xv. 12, 13, 17

   [1484] 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22

   [1485] 1 Cor. xv. 21

   [1486] 1 Thess. iv. 14

   [1487] 1 Peter iv. 1

   [1488] Matt. i. 23

   [1489] 1 Tim. vi. 16

   [1490] Matt. x. 28

   [1491] Heb. x. 10

   [1492] John xii. 27

   [1493] John ii. 19

   [1494] John ii. 21, 22

   [1495] John vi. 21

   [1496] Matt. xvii. 26. Mark xiv. 22. Luke xxii. 19. 1 Cor. xi. 24

   [1497] Luke xxii. 19

   [1498] 1 Cor. xi. 24

   [1499] Matt. xxvi. 28 and Mark xiv. 24

   [1500] Luke xxiv. 39

   [1501] Acts ii. 29 et seqq. and Ps. xvi. 10

   [1502] Ez. xxxvii. 7 et seqq.

   [1503] 1 Cor. ii. 8

   [1504] Gal. i. 19

   [1505] 1 Cor. ii. 8

   [1506] John vi. 62

   [1507] John iii. 13

   [1508] Heb. xiii. 8

   [1509] 1 Cor. ii. 8

   [1510] John x. 33

   [1511] Vide note on page 72.

   [1512] See the Creed as published by the Council. p. 50.

   [1513] The quotation is not quite exact, "'Eucharistias kai prosphoras
   ouk apodechontai" being substituted for eucharistias kai proseuches
   apechontai. Bp. Lightfoot (Ap. Fath. II. ii. 307) notes, "the argument
   is much the same as Tertullian's against the Docetism of Marcion (adv.
   Marc. iv. 40), Acceptum panem et distributum discipulis corpus suum
   illum fecit. Hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura mei corporis.
   Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus, ceterum vacua
   res quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset.' The Eucharist
   implies the reality of Christ's flesh. To those who deny this reality
   it has no meaning at all; to them Christ's words of institution are
   false; it is in no sense the flesh of Christ." Cf. Iren. iv. 18, 5.

   [1514] 1 Cor. xv. 12

   [1515] 1 Cor. xv. 21

   [1516] Rom. xiv. 15

   [1517] Ephes. ii. 13. Observe slight differences.

   [1518] Gal. iii. 13 and Deut. xxi. 23

   [1519] 1 Cor. xv. 20

   [1520] Coloss. i. 18

   [1521] cf. Luke xxiv. 39. And for the application of these words to St.
   Thomas cf. page 210.

   [1522] The effusion of water and blood is now well known to have been a
   natural consequence of the "broken heart." On the rupture of the heart
   the blood fills the pericardium, and then coagulates. The wound of the
   lance gave passage to the collected blood and serum. cf. Dr. Stroud's
   "Physical Cause of the Death of Christ," first published in 1847.

   [1523] Prov. viii. 22, lxx.

   [1524] i.e. literally, try not to lay hold of me.

   [1525] John xx. 17

   [1526] Acts ii. 36

   [1527] John x. 18

   [1528] Rom. ix. 5

   [1529] Isaiah liii. 2, 3. Sept.

   [1530] Isaiah liii. 3. Sept.

   [1531] The quotation seems to be a confusion between Acts ii. 24, and
   Acts xiii. 29. Sic in Athan. Ed. Migne. II. 1030.

   [1532] John iii. 19

   [1533] But "after his resurrection" appears to qualify the statement
   "arose" as well as "appeared" in Matt. xxviii. 53

   [1534] Hebrews iv. 12

   [1535] Malachi iii. 6

   [1536] John x. 18

   [1537] Acts xiii. 30

   [1538] John ii. 19 and 21

   [1539] John v. 26

   [1540] Heb. ii. 14

   [1541] This passage is not found in the discourse on the Incarnation,
   but a similar passage occurs in the third oration against the Arians.
   Ed. Ben. p. 606.

   [1542] Ps. xvi. 10

   [1543] Epist. iii. Ad Paulinum.

   [1544] Matt. x. 28

   [1545] cf. note on p. 72.

   [1546] Acts ii. 36

   [1547] cf. Heb. v. 8

   [1548] Isaiah lxiii. 1

   [1549] John v. 24

   [1550] John xiv. 28

   [1551] Matt. xxvi. 39

   [1552] Acts ii. 36

   [1553] Acts ii. 24. The citation is loose.

   [1554] John ii. 19

   [1555] John v. 19

   [1556] 1 Cor. xv. 53. Observe the inaccuracy of the quotation.

   [1557] The Latin translator, as though observing the apparent
   impropriety of the epithet, here renders theion "sanctissimum."

   [1558] Ps. xvi. 10

   [1559] John v. 17

   [1560] John ii. 18

   [1561] John ii. 19

   [1562] John ii. 21

   [1563] cf. 2 Cor. iii. 6

   [1564] Matt. xxvi. 39

   [1565] Eusebius, bishop of Emesa (now Hems, where Heliogabalus received
   the purple, and Aurelian defeated Zenobia) c. 341-359 is called by
   Jerome "Signifer Arianæ factionis." Chron. sub ann. x Constantii.
   Theodoret also mentions writings of his against Apelles (Hær. fab. i.
   25.)

   [1566] John vi. 51

   [1567] Luke xxiii. 46

   [1568] Luke xxiii. 46

   [1569] Romans viii. 32

   [1570] John vi. 51

   [1571] Luke xxiii. 46

   [1572] i.e. Paul of Samosata.

   [1573] ton onton in the original; lit: of the things that are, which
   might have an orthodox interpretation, tho' strictly speaking there is
   no such thing as "to on;" there is only "ho on," i.e. God. But Schulze
   is no doubt right in explaining ton onton here to refer to created
   things.

   [1574] Acts xx. 26
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Demonstrations by Syllogisms.

   That God the Word is Immutable.

   1. We have confessed one substance of the Father, of the Son, and of
   the Holy Ghost, and have agreed that it is immutable. If then there is
   one substance of the Trinity, and it is immutable, then the only
   begotten Son, who is one person of the Trinity, is immutable. And, if
   He is immutable, He was not made flesh by mutation, but is said to have
   been made flesh after taking flesh.

   2. If God the Word was made flesh by undergoing mutation into flesh,
   then He is not immutable. For no one in his senses would call that
   which undergoes alteration immutable. And if He is mutable He is not of
   one substance with Him that begat Him. How indeed is it possible for
   one part of an uncompounded substance to be mutable and the other
   immutable? If we grant this we shall fall headlong into the blasphemy
   of Arius and Eunomius, who assert that the Son is of another substance.

   3. If the Lord is consubstantial with the Father, and the Son was made
   flesh by undergoing change into flesh, then the substance is at once
   mutable and immutable, which blasphemy if any one has the hardihood to
   maintain, he will no doubt make it worse by his blasphemy against the
   Father, for inasmuch as the Father shares the same substance, he will
   assuredly call Him mutable.

   4. It is written in the divine Scriptures that God the Word took flesh,
   and also a soul. And the most divine Evangelist says the Word was made
   flesh. [1575] We must therefore perforce do one of two things: either
   we must admit the mutation of the Word into flesh, and reject all
   divine Scripture, both Old and New, as teaching lies, or in obedience
   to the divine Scripture, we must confess the assumption of the flesh,
   banishing mutation from our thoughts, and piously regarding the word of
   the Evangelist. This latter we must do inasmuch as we confess the
   nature of God the Word to be immutable, and have countless testimonies
   to the assumption of the flesh.

   5. That which inhabits a tabernacle is distinct from the tabernacle
   which is inhabited. [1576] The Evangelist calls the flesh a tabernacle,
   and says that God the Word tabernacled therein. "The Word," he says,
   "was made flesh and dwelt among us." [1577] Now if He was made flesh by
   mutation, He did not dwell in flesh. But we have been taught that He
   dwelt in flesh; for the same Evangelist in another place calls His body
   a temple. [1578] We must therefore believe the Evangelist's explanation
   and interpretation of what to some seemed ambiguous.

   6. If when the Evangelist wrote "the Word was made flesh" he had added
   nothing which could remove the ambiguity, perhaps the controversy about
   the passage might have had some reasonable excuse, from the obscurity
   of the terms used. But since he immediately went on to say "and dwelt
   in us," the combatants contend to no purpose. The former clause is
   explained by the latter.

   7. The immutability of God the Word is plainly proclaimed by the most
   wise Evangelist, for after saying "the Word was made flesh and dwelt
   among us," he immediately adds, "And we beheld His glory, the glory as
   of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." [1579]
   But if, according to the foolish, He had undergone mutation into flesh,
   He would not have remained what He was, but if even when enveloped in
   the flesh He emitted the rays of His Father's nobility, it follows that
   the nature which He has is immutable, and it shines even in the body
   and sends abroad the brightness of the nature which is unseen. For that
   light nothing can dim. "For the light shineth in the darkness, and the
   darkness comprehendeth it not," [1580] as saith the very divine John.

   8. The illustrious Evangelist was desirous of explaining the glory of
   the only-begotten, but was unable to carry out his purpose. He
   therefore shews it by His fellowship with the Father. For he says He is
   of that nature; just as though any one to persons beholding Joseph sunk
   in a slavery inconsistent with his rank, and unaware of the splendour
   of his descent, were to point out that Jacob was his father, and his
   forefather Abraham. So in this sense the Evangelist said that when He
   dwelt among us He did not dim the glory of His nature, "For we beheld
   His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father." So if even
   when He was made flesh it was plain who He was, then He remained who he
   was, and did not undergo the mutation into flesh.

   9. We have confessed that God the Word took not a body only but also a
   soul. Why then did the divine Evangelist omit in this place mention of
   the soul and mention the flesh alone? Is it not plain that he exhibited
   the visible nature and by its means signified the nature united to it?
   For the mention of the soul is understood of course in that of the
   flesh. For when we hear the prophet saying "Let all flesh bless His
   holy name," [1581] we do not understand the prophet to be exhorting
   bodies of flesh without souls, but believe the whole to be summoned to
   give praise in the summoning of a part.

   10. The words "the Word was made flesh" are plainly indicative not of
   mutation, but of His unspeakable loving-kindness. For after the
   illustrious Evangelist had said "in the beginning was the Word, and the
   Word was with God and the Word was God," and had declared Him to be
   Creator of the visible and invisible, and had called Him life and true
   light, adding other similar expressions, and had spoken concerning the
   Godhead in such terms as human reason can take in and the language at
   its command can express, he went on "And the Word was made flesh," as
   though smitten with amazement and astounded at the boundless
   loving-kindness. His existence is eternal; He is God; He made all
   things; He is source of eternal life and of true light; and on account
   of the salvation of men He put about Him the tabernacle of flesh. And
   He was supposed to be only that which He appeared. So for this reason
   he did not even mention a soul but only the perishable and mortal
   flesh. Of the soul as being immortal he said nothing in order to
   exhibit the boundlessness of the kindness.

   11. The divine Apostle calls [1582] the Lord Christ seed of Abraham.
   But if this is true, as true it is, then God the Word was not changed
   into flesh, but took on Him the seed of Abraham, according to the
   teaching of the Apostle himself.

   12. God swore to David that of the fruit of his loins, according to the
   flesh, He would raise up the Christ, as the prophet [1583] said and as
   the great Peter interpreted. [1584] But if God the Word was called
   Christ after mutation into flesh, we shall nowhere find the truth in
   the oaths. Yet we have been taught that God cannot lie; nay rather is
   Himself the truth. Therefore God the Word did not undergo change into
   flesh, but in accordance with the promise, took firstfruits of David's
   seed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1575] John i. 14

   [1576] skenoun and skenoumenon

   [1577] John i. 14. The argument rather requires the rendering "dwelt in
   us," which is that of the Rheims Version. "In nobis qui caro sumus."
   Bengel. But see Alford in loc.

   [1578] John ii. 19

   [1579] John i. 14

   [1580] John i. 5

   [1581] Ps. cxlv. 21

   [1582] Hebrews ii. 16

   [1583] Psalm cxxxii. 11

   [1584] Acts ii. 30
     __________________________________________________________________

   Proofs that the Union was without Confusion.

   1. Those who believe that after the union there was one nature both of
   Godhead and of manhood, destroy by this reasoning the peculiarities of
   the natures; and their destruction involves denial of either nature.
   For the confusion of the united natures prevents us from recognising
   either that flesh is flesh or that God is God. But if even after the
   union the difference of the united natures is clear, it follows that
   there is no confusion and that the union is without confusion. And if
   this is confessed then the Master Christ is not one nature, but one Son
   shewing either nature unimpaired.

   2. We too assert the union, and ourselves confess that it took place at
   the conception; if then by the union the natures were mixed and
   confounded, how was the flesh after the birth not seen to possess any
   new quality, but exhibited the human character, preserved the
   dimensions of the babe, was wrapped in swaddling clothes, and sucked a
   mother's breast? And if all this did not come to pass in mere phantasy
   and seeming, then they admit of neither phantasy nor seeming; then what
   was seen was truly a body. And if this be granted then the natures were
   not confounded by the union, but each remained unimpaired.

   3. The authors of this patchwork and incongruous heresy at one time
   assert that God the Word was made flesh, and at another declare that
   the flesh underwent a change into nature of Godhead. Either statement
   is futile and vain and full of falsehood, for if God the Word, as they
   argue, was made flesh, why then do they call Him God, and this alone,
   and refuse to name Him man as well, and find great fault with us who in
   addition to confessing Him as God also call Him man? But if the flesh
   was changed into the nature of Godhead, wherefore do they substitute
   the antitypes of the body? For the type is superfluous when the reality
   is destroyed.

   4. An incorporeal nature is not corporeally circumcised, but the word
   corporeally is added on account of the spiritual circumcision of the
   heart; so then the circumcision is of a body; but the Master Christ is
   circumcised after the union. And if this is granted then the argument
   of the confusion is confuted.

   5. We have learnt that the Saviour Christ hungered and thirsted, and we
   have believed that this was so really and not in seeming, but such
   conditions belong not to a bodiless nature but to a body. The Master
   Christ then had a body which before the resurrection was affected
   according to its nature. And to this the divine Apostle bears testimony
   when he says "For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched
   with the feeling of our infirmities but was in all points tempted like
   as we are yet without sin." [1585] For the sin is not of the nature but
   of the evil will. [1586]

   6. Of the divine nature the prophet David says, "Behold He that keepeth
   Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep." [1587] But the narrative of
   the Evangelist describes the Master Christ as sleeping in the boat. Now
   not sleeping and being asleep are two contrary ideas, so the prophet
   contradicts the Gospels if, as they argue, the Master Christ was God
   alone. There is no contradiction, for both prophecies and gospels flow
   from one and the same spirit. The Master Christ therefore had a body,
   akin to all other bodies, affected by the need of sleep. So the
   argument for the confusion is proved a fable.

   7. Of the divine nature the prophet Isaiah said, "He shall neither be
   hungry nor weary" [1588] and so on. But the Evangelist says "Jesus
   being weary with his journey sat thus on the well;" [1589] and "shall
   not be weary" is contrary to "being weary." Therefore the prophecy is
   contrary to the narrative of the gospels. But they are not contrary,
   for both are of one God. Not being weary is of the uncircumscribed
   nature which fills all things. But moving from place to place is of the
   circumscribed nature; and when that which moves is constrained to
   travel it is subject to the weariness of the wayfarer. Therefore what
   walked and was weary was a body, for the union did not confound the
   natures.

   8. To the divine Paul when shut up in prison the Master Christ said "Be
   not afraid Paul" [1590] and so on. But the same Christ, who drove away
   Paul's fear, Himself so feared, as testifies the blessed Luke that He
   sweated from all His body drops of blood, and with them sprinkled all
   the ground about His body, and was strengthened by angelic succour,
   [1591] and these statements are opposed to one another, for how can
   fearing be other than contrary to driving away fear? Yet they are not
   contrary. For the same Christ is by nature God and man; as God He
   strengthens them that need consolation; as man He receives consolation
   through an angel. And although the Godhead and the Spirit were present
   as an anointing, the body and the soul were not then supported either
   by the Godhead united to them or by the Holy Ghost, but this service
   was entrusted to an angel in order to exhibit the infirmity both of the
   soul and of the body and that through the infirmity might be seen the
   natures of the infirm. Now these things plainly happened by the
   permission of the divine nature, that, among them that were to live in
   future times, believers in the assumption of the soul and of the body
   might be vindicated by these demonstrations, and their opponents by
   plain proof convicted. If then the union was effected by the
   conception, and, as they argue, made both natures one, how could the
   properties of the natures continue unimpaired, the soul agonize, and
   the body sweat so as to sweat bloody drops from excess of fear? But if
   the one is natural to the body and the other to the soul, then the
   union did not effect one nature of flesh and Godhead, but one Son
   appeared shewing forth in Himself both the human and the divine.

   9. Should they say that after the resurrection the body underwent
   mutation into Godhead they may properly be answered thus. Even after
   the resurrection the body was seen circumscribed with hands and feet
   and all the body's parts; it was tangible and visible; it had wounds
   and scars, as it had before the resurrection. One then of two
   alternatives must be maintained. Either these parts must be attributed
   to the divine nature, if the body when changed into the divine nature
   had these parts; or on the other hand it must be confessed that the
   body remained within the bounds of its own nature. Now the divine
   nature is simple and incomposite, but the body is composite and divided
   into many parts; therefore it was not changed into the nature of
   Godhead, but even after the resurrection though immortal, incorruptible
   and full of divine glory, it remains a body with its own
   circumscription.

   10. To the unbelieving apostles the Lord after His resurrection shewed
   His hands, His feet, and the prints of the nails; then further to teach
   them that what they saw was not a vision He added "a spirit hath not
   flesh and bones as ye see me have." [1592] Therefore the body was not
   changed into spirit it was flesh and bones and hands and feet.
   Consequently even after the resurrection the body remained a body.

   11. The divine nature is invisible, but the thrice blessed Stephen said
   that he saw the Lord, [1593] so even after the resurrection the Lord's
   body is a body, and it was seen by the victorious Stephen, since the
   divine nature cannot be seen.

   12. If all mankind shall see the Son of man coming on the clouds of
   heaven, according to the Lord's own words, [1594] and He said to Moses
   "No man shall see me and live," [1595] and both are true, then He will
   come with the body with which He ascended into heaven. For that body is
   visible, and of this the angel spoke to the Apostles "This same Jesus
   which is taken up from you into Heaven shall so come in like manner as
   ye have seen Him go into Heaven." [1596] If this is true, as true it
   is, then there is not one nature of flesh and Godhead, but the union is
   without confusion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1585] Hebrews iv. 15

   [1586] cf. note on page 164.

   [1587] Psalm cxxi. 4

   [1588] Isaiah xl. 28, lxx.

   [1589] John iv. 6

   [1590] When Paul was brought into the castle the Lord stood by him and
   said, "Be of good cheer Paul" (Acts xxiii. 11.) "Fear not Paul" was
   said when he was being exceedingly tossed in the tempest (Acts xxvii.
   24).

   [1591] Luke xxii. 44

   [1592] Luke xxiv. 39

   [1593] Acts vii. 55

   [1594] Matt. xxvi. 64

   [1595] Exodus xxxiii. 20

   [1596] Acts i. 11
     __________________________________________________________________

   Proof that the Divinity of the Saviour is Impassible.

   1. Alike by the divine Scripture and by the holy Fathers assembled at
   Nicæa we have been taught to confess that the Son is of one substance
   with God the Father. The impassibility of the Father is also taught by
   the nature and proclaimed by the divine Scripture. We shall then
   further confess the Son to be impassible, for this definition is
   enforced by the identity of substance. Whenever then we hear the divine
   Scripture proclaiming the cross and the death of the Master Christ we
   attribute the passion to the flesh, for in no wise is the Godhead,
   being by nature impassible, capable of suffering.

   2. "All things that the Father hath are mine" [1597] says the Master
   Christ, and one out of all is impassibility. If therefore as God He is
   impassible, He suffered as man. For the divine nature does not undergo
   suffering.

   3. The Lord said "the bread which I will give is my flesh which I will
   give for the life of the world," [1598] and again "I am the good
   shepherd and know my sheep and am known of mine...and I lay down my
   life for the sheep." [1599] So body and soul are both given by the good
   shepherd for the sheep who have soul and body.

   4. The nature of men is compounded of body and soul. But it sinned and
   stood in need of a sacrifice free from every spot. So the Creator took
   a body and a soul, and keeping them clean from the stains of sin for
   men's bodies gave His body and for their souls His soul. If this is
   true, and true it is, for these are words of truth itself, then wild
   and blasphemous are they who ascribe passion to the divine nature.

   5. The blessed Paul called the Christ "the first born of the dead;"
   [1600] and I suppose the first born has the same nature as they of whom
   He is called first born. As man then He is first born of the dead, for
   He first destroyed the pangs of death and gave to all the sweet hope of
   another life. As He rose so He suffered. As man then He suffered but as
   awful God He remained impassible.

   6. The divine Apostle calls our Saviour Christ "the firstfruits of them
   that slept," [1601] but the firstfruits are related to the whole
   whereof they are firstfruits. He is not therefore called firstfruits as
   God, for what relationship is there between Godhead and manhood? The
   former is an immortal nature, the latter mortal. Such is the nature of
   them that sleep, of whom Christ is called firstfruits. To this nature
   belong death and resurrection, and in its resurrection we have a proof
   of the general resurrection.

   7. When the Master Christ wished to persuade the doubting Apostles that
   He had destroyed death and risen, He shewed them parts of His body, His
   side, His hands, His feet and the marks of the passion preserved
   therein. This body then rose, and this, I ween, was shown to the
   disbelievers. What rose is what was buried, and what was buried is what
   had died, and what had died is of course what was nailed to the cross.
   So the divine nature united to the body remained impassible.

   8. They who describe the flesh of the Lord as giver of life make life
   itself mortal by their words. They ought to have seen that it was giver
   of life through the life united to it. But if according to their
   argument the life is mortal, how could the flesh being itself by nature
   mortal, and made life-giving through the life, remain life-giving?

   9. God the Word is by nature immortal, and the flesh by nature mortal,
   but after the passion by union with the Word the flesh itself became
   immortal. How then is it not absurd to say that the giver of such
   immortality shared death?

   10. They who maintain that God the Word suffered in the flesh should be
   asked the meaning of what they say, and should they have the hardihood
   to reply that when the body was pierced with nails the divine nature
   was sensible of pain, let them learn that the divine nature did not
   fill the part of a soul. God the Word had assumed a soul with the body.
   Should they reject this argument as blasphemous, and should they assert
   that the flesh suffered by nature, and that God the Word made the
   passion His own as of His own flesh, let them not propound puzzling and
   murky phrases, but let them clearly propound the meaning of the ill
   sounding phrase. They will have all those who wish to follow the divine
   Scripture as their supporters in this interpretation.

   11. The divine Peter in his Catholic Epistle says that Christ suffered
   in the flesh. [1602] But he who hears that Christ suffered does not
   understand God the Word incorporeal, but incarnate. The name of Christ
   indicates both natures; but the word "flesh" connected with the passion
   signifies not that both, but that one of the two, suffered. For he that
   hears that Christ suffered in the flesh thinks of Him as impassible in
   that He was God, and attributes the passion to the flesh alone. For
   just as when we hear him saying that God had sworn to David of the
   fruit of his loins according to the flesh to raise up the Christ, we do
   not say that God the Word derived His origin from David, but that the
   flesh which God the Word took was akin to David, so must he who hears
   that Christ suffered in the flesh, recognise that the passion belongs
   to the flesh, and confess the impassibility of the Godhead.

   12. When on the cross the Lord Christ said, "Father into Thy hands I
   commend my spirit," [1603] this spirit is said by the Arians and the
   Eunomians to be the Godhead of the only-begotten, for they hold that
   the body which He took was without a soul, but the heralds of the truth
   say that the soul was so called and they base their opinion on the
   following passages. The right wise Evangelist immediately adds "And
   having said thus He gave up the ghost." [1604] So says Luke, and the
   blessed Mark similarly adds "He gave up the ghost." [1605] The divine
   Matthew writes, "yielded up the Ghost," [1606] and the divine John,
   "gave up the Ghost." [1607] All speak according to the usage of men,
   for we are accustomed to use all these expressions about those who die;
   none of them conveys any meaning of Godhead, but they all signify the
   soul, and if any one were to receive the Arian sense of the passage
   none the less even thus will it shew the immortality of the divine
   nature. For Christ commended it to the Father. He did not yield it to
   death. If then they that deny the assumption of the soul, and maintain
   God the Word to be a creature, and assert that He was in the body in
   place of a soul, deny that He was delivered to death, how can they
   obtain pardon who while they confess one substance of the Trinity, and
   leave the soul in its own immortality, impudently dare to say that God
   the Word of one substance with the Father tasted death?

   13. If Christ is both God and man, as the divine Scripture teaches, and
   the illustrious Fathers persistently preached, then He suffered as man,
   but as God remained impassible.

   14. If they acknowledge the assumption of the flesh, and declare it to
   be passible before the resurrection, and preach that the nature of the
   Godhead is impassible, why, leaving the passible nature, do they
   attribute the passion to the impassible?

   15. If our Lord and Saviour nailed the handwriting to the cross, as
   says the divine Apostle, [1608] He then nailed the body, for on his
   body every man like letters marks the prints of his sins, wherefore on
   behalf of sinners He gave up the body that was free from all sin.

   16. When we say that the body or the flesh or the manhood suffered, we
   do not separate the divine nature, for as it was united to one
   hungering, thirsting, aweary, even asleep, and undergoing the passion,
   itself affected by none of these but permitting the human nature to be
   affected in its own way, so it was conjoined to it even when crucified,
   and permitted the completion of the passion, that by the passion it
   might destroy death; not indeed receiving pain from the passion, but
   making the passion its own, as of its own temple, and of the flesh
   united to it, on account of which flesh also the faithful are called
   members of Christ, and He Himself is styled the head of them that
   believed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1597] John xvi. 15

   [1598] John vi. 51

   [1599] John x. 14, 15

   [1600] Coloss. i. 18

   [1601] 1 Cor. xv. 20

   [1602] 1 Pet. i. 1

   [1603] Luke xxiii. 46

   [1604] Luke xxiii. 46

   [1605] Mark xv. 39

   [1606] Matt. xxvii. 50

   [1607] John xix. 30

   [1608] Col. ii. 14
