# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume VII.   Cyril of Jerusalem, Gregory Nazianzen
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume VII
# father: gregory_nazianzen
# work: Panegyric on St. Athanasius (Oration XXI)
# clavis: CPG-3010.21, BHG-186
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Schaff/Browne/Swallow English extract (Oration XXI).

   Oration XXI.

   On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

   The reference in §22 to "the Council which sat first at Seleucia...and
   afterwards at this mighty city," leaves no room for doubting that the
   Oration was delivered at Constantinople.  Further local colour is found
   in the allusions of §5.  We are assured by the panegyric on S. Cyprian
   (Orat. xxiv. 1) that it was already the custom of the Church of
   Constantinople to observe annual festivals in honour of the Saints:
   and at present two days are kept by the Eastern Church, viz., Jan.
   18th, as the day of the actual death of S. Athanasius, and May 2d, in
   memory of the translation of his remains to the church of S. Sophia at
   Constantinople.  Probably, therefore, this Oration was delivered on the
   former day, on which Assemani holds that S. Athanasius died.  Papebroke
   and (with some hesitation) Dr. Bright pronounce in favour of May 2d.
   Tillemont supposes that a.d. 379 is the year of its delivery; in which
   case it must have been very shortly after S. Gregory's arrival in the
   city.  Since, however, no allusion is made to this, it seems, on the
   whole, more likely that it should be assigned to a.d. 380.  The sermon
   takes high rank, even among S. Gregory's discourses, as the model of an
   ecclesiastical panegyric.  It lacks, however, the charm of personal
   affection and intimate acquaintance with the inner life, which is
   characteristic of the orations concerned with his own relatives and
   friends.

   1.  In praising Athanasius, I shall be praising virtue.  To speak of
   him and to praise virtue are identical, because he had, or, to speak
   more truly, has embraced virtue in its entirety.  For all who have
   lived according to God still live unto God, though they have departed
   hence.  For this reason, God is called the God of Abraham, Isaac and
   Jacob, since He is the God, not of the dead, but of the living. [3272]
     Again, in praising virtue, I shall be praising God, who gives virtue
   to men and lifts them up, or lifts them up again, to Himself by the
   enlightenment which is akin to Himself. [3273]   For many and great as
   are our blessings--none can say how many and how great--which we have
   and shall have from God, this is the greatest and kindliest of all, our
   inclination and relationship to Him.  For God is to intelligible things
   what the sun is to the things of sense.  The one lightens the visible,
   the other the invisible, world.  The one makes our bodily eyes to see
   the sun, the other makes our intellectual natures to see God.  And, as
   that, which bestows on the things which see and are seen the power of
   seeing and being seen, is itself the most beautiful of visible things;
   so God, who creates, for those who think, and that which is thought of,
   the power of thinking and being thought of, is Himself the highest of
   the objects of thought, in Whom every desire finds its bourne, beyond
   Whom it can no further go.  For not even the most philosophic, the most
   piercing, the most curious intellect has, or can ever have, a more
   exalted object.  For this is the utmost of things desirable, and they
   who arrive at it find an entire rest from speculation.

   2.  Whoever has been permitted to escape by reason and contemplation
   from matter and this fleshly cloud or veil (whichever it should be
   called) and to hold communion with God, and be associated, as far as
   man's nature can attain, with the purest Light, blessed is he, both
   from his ascent from hence, and for his deification there, which is
   conferred by true philosophy, and by rising superior to the dualism of
   matter, through the unity which is perceived in the Trinity.  And
   whosoever has been depraved by being knit to the flesh, and so far
   oppressed by the clay that he cannot look at the rays of truth, nor
   rise above things below, though he is born from above, and called to
   things above, I hold him to be miserable in his blindness, even though
   he may abound in things of this world; and all the more, because he is
   the sport of his abundance, and is persuaded by it that something else
   is beautiful instead of that which is really beautiful, reaping, as the
   poor fruit of his poor opinion, the sentence of darkness, or the seeing
   Him to be fire, Whom he did not recognize as light.

   3.  Such has been the philosophy of few, both nowadays and of old--for
   few are the men of God, though all are His handiwork,--among lawgivers,
   generals, priests, Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, shepherds,
   teachers, and all the spiritual host and band--and, among them all, of
   him whom now we praise.  And whom do I mean by these?  Men like Enoch,
   Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve Patriarchs, Moses, Aaron,
   Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, David, to some extent Solomon, Elijah,
   Elisha, the Prophets before the captivity, those after the captivity,
   and, though last in order, first in truth, those who were concerned
   with Christ's Incarnation or taking of our nature, the lamp [3274]
   before the Light, the voice before the Word, the mediator before the
   Mediator, the mediator between the old covenant and the new, the famous
   John, the disciples of Christ, those after Christ, who were set over
   the people, or illustrious in word, or conspicuous for miracles, or
   made perfect through their blood.

   4.  With some of these Athanasius vied, by some he was slightly
   excelled, and others, if it is not bold to say so, he surpassed:  some
   he made his models in mental power, others in activity, others in
   meekness, others in zeal, others in dangers, others in most respects,
   others in all, gathering from one and another various forms of beauty
   (like men who paint figures of ideal excellence), and combining them in
   his single soul, he made one perfect form of virtue out of all,
   excelling in action men of intellectual capacity, in intellect men of
   action; or, if you will, surpassing in intellect men renowned for
   intellect, in action those of the greatest active power; outstripping
   those who had moderate reputation in both respects, by his eminence in
   either, and those who stood highest in one or other, by his powers in
   both; and, if it is a great thing for those who have received an
   example, so to use it as to attach themselves to virtue, he has no
   inferior title to fame, who for our advantage has set an example to
   those who come after him.

   5.  To speak of and admire him fully, would perhaps be too long a task
   for the present purpose of my discourse, and would take the form of a
   history rather than of a panegyric:  a history which it has been the
   object of my desires to commit to writing for the pleasure and
   instruction of posterity, as he himself wrote the life of the divine
   Antony, [3275] and set forth, in the form of a narrative, the laws of
   the monastic life.  Accordingly, after entering into a few of the many
   details of his history, such as memory suggests at the moment as most
   noteworthy, in order both to satisfy my own longing and fulfil the duty
   which befits the festival, we will leave the many others to those who
   know them.  For indeed, it is neither pious nor safe, while the lives
   of the ungodly are honoured by recollection, to pass by in silence
   those who have lived piously, especially in a city which could hardly
   be saved by many examples of virtue, making sport, as it does, of
   Divine things, no less than of the horse-race and the theatre.

   6.  He was brought up, from the first, in religious habits and
   practices, after a brief study of literature and philosophy, so that he
   might not be utterly unskilled in such subjects, or ignorant of matters
   which he had determined to despise.  For his generous and eager soul
   could not brook being occupied in vanities, like unskilled athletes,
   who beat the air instead of their antagonists and lose the prize.  From
   meditating on every book of the Old and New Testament, with a depth
   such as none else has applied even to one of them, he grew rich in
   contemplation, rich in splendour of life, combining them in wondrous
   sort by that golden bond which few can weave; using life as the guide
   of contemplation, contemplation as the seal of life.  For the fear of
   the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and, so to say, its first swathing
   band; but, when wisdom has burst the bonds of fear and risen up to
   love, it makes us friends of God, and sons instead of bondsmen.

   7.  Thus brought up and trained, as even now those should be who are to
   preside over the people, and take the direction of the mighty body of
   Christ, [3276] according to the will and foreknowledge of God, which
   lays long before the foundations of great deeds, he was invested with
   this important ministry, and made one of those who draw near to the God
   Who draws near to us, and deemed worthy of the holy office and rank,
   and, after passing through the entire series of orders, he was (to make
   my story short) entrusted with the chief rule over the people, in other
   words, the charge of the whole world:  nor can I say whether he
   received the priesthood as the reward of virtue, or to be the fountain
   and life of the Church.  For she, like Ishmael, [3277] fainting from
   her thirst for the truth, needed to be given to drink, or, like Elijah,
   [3278] to be refreshed from the brook, when the land was parched by
   drought; and, when but faintly breathing, to be restored to life and
   left as a seed to Israel, [3279] that we might not become like Sodom
   and Gomorrah, [3280] whose destruction by the rain of fire and
   brimstone is only more notorious than their wickedness.  Therefore,
   when we were cast down, a horn of salvation was raised up for us,
   [3281] and a chief corner stone, [3282] knitting us to itself and to
   one another, was laid in due season, or a fire [3283] to purify our
   base and evil matter, [3284] or a farmer's fan [3285] to winnow the
   light from the weighty in doctrine, or a sword to cut out the roots of
   wickedness; and so the Word finds him as his own ally, and the Spirit
   takes possession of one who will breathe on His behalf.

   8.  Thus, and for these reasons, by the vote of the whole people, not
   in the evil fashion which has since prevailed, nor by means of
   bloodshed and oppression, but in an apostolic and spiritual manner, he
   is led up to the throne [3286] of Saint Mark, to succeed him in piety,
   no less than in office; in the latter indeed at a great distance from
   him, in the former, which is the genuine right of succession, following
   him closely.  For unity in doctrine deserves unity in office; and a
   rival teacher sets up a rival throne; the one is a successor in
   reality, the other but in name.  For it is not the intruder, but he
   whose rights are intruded upon, who is the successor, not the
   lawbreaker, but the lawfully appointed, not the man of contrary
   opinions, but the man of the same faith; if this is not what we mean by
   successor, he succeeds in the same sense as disease to health, darkness
   to light, storm to calm, and frenzy to sound sense.

   9.  The duties of his office he discharged in the same spirit as that
   in which he had been preferred to it.  For he did not at once, after
   taking possession of his throne, like men who have unexpectedly seized
   upon some sovereignty or inheritance, grow insolent from intoxication.
   This is the conduct of illegitimate and intrusive priests, who are
   unworthy of their vocation; whose preparation for the priesthood has
   cost them nothing, who have endured no inconvenience for the sake of
   virtue, who only begin to study religion when appointed to teach it,
   and undertake the cleansing of others before being cleansed themselves;
   yesterday sacrilegious, to-day sacerdotal; yesterday excluded from the
   sanctuary, [3287] to-day its officiants; proficient in vice, novices in
   piety; the product of the favour of man, not of the grace of the
   Spirit; who, having run through the whole gamut of violence, at last
   tyrannize over even piety; who, instead of gaining credit for their
   office by their character, need for their character the credit of their
   office, thus subverting the due relation between them; who ought to
   offer more sacrifices [3288] for themselves than for the ignorances of
   the people; [3289] who inevitably fall into one of two errors, either,
   from their own need of indulgence, being excessively indulgent, and so
   even teaching, instead of checking, vice, or cloaking their own sins
   under the harshness of their rule.  Both these extremes he avoided; he
   was sublime in action, lowly in mind; inaccessible in virtue, most
   accessible in intercourse; gentle, free from anger, sympathetic, sweet
   in words, sweeter in disposition; angelic in appearance, more angelic
   in mind; calm in rebuke, persuasive in praise, without spoiling the
   good effect of either by excess, but rebuking with the tenderness of a
   father, praising with the dignity of a ruler, his tenderness was not
   dissipated, nor his severity sour; for the one was reasonable, the
   other prudent, and both truly wise; his disposition sufficed for the
   training of his spiritual children, with very little need of words; his
   words with very little need of the rod, [3290] and his moderate use of
   the rod with still less for the knife.

   10.  But why should I paint for you the portrait of the man?  St. Paul
   [3291] has sketched him by anticipation.  This he does, when he sings
   the praises of the great High-priest, who hath passed through the
   heavens [3292] (for I will venture to say even this, since Scripture
   [3293] can call those who live according to Christ by the name of
   Christs): [3294]   and again when by the rules in his letter to
   Timothy, [3295] he gives a model for future Bishops:  for if you will
   apply the law as a test to him who deserves these praises, you will
   clearly perceive his perfect exactness.  Come then to aid me in my
   panegyric; for I am labouring heavily in my speech, and though I desire
   to pass by point after point, they seize upon me one after another, and
   I can find no surpassing excellence in a form which is in all respects
   well proportioned and beautiful; for each as it occurs to me seems
   fairer than the rest and so takes by storm my speech.  Come then I
   pray, you who have been his admirers and witnesses, divide among
   yourselves his excellences, contend bravely with one another, men and
   women alike, young men and maidens, old men and children, priests and
   people, solitaries and cenobites, [3296] men of simple or of exact
   life, contemplatives or practically minded.  Let one praise him in his
   fastings and prayers as if he had been disembodied and immaterial,
   another his unweariedness and zeal for vigils and psalmody, another his
   patronage of the needy, another his dauntlessness towards the powerful,
   or his condescension to the lowly.  Let the virgins celebrate the
   friend of the Bridegroom; [3297] those under the yoke [3298] their
   restrainer, hermits him who lent wings to their course, cenobites their
   lawgiver, simple folk their guide, contemplatives the divine, the
   joyous their bridle, the unfortunate their consolation, the
   hoary-headed their staff, youths their instructor, the poor their
   resource, the wealthy their steward.  Even the widows will, methinks,
   praise their protector, even the orphans their father, even the poor
   their benefactor, strangers their entertainer, brethren the man of
   brotherly love, the sick their physician, in whatever sickness or
   treatment you will, the healthy the guard of health, yea all men him
   who made himself all things to all men that he might gain almost, if
   not quite, all.

   11.  On these grounds, as I have said, I leave others, who have leisure
   to admire the minor details of his character, to admire and extol him.
   I call them minor details only in comparing him and his character with
   his own standard, for that which hath been made glorious hath not been
   made glorious, even though it be exceeding splendid by reason of the
   glory that surpasseth, [3299] as we are told; for indeed the minor
   points of his excellence would suffice to win celebrity for others.
   But since it would be intolerable for me to leave the word and serve
   [3300] less important details, I must turn to that which is his chief
   characteristic; and God alone, on Whose behalf I am speaking, can
   enable me to say anything worthy of a soul so noble and so mighty in
   the word.

   12.  In the palmy days of the Church, when all was well, the present
   elaborate, far-fetched and artificial treatment of Theology had not
   made its way into the schools of divinity, but playing with pebbles
   which deceive the eye by the quickness of their changes, or dancing
   before an audience with varied and effeminate contortions, were looked
   upon as all one with speaking or hearing of God in a way unusual or
   frivolous.  But since the Sextuses [3301] and Pyrrhos, and the
   antithetic style, like a dire and malignant disease, have infected our
   churches, and babbling is reputed culture, and, as the book of the Acts
   [3302] says of the Athenians, we spend our time in nothing else but
   either to tell or to hear some new thing.  O what Jeremiah [3303] will
   bewail our confusion and blind madness; he alone could utter
   lamentations befitting our misfortunes.

   13.  The beginning of this madness was Arius (whose name is derived
   from frenzy [3304] ), who paid the penalty of his unbridled tongue by
   his death in a profane spot, [3305] brought about by prayer not by
   disease, when he like Judas [3306] burst asunder [3307] for his similar
   treachery to the Word.  Then others, catching the infection, organized
   an art of impiety, and, confining Deity to the Unbegotten, expelled
   from Deity not only the Begotten, but also the Proceeding one, and
   honoured the Trinity with communion in name [3308] alone, or even
   refused to retain this for it.  Not so that blessed one, Who was indeed
   a man of God and a mighty trumpet of truth:  but being aware that to
   contract [3309] the Three Persons to a numerical Unity is heretical,
   and the innovation of Sabellius, who first devised a contraction of
   Deity; and that to sever the Three Persons by a distinction of nature,
   is an unnatural mutilation of Deity; he both happily preserved the
   Unity, which belongs to the Godhead, and religiously taught the
   Trinity, which refers [3310] to Personality, neither confounding the
   Three Persons in the Unity, nor dividing the Substance among the Three
   Persons, but abiding within the bounds of piety, by avoiding excessive
   inclination or opposition to either side.

   14.  And therefore, first in the holy Synod of Nicæa, [3311] the
   gathering of the three hundred and eighteen chosen men, united by the
   Holy Ghost, as far as in him lay, he stayed the disease.  Though not
   yet ranked among the Bishops, he held the first rank among the members
   of the Council, for preference was given to virtue just as much as to
   office.  Afterwards, when the flame had been fanned by the blasts of
   the evil one, and had spread very widely (hence came the tragedies of
   which almost the whole earth and sea are full), the fight raged
   fiercely around him who was the noble champion of the Word.  For the
   assault is hottest upon the point of resistance, while various dangers
   surround it on every side:  for impiety is skilful in designing evils,
   and excessively daring in taking them in hand:  and how would they
   spare men, who had not spared the Godhead?  Yet one of the assaults was
   the most dangerous of all:  and I myself contribute somewhat to this
   scene; yea, let me plead for the innocence of my dear fatherland, for
   the wickedness was not due to the land that bore them, but to the men
   who undertook it.  For holy indeed is that land, and everywhere noted
   for its piety, but these men are unworthy of the Church which bore
   them, and ye have heard of a briar growing in a vine; [3312] and the
   traitor [3313] was Judas, one of the disciples.

   15.  There are some who do not excuse even my namesake [3314] from
   blame; who, living at Alexandria at the time for the sake of culture,
   although he had been most kindly treated by him, as if the dearest of
   his children, and received his special confidence, yet joined in the
   revolutionary plot against his father and patron:  for, though others
   took the active part in it, the hand of Absalom [3315] was with them,
   as the saying goes.  If any of you had heard of the hand which was
   produced by fraud against the Saint, and the corpse [3316] of the
   living man, and the unjust banishment, he knows what I mean.  But this
   I will gladly forget.  For on doubtful points, I am disposed to think
   we ought to incline to the charitable side, and acquit rather than
   condemn the accused.  For a bad man would speedily condemn even a good
   man, while a good man would not be ready to condemn even a bad one.
   For one who is not ready to do ill, is not inclined even to suspect
   it.  I come now to what is matter of fact, not of report, what is
   vouched for as truth instead of unverified suspicion.

   16.  There was a monster [3317] from Cappadocia, born on our farthest
   confines, of low birth, and lower mind, whose blood was not perfectly
   free, but mongrel, as we know that of mules to be; at first, dependent
   on the table of others, whose price was a barley cake, who had learnt
   to say and do everything with an eye to his stomach, and, at last,
   after sneaking into public life, and filling its lowest offices, such
   as that of contractor for swine's flesh, the soldiers' rations, and
   then having proved himself a scoundrel for the sake of greed in this
   public trust, and been stripped to the skin, contrived to escape, and
   after passing, as exiles do, from country to country and city to city,
   last of all, in an evil hour for the Christian community, like one of
   the plagues of Egypt, he reached Alexandria.  There, his wanderings
   being stayed, he began his villany.  Good for nothing in all other
   respects, without culture, without fluency in conversation, without
   even the form and pretence of reverence, his skill in working villany
   and confusion was unequalled.

   17.  His acts of insolence towards the saint you all know in full
   detail.  Often were the righteous given into the hands of the wicked,
   [3318] not that the latter might be honoured, but that the former might
   be tested:  and though the wicked come, as it is written, to an awful
   death, [3319] nevertheless for the present the godly are a laughing
   stock, while the goodness of God and the great treasuries of what is in
   store for each of them hereafter are concealed.  Then indeed word and
   deed and thought will be weighed in the just balances of God, as He
   arises to judge the earth, [3320] gathering together counsel and works,
   and revealing what He had kept sealed up. [3321]   Of this let the
   words and sufferings of Job convince thee, who was a truthful,
   blameless, just, godfearing man, with all those other qualities which
   are testified of him, and yet was smitten with such a succession of
   remarkable visitations, at the hands of him who begged for power over
   him, that, although many have often suffered in the whole course of
   time, and some even have, as is probable, been grievously afflicted,
   yet none can be compared with him in misfortunes.  For he not only
   suffered, without being allowed space to mourn for his losses in their
   rapid succession, the loss of his money, his possessions, his large and
   fair family, blessings for which all men care; but was at last smitten
   with an incurable disease horrible to look upon, and, to crown his
   misfortunes, had a wife whose only comfort was evil counsel.  For his
   surpassing troubles were those of his soul added to those of the body.
   [3322]   He had also among his friends truly miserable comforters,
   [3323] as he calls them, who could not help him.  For when they saw his
   suffering, in ignorance of its hidden meaning, they supposed his
   disaster to be the punishment of vice and not the touchstone of
   virtue.  And they not only thought this, but were not even ashamed to
   reproach him with his lot, [3324] at a time when, even if he had been
   suffering for vice, they ought to have treated his grief with words of
   consolation.

   18.  Such was the lot of Job:  such at first sight his history.  In
   reality it was a contest between virtue and envy: [3325]   the one
   straining every nerve to overcome the good, the other enduring
   everything, that it might abide unsubdued; the one striving to smooth
   the way for vice, by means of the chastisement of the upright, the
   other to retain its hold upon the good, even if they do exceed others
   in misfortunes.  What then of Him who answered Job out of the whirlwind
   and cloud, [3326] Who is slow to chastise and swift to help, Who
   suffers not utterly the rod of the wicked to come into the lot of the
   righteous, lest the righteous should learn iniquity? [3327]   At the
   end of the contests He declares the victory of the athlete in a
   splendid proclamation and lays bare the secret of his calamities,
   saying:  "Thinkest thou that I have dealt with thee for any other
   purpose than the manifestation of thy righteousness?" [3328]   This is
   the balm for his wounds, this is the crown of the contest, this the
   reward for his patience.  For perhaps his subsequent prosperity was
   small, great as it may seem to some, and ordained for the sake of small
   minds, even though he received again twice as much as he had lost.

   19.  In this case then it is not wonderful, if George had the advantage
   of Athanasius; nay it would be more wonderful, if the righteous were
   not tried in the fire of contumely; nor is this very wonderful, as it
   would have been had the flames availed for more than this.  Then he was
   in retirement, and arranged his exile most excellently, for he betook
   himself to the holy and divine homes [3329] of contemplation in Egypt,
   where, secluding themselves from the world, and welcoming the desert,
   men live to God more than all who exist in the body.  Some struggle on
   in an utterly monastic and solitary life, speaking to themselves alone
   and to God, [3330] and all the world they know is what meets their eyes
   in the desert.  Others, cherishing the law of love in community, are at
   once Solitaries and Coenobites, dead to all other men and to the eddies
   of public affairs which whirl us and are whirled about themselves and
   make sport of us in their sudden changes, being the world to one
   another and whetting the edge of their love in emulation.  During his
   intercourse with them, the great Athanasius, who was always the
   mediator and reconciler of all other men, like Him Who made peace
   through His blood [3331] between things which were at variance,
   reconciled the solitary with the community life:  by showing that the
   Priesthood is capable of contemplation, and that contemplation is in
   need of a spiritual guide.

   20.  Thus he combined the two, and so united the partisans of both calm
   action and of active calm, as to convince them that the monastic life
   is characterised by steadfastness of disposition rather than by bodily
   retirement.  Accordingly the great David was a man of at once the most
   active and most solitary life, if any one thinks the verse, I am in
   solitude, till I pass away, [3332] of value and authority in the
   exposition of this subject.  Therefore, though they surpass all others
   in virtue, they fell further short of his mind than others fell short
   of their own, and while contributing little to the perfection of his
   priesthood, they gained in return greater assistance in contemplation.
   Whatever he thought, was a law for them, whatever on the contrary he
   disapproved, they abjured:  his decisions were to them the tables of
   Moses, [3333] and they paid him more reverence than is due from men to
   the Saints.  Aye, and when men came to hunt the Saint like a wild
   beast, and, after searching for him everywhere, failed to find him,
   they vouchsafed these emissaries not a single word, and offered their
   necks to the sword, as risking their lives for Christ's sake, and
   considering the most cruel sufferings on behalf of Athanasius to be an
   important step to contemplation, and far more divine and sublime than
   the long fasts and hard lying and mortifications in which they
   constantly revel.

   21.  Such were his surroundings when he approved the wise counsel of
   Solomon that there is a time to every purpose: [3334]   so he hid
   himself for a while, escaping during the time of war, to show himself
   when the time of peace came, as it did soon afterwards.  Meanwhile
   George, there being absolutely no one to resist him, overran Egypt, and
   desolated Syria, in the might of ungodliness.  He seized upon the East
   also as far as he could, ever attracting the weak, as torrents roll
   down objects in their course, and assailing the unstable or
   faint-hearted.  He won over also the simplicity of the Emperor, for
   thus I must term his instability, though I respect his pious motives.
   For, to say the truth, he had zeal, but not according to knowledge.
   [3335]   He purchased those in authority who were lovers of money
   rather than lovers of Christ--for he was well supplied with the funds
   for the poor, which he embezzled--especially the effeminate and unmanly
   men, [3336] of doubtful sex, but of manifest impiety; to whom, I know
   not how or why, Emperors of the Romans entrusted authority over men,
   though their proper function was the charge of women.  In this lay the
   power of that servant [3337] of the wicked one, that sower of tares,
   that forerunner of Antichrist; foremost in speech of the orators of his
   time among the Bishops; if any one likes to call him an orator who was
   not so much an impious, as he was a hostile and contentious
   reasoner,--his name I will gladly pass by:  he was the hand of his
   party, perverting the truth by the gold subscribed for pious uses,
   which the wicked made an instrument of their impiety.

   22.  The crowning feat of this faction was the council which sat first
   at Seleucia, the city of the holy and illustrious virgin Thekla, and
   afterwards at this mighty city, thus connecting their names, no longer
   with noble associations, but with these of deepest disgrace; whether we
   must call that council, which subverted and disturbed everything, a
   tower of Chalane, [3338] which deservedly confounded the tongues--would
   that theirs had been confounded for their harmony in evil!--or a
   Sanhedrim of Caiaphas [3339] where Christ was condemned, or some other
   like name.  The ancient and pious doctrine which defended the Trinity
   was abolished, by setting up a [3340] palisade and battering down the
   Consubstantial:  opening the door to impiety by means of what is
   written, using as their pretext, their reverence for Scripture and for
   the use of approved terms, but really introducing unscriptural
   Arianism.  For the phrase "like, according to the Scriptures," was a
   bait to the simple, concealing the hook of impiety, a figure seeming to
   look in the direction of all who passed by, a boot fitting either foot,
   a winnowing with every wind, [3341] gaining authority from the newly
   written villany and device against the truth.  For they were wise to do
   evil, but to do good they had no knowledge. [3342]

   23.  Hence came their pretended condemnation [3343] of the heretics,
   whom they renounced in words, in order to gain plausibility for their
   efforts, but in reality furthered; charging them not with unbounded
   impiety, but with exaggerated language.  Hence came the profane judges
   of the Saints, and the new combination, and public view and discussion
   of mysterious questions, and the illegal enquiry into the actions of
   life, and the hired informers, and the purchased sentences.  Some were
   unjustly deposed [3344] from their sees, others intruded, and among
   other necessary qualifications, made to sign the bonds of iniquity:
   the ink was ready, the informer at hand.  This the majority even of us,
   who were not overcome, had to endure, not falling in mind, though
   prevailed upon to sign, [3345] and so uniting with men who were in both
   respects wicked, and involving ourselves in the smoke, [3346] if not in
   the flame.  Over this I have often wept, when contemplating the
   confusion of impiety at that time, and the persecution of the orthodox
   teaching which now arose at the hands of the patrons of the Word.

   24.  For in reality, as the Scripture says, the shepherds became
   brutish, [3347] and many shepherds destroyed My vineyard, and defiled
   my pleasant portion, [3348] I mean the Church of God, which has been
   gathered together by the sweat and blood of many toilers and victims
   both before and after Christ, aye, even the great sufferings of God for
   us.  For with very few exceptions, and these either men who from their
   insignificance were disregarded, or from their virtue manfully
   resisted, being left unto Israel, [3349] as was ordained, for a seed
   and root, [3350] to blossom and come to life again amid the streams of
   the Spirit, everyone [3351] yielded to the influences of the time,
   distinguished only by the fact that some did so earlier, some later,
   that some became the champions and leaders of impiety, while such
   others were assigned a lower rank, as had been shaken by fear, enslaved
   by need, fascinated by flattery, or beguiled in ignorance; the last
   being the least guilty, if indeed we can allow even this to be a valid
   excuse for men entrusted with the leadership of the people.  For just
   as the force of lions and other animals, or of men and of women, or of
   old and of young men is not the same, but there is a considerable
   difference due to age or species--so it is also with rulers and their
   subjects.  For while we might pardon laymen in such a case, and often
   they escape, because not put to the test, yet how can we excuse a
   teacher, whose duty it is, unless he is falsely so-called, to correct
   the ignorance of others.  For is it not absurd, while no one, however
   great his boorishness and want of education, is allowed to be ignorant
   of the Roman law, and while there is no law in favour of sins of
   ignorance, that the teachers of the mysteries of salvation should be
   ignorant of the first principles of salvation, however simple and
   shallow their minds may be in regard to other subjects.  But, even
   granting indulgence to them who erred in ignorance, what can be said
   for the rest, who lay claim to subtlety of intellect, and yet yielded
   to the court-party for the reasons I have mentioned, and after playing
   the part of piety for a long while, failed in the hour of trial.

   25.  "Yet once more," [3352] I hear the Scripture say that the heaven
   and the earth shall be shaken, inasmuch as this has befallen them
   before, signifying, as I suppose, a manifest renovation of all things.
   And we must believe S. Paul when he says [3353] that this last shaking
   is none other than the second coming of Christ, and the transformation
   and changing of the universe to a condition of stability which cannot
   be shaken.  And I imagine that this present shaking, in which [3354]
   the contemplatives and lovers of God, who before the time exercise
   their heavenly citizenship, are shaken from us, is of no less
   consequence than any of former days.  For, however peaceful and
   moderate in other respects these men are, yet they cannot bear to carry
   their reasonableness so far as to be traitors to the cause of God for
   quietness' sake:  nay on this point they are excessively warlike and
   sturdy in fight; such is the heat of their zeal, that they would sooner
   proceed to excess in disturbance, than fail to notice anything that is
   amiss.  And no small portion of the people is breaking away with them,
   flying away, as a flock of birds does, with those who lead the flight,
   and even now does not cease to fly with them.

   26.  Such was Athanasius to us, when present, the pillar of the Church;
   and such, even when he retired before the insults of the wicked.  For
   those who have plotted the capture of some strong fort, when they see
   no other easy means of approaching or taking it, betake themselves to
   arts, and then, after seducing the commander by money or guile, without
   any effort possess themselves of the stronghold, or, if you will, as
   those who plotted against Samson first cut off his hair, [3355] in
   which his strength lay, and then seized upon the judge, and made sport
   of him at will, to requite him for his former power:  so did our
   foreign foes, after getting rid of our source of strength, and shearing
   off the glory of the Church, revel in like manner in utterances and
   deeds of impiety.  Then the supporter [3356] and patron of the hostile
   shepherd [3357] died, crowning [3358] his reign, which had not been
   evil, with an evil close, and unprofitably repenting, as they say, with
   his last breath, when each man, in view of the higher judgement seat,
   is a prudent judge of his own conduct.  For of these three evils, which
   were unworthy of his reign, he said that he was conscious, the murder
   of his kinsmen, the proclamation of the Apostate, and the innovation
   upon the faith; and with these words he is said to have departed.  Thus
   there was once more authority to teach the word of truth, and those who
   had suffered violence had now undisturbed freedom of speech, while
   jealousy was whetting the weapons of its wrath.  Thus it was with the
   people of Alexandria, who, with their usual impatience of the insolent,
   could not brook the excesses of the man, and therefore marked his
   wickedness by an unusual death, and his death by an unusual ignominy.
   For you know that camel, [3359] and its strange burden, and the new
   form of elevation, and the first and, I think, the only procession,
   with which to this day the insolent are threatened.

   27.  But when from this hurricane of unrighteousness, this corrupter of
   godliness, this precursor of the wicked one, such satisfaction had been
   exacted, in a way I cannot praise, for we must consider not what he
   ought to have suffered, but what we ought [3360] to do:  exacted
   however it was, as the result of the public anger and excitement:  and
   thereupon, our champion was restored from his illustrious banishment,
   for so I term his exile on behalf of, and under the blessing of, the
   Trinity, amid such delight of the people of the city and of almost all
   Egypt, that they ran together from every side, from the furthest limits
   of the country, simply to hear the voice of Athanasius, or feast their
   eyes upon the sight of him, nay even, as we are told of the Apostles,
   that they might be hallowed by the shadow [3361] and unsubstantial
   image of his body:  so that, many as are the honours, and welcomes
   bestowed on frequent occasions in the course of time upon various
   individuals, not only upon public rulers and bishops, but also upon the
   most illustrious of private citizens, not one has been recorded more
   numerously attended or more brilliant than this.  And only one honour
   can be compared with it by Athanasius himself, which had been conferred
   upon him on his former entrance into the city, when returning from the
   same exile for the same reasons.

   28.  With reference to this honour there was also current some such
   report as the following; for I will take leave to mention it, even
   though it be superfluous, as a kind of flavouring to my speech, or a
   flower scattered in honour of his entry.  After that entry, a certain
   officer, who had been twice Consul, was riding into the city; he was
   one of us, among the most noted of Cappadocians.  I am sure that you
   know that I mean Philagrius, who won upon our affections far beyond any
   one else, and was honoured as much as he was loved, if I may thus
   briefly set forth all his distinctions:  who had been for a second time
   entrusted with the government of the city, at the request of the
   citizens, by the decision of the Emperor.  Then one of the common
   people present, thinking the crowd enormous, like an ocean whose bound
   no eye can see, is reported to have said to one of his comrades and
   friends--as often happens in such a case--"Tell me, my good fellow,
   have you ever before seen the people pour out in such numbers and so
   enthusiastically to do honour to any one man?"  "No!" said the young
   man, "and I fancy that not even Constantius himself would be so
   treated;" indicating, by the mention of the Emperor, the climax of
   possible honour.  "Do you speak of that," said the other with a sweet
   and merry laugh, "as something wonderfully great?  I can scarcely
   believe that even the great Athanasius would be welcomed like this,"
   adding at the same time one of our native oaths in confirmation of his
   words.  Now the point of what he said, as I suppose you also plainly
   see, is this, that he set the subject of our eulogy before the Emperor
   himself.

   29.  So great was the reverence of all for the man, and so amazing even
   now seems the reception which I have described.  For if divided
   according to birth, age and profession, (and the city is most usually
   arranged in this way, when a public honour is bestowed on anyone) how
   can I set forth in words that mighty spectacle?  They formed one river,
   and it were indeed a poet's task to describe that Nile, of really
   golden stream and rich in crops, flowing back again from the city to
   the Chæreum, a day's journey, I take it, and more.  Permit me to revel
   a while longer in my description:  for I am going there, and it is not
   easy to bring back even my words from that ceremony.  He rode upon a
   colt, almost, blame me not for folly, as my Jesus did upon that other
   colt, [3362] whether it were the people of the Gentiles, whom He mounts
   in kindness, by setting it free from the bonds of ignorance, or
   something else, which the Scripture sets forth.  He was welcomed with
   branches of trees, and garments with many flowers and of varied hue
   were torn off and strewn before him and under his feet:  there alone
   was all that was glorious and costly and peerless treated with
   dishonour.  Like, once more, to the entry of Christ were those that
   went before with shouts and followed with dances; only the crowd which
   sung his praises was not of children only, but every tongue was
   harmonious, as men contended only to outdo one another.  I pass by the
   universal cheers, and the pouring forth of unguents, and the nightlong
   festivities, and the whole city gleaming with light, and the feasting
   in public and at home, and all the means of testifying to a city's joy,
   which were then in lavish and incredible profusion bestowed upon him.
   Thus did this marvellous man, with such a concourse, regain his own
   city.

   30.  He lived then as becomes the rulers of such a people, but did he
   fail to teach as he lived?  Were his contests out of harmony with his
   teaching?  Were his dangers less than those of men who have contended
   for any truth?  Were his honours inferior to the objects for which he
   contended?  Did he after his reception in any way disgrace that
   reception?  By no means.  Everything was harmonious, as an air upon a
   single lyre, and in the same key; his life, his teaching, his
   struggles, his dangers, his return, and his conduct after his return.
   For immediately on his restoration to his Church, he was not like those
   who are blinded by unrestrained passion, who, under the dominion of
   their anger, thrust away or strike at once whatever comes in their way,
   even though it might well be spared.  But, thinking this to be a
   special time for him to consult his reputation, since one who is
   ill-treated is usually restrained, and one who has the power to requite
   a wrong is ungoverned, he treated so mildly and gently those who had
   injured him, that even they themselves, if I may say so, did not find
   his restoration distasteful.

   31.  He cleansed the temple of those who made merchandise of God, and
   trafficked in the things of Christ, imitating Christ [3363] in this
   also; only it was with persuasive words, not with a twisted scourge
   that this was wrought.  He reconciled also those who were at variance,
   both with one another and with him, without the aid of any coadjutor.
   Those who had been wronged he set free from oppression, making no
   distinction as to whether they were of his own or of the opposite
   party.  He restored too the teaching which had been overthrown:  the
   Trinity was once more boldly spoken of, and set upon the lampstand,
   flashing with the brilliant light of the One Godhead into the souls of
   all.  He legislated again for the whole world, and brought all minds
   under his influence, by letters to some, by invitations to others,
   instructing some, who visited him uninvited, and proposing as the
   single law to all--Good will. [3364]   For this alone was able to
   conduct them to the true issue.  In brief, he exemplified the virtues
   of two celebrated stones--for to those who assailed him he was adamant,
   and to those at variance a magnet, which by some secret natural power
   draws iron to itself, and influences the hardest of substances.

   32.  But yet it was not likely that envy could brook all this, or see
   the Church restored again to the same glory and health as in former
   days, by the speedy healing over, as in the body, of the wounds of
   separation.  Therefore it was, that he raised up against Athanasius the
   Emperor, a rebel like himself, [3365] and his peer in villany, inferior
   to him only from lack of time, the first of Christian Emperors to rage
   against Christ, bringing forth all at once the basilisk of impiety with
   which he had long been in labour, when he obtained an opportunity, and
   shewing himself, at the time when he was proclaimed Emperor, to be a
   traitor to the Emperor who had entrusted him with the empire, and a
   traitor double dyed to the God who had saved him.  He devised the most
   inhuman of all the persecutions by blending speciousness with cruelty,
   in his envy of the honour won by the martyrs in their struggles; and so
   he called in question their repute for courage, by making verbal twists
   and quibbles a part of his character, or to speak the real truth,
   devoting himself to them with an eagerness born of his natural
   disposition, and imitating in varied craft the Evil one who dwelt
   within him.  The subjugation of the whole race of Christians he thought
   a simple task; but found it a great one to overcome Athanasius and the
   power of his teaching over us.  For he saw that no success could be
   gained in the plot against us, because of this man's resistance and
   opposition; the places of the Christians cut down being at once filled
   up, surprising though it seems, by the accession of Gentiles and the
   prudence of Athanasius.  In full view therefore of this, the crafty
   perverter and persecutor, clinging no longer to his cloak of illiberal
   sophistry, laid bare his wickedness and openly banished the Bishop from
   the city.  For the illustrious warrior must needs conquer in three
   struggles [3366] and thus make good his perfect title to fame.

   33.  Brief was the interval before Justice pronounced sentence, and
   handed over the offender [3367] to the Persians:  sending him forth an
   ambitious monarch--and bringing him back a corpse for which no one even
   felt pity; which, as I have heard, was not allowed to rest in the
   grave, but was shaken out and thrown up by the earth which he had
   shaken:  a prelude--I take it--to his future chastisement.  Then
   another king [3368] arose, [3369] not shameless in countenance like the
   former, nor an oppressor of Israel with cruel tasks and taskmasters,
   but most pious and gentle.  In order to lay the best of foundations for
   his empire, and begin, as is right, by an act of justice, he recalled
   from exile all the Bishops, but in the first place him who stood first
   in virtue and had conspicuously championed the cause of piety.
   Further, he inquired into the truth of our faith which had been torn
   asunder, confused, and parcelled out into various opinions and portions
   by many; with the intention, if it were possible, of reducing the whole
   world to harmony and union by the co-operation of the Spirit:  and,
   should he fail in this, of attaching himself to the best party, so as
   to aid and be aided by it, thus giving token of the exceeding loftiness
   and magnificence of his ideas on questions of the greatest moment.
   Here too was shown in a very high degree the simple-mindedness of
   Athanasius, and the steadfastness of his faith in Christ.  For, when
   all the rest who sympathised with us were divided into three parties,
   and many were faltering in their conception of the Son, and still more
   in that of the Holy Ghost, (a point on which to be only slightly in
   error was to be orthodox) and few indeed were sound upon both points,
   he was the first and only one, or with the concurrence of but a few, to
   venture to confess in writing, with entire clearness and distinctness,
   the Unity of Godhead and Essence of the Three Persons, and thus to
   attain in later days, under the influence of inspiration, to the same
   faith in regard to the Holy Ghost, as had been bestowed at an earlier
   time on most of the Fathers in regard to the Son.  This confession, a
   truly royal and magnificent gift, he presented to the Emperor, opposing
   to the unwritten innovation, a written account [3370] the orthodox
   faith, so that an emperor might be overcome by an emperor, reason by
   reason, treatise by treatise.

   34.  This confession was, it seems, greeted with respect by all, both
   in West and East, who were capable of life; some cherishing piety
   within their own bosoms, if we may credit what they say, but advancing
   no further, like a still-born child which dies within its mother's
   womb; others kindling to some extent, as it were, sparks, so far as to
   escape the difficulties of the time, arising either from the more
   fervent of the orthodox, or the devotion of the people; while others
   spoke the truth with boldness, on whose side I would be, for I dare
   make no further boast; no longer consulting my own fearfulness--in
   other words, the views of men more unsound than myself (for this we
   have done enough and to spare, without either gaining anything from
   others, or guarding from injury that which was our own, just as bad
   stewards do) but bringing forth to light my offspring, nourishing it
   with eagerness, and exposing it, in its constant growth, to the eyes of
   all.

   35.  This, however, is less admirable than his conduct.  What wonder
   that he, who had already made actual ventures on behalf of the truth,
   should confess it in writing?  Yet this point I will add to what has
   been said, as it seems to me especially wonderful and cannot with
   impunity be passed over in a time so fertile in disagreements as this.
   For his action, if we take note of him, will afford instruction even to
   the men of this day.  For as, in the case of one and the same quantity
   of water, there is separated from it, not only the residue which is
   left behind by the hand when drawing it, but also those drops, once
   contained in the hand, which trickle out through the fingers; so also
   there is a separation between us and, not only those who hold aloof in
   their impiety, but also those who are most pious, and that both in
   regard to such doctrines as are of small consequence (a matter of less
   moment) and also in regard to expressions intended to bear the same
   meaning.  We use in an orthodox sense the terms one Essence and three
   Hypostases, the one to denote the nature of the Godhead, the other the
   properties [3371] of the Three; the Italians [3372] mean the same, but,
   owing to the scantiness of their vocabulary, and its poverty of terms,
   they are unable to distinguish between Essence and Hypostases, and
   therefore introduce the term Persons, to avoid being understood to
   assert three Essences.  The result, were it not piteous, would be
   laughable.  This slight difference of sound was taken to indicate a
   difference of faith.  Then, Sabellianism was suspected in the doctrine
   of Three Persons, Arianism in that of Three Hypostases, both being the
   offspring of a contentious spirit.  And then, from the gradual but
   constant growth of irritation (the unfailing result of contentiousness)
   there was a danger of the whole world being torn asunder in the strife
   about syllables.  Seeing and hearing this, our blessed one, true man of
   God and great steward of souls as he was, felt it inconsistent with his
   duty to overlook so absurd and unreasonable a rending of the word, and
   applied his medicine to the disease.  In what manner?  He conferred in
   his gentle and sympathetic way with both parties, and after he had
   carefully weighed the meaning of their expressions, and found that they
   had the same sense, and were in nowise different in doctrine, by
   permitting each party to use its own terms, he bound them [3373]
   together in unity of action.

   36.  This in itself was more profitable than the long course of labours
   and teaching on which all writers enlarge, for in it somewhat of
   ambition mingled, and consequently, perhaps, somewhat of novelty in
   expressions.  This again was of more value than his many vigils and
   acts of discipline, [3374] the advantage of which is limited to those
   who perform them.  This was worthy of our hero's famous banishments and
   flights; for the object, in view of which he chose to endure such
   sufferings, he still pursued when the sufferings were past.  Nor did he
   cease to cherish the same ardour in others, praising some, gently
   rebuking others; rousing the sluggishness of these, restraining the
   passion of those; in some cases eager to prevent a fall, in others
   devising means of recovery after a fall; simple in disposition,
   manifold in the arts of government; clever in argument, more clever
   still in mind; condescending to the more lowly, outsoaring the more
   lofty; hospitable, [3375] protector of suppliants, averted of evils,
   really combining in himself alone the whole of the attributes parcelled
   out by the sons of Greece among their deities.  Further he was the
   patron of the wedded and virgin state alike, both peaceable and a
   peacemaker, and attendant upon those who are passing from hence.  Oh,
   how many a title does his virtue afford me, if I would detail its
   many-sided excellence.

   37.  After such a course, as taught and teacher, that his life and
   habits form the ideal of an Episcopate, and his teaching the law of
   orthodoxy, what reward does he win for his piety?  It is not indeed
   right to pass this by.  In a good old age he closed his life, [3376]
   and was gathered to his fathers, the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and
   Apostles, and Martyrs, who contended for the truth.  To be brief in my
   epitaph, the honours at his departure surpassed even those of his
   return from exile; the object of many tears, his glory, stored up in
   the minds of all, outshines all its visible tokens.  Yet, O thou dear
   and holy one, who didst thyself, with all thy fair renown, so
   especially illustrate the due proportions of speech and of silence, do
   thou stay here my words, falling short as they do of thy true meed of
   praise, though they have claimed the full exercise of all my powers.
   And mayest thou cast upon us from above a propitious glance, and
   conduct this people in its perfect worship of the perfect Trinity,
   which, as Father, Son, Holy Ghost, we contemplate and adore.  And
   mayest thou, if my lot be peaceful, possess and aid me in my pastoral
   charge, or if it pass through struggles, uphold me, or take me to thee,
   and set me with thyself and those like thee (though I have asked a
   great thing) in Christ Himself, our Lord, to whom be all glory, honour,
   and power for evermore.  Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3272] S. Matt. xxii. 32.

   [3273] 1 John i. 5.

   [3274] S. John i. 23; v. 35.

   [3275] Antony, "the founder of asceticism," the most celebrated of the
   monks and hermits of the Thebaid desert.  His life by S. Athanasius is
   certainly genuine, and even if, as some suspect, interpolations have
   been inserted, its substantial integrity is undoubted.  (Newman, Ch. of
   the Fathers, p. 176.)

   [3276] Body of Christ, i.e., the Church, His mystical body.

   [3277] Gen. xxi. 19.

   [3278] 1 Kings xvii. 4.

   [3279] Isai. i. 9.

   [3280] Gen. xix. 24.

   [3281] S. Luke i. 69.

   [3282] Isai. xxviii. 16.

   [3283] Mal. iii. 2, 3.

   [3284] 1 Cor. iii. 13, 15.

   [3285] S. Matt. iii. 12.

   [3286] The throne, etc., as Patriarch of Alexandria.  The date of his
   consecration is a.d. 326.

   [3287] The Sanctuary, or "the Sacraments."  Exod. xxvi. 33.

   [3288] To offer more sacrifices, i.e., These priests are not only "men
   which have infirmity," who need to offer for their own sins, as well as
   for those of the people; but because they are even more sinful than
   their flocks, they need a greater and more frequent atonement.

   [3289] Heb. vii. 27; ix. 7.

   [3290] 1 Cor. iv. 21.

   [3291] St. Paul.  To whom here the Ep. to the Hebrews is assigned.

   [3292] Heb. iv. 14.

   [3293] Ps. cv. 15.

   [3294] Christs.  i.e., Ps. cv. 15.  "Touch not Mine anointed." (LXX.)
   and Vulg. "my Christs."

   [3295] 1 Tim. iii. 2 et seq.

   [3296] Cenobites migades.  Cf. Orat. ii. 29; xliii. 62.

   [3297] S. John iii. 29.

   [3298] Under the yoke, i.e. "Married."  Cf. Orat. xlii. 11.

   [3299] 2 Cor. iii. 10.

   [3300] Acts vi. 2.

   [3301] Sextuses.  Sextus Empiricus (cent. 3 a.d.) a leader of the later
   Sceptic school.  Pyrrho of Elis (cent. 4 b.c.) was the founder of the
   earlier.

   [3302] Acts xvii. 21.

   [3303] Lam. i. 1.

   [3304] Frenzy.  Cf. Orat. ii. 37; xxxiv. 8.

   [3305] A profane spot, lit. "profane places"--plural as contrasted with
   the en topo hagio, Lev. vi. 16. etc., etc.:  in which the priests must
   eat of the sacrifices.  The meaning of the phrase is "Arius died
   excommunicated"--indeed on the eve of the day on which the Emperor
   Constantine had ordered him to be restored to communion.

   [3306] Like Judas.  Cf. Epiph. Hær. 68. 7; Socr. i. 38.  Theodoret i.
   4.

   [3307] Acts i. 18.

   [3308] In name, etc., i.e., They used the name Trinity, although it was
   rendered meaningless by their false doctrine as to the inequality of
   the Three Blessed Persons.

   [3309] To contract, etc.  On this whole passage cf. Orat. ii. 36, 37,
   notes.

   [3310] Which refers, etc., or "which consists in personal relations."
   Cf. on idiotes.  Orat. xliii. 30. note.

   [3311] Nicæa, a.d. 325.  Athanasius was present as theological
   assistant to Alexander of Alexandria.

   [3312] Isai. v. 2 (LXX.); vii. 23, v. l. "in a vineyard."

   [3313] S. Luke vi. 16.

   [3314] Namesake.  Gregory, a Cappadocian, nominated to the see of
   Alexandria, by the Arian Bishops at Antioch, after the banishment of
   Athanasius, a.d. 340.

   [3315] he cheir 'Abessalom.  "The hand of Absalom," prob. a
   misquotation of 2 Sam. xiv. 19.  "The hand of Joab."  2 Sam. xv. 5.

   [3316] Corpse, etc.  Athanasius was charged with having murdered
   Arsenius, and his enemies produced a hand which, they said, had
   belonged to the dead man.

   [3317] Monster.  George of Cappadocia, Arian intruder into the see of
   Alexandria, a.d. 356-361.

   [3318] Job ix. 24.

   [3319] Ib. ix. 23.

   [3320] Ps. lxxxii. 8.

   [3321] Dan. xii. 9.

   [3322] Job ii. 7 et seq.

   [3323] Ib. xvi. 2.

   [3324] His lot, lit. "the dreadful (thing)" i.e. "reproach him, as
   having brought his sufferings upon himself"--or "reproach him with
   impiety"--the cause of his sufferings.

   [3325] Envy, i.e., of the devil.  Wisdom ii. 24.  Cf. § 32 of this
   Oration.

   [3326] Job xxxviii. 1.

   [3327] Ps. cxxv. 3.

   [3328] Job xl. 3 (LXX.).

   [3329] Homes, etc.  The monasteries of lower Egypt and the Thebaid.
   This was a.d. 356.

   [3330] 1 Cor. xiv. 28.

   [3331] Col. i. 20.

   [3332] Ps. cxli. 10 (LXX.).

   [3333] Exod. xxxii. 15; xxxiv. 1.

   [3334] Eccles. iii. 1.

   [3335] Rom. x. 2.

   [3336] Unmanly men, the Eunuchs, the chamberlains of Constantius.

   [3337] Servant, etc., probably Acacius.

   [3338] Gen. xi. 4.

   [3339] S. John xi. 47 et seq.

   [3340] charaka lit. "a pale"--one of the many which formed the
   palisade.  Perhaps there is play on the word charaktera "a letter" in
   reference to the insertion of the letter iota in the Nicene
   formula--which then became Homoiousion, i.e., "Like in substance."
   This action on the part of the Semi-Arians (who formed the majority of
   the Council of Seleucia a.d. 359), was the first step to the Homoion of
   the Acacian party, who prevailed at the council of Constantinople, a.d.
   360, and professed great devotion to the use of Scriptural terms.

   [3341] Eccles. v. 9.

   [3342] Jer. iv. 22.

   [3343] Condemnation, i.e., of Aetius, who was banished by Constantius
   after the Council.

   [3344] Deposed.  Cyril of Jerusalem, Eustathius of Sebaste, Basil of
   Ancyra and others.

   [3345] To sign, etc.  Cf. Orat. xviii. 18.

   [3346] The smoke, etc.  Cf. Orat. xvi. 6; Ps. xviii. 9; cv. 32.

   [3347] Jer. x. 21.

   [3348] Ib. ii. 10.

   [3349] Isai. i. 9.

   [3350] Ib. xxxvii. 31 (LXX.).

   [3351] Everyone.  This was the time of which S. Jerome wrote "Ingemuit
   totus orbis, et miratus est se Arianum esse."

   [3352] Hagg. ii. 7; Heb. xii. 26.

   [3353] Heb. xii. 27.

   [3354] In which, etc.  This sentence probably alludes to the excessive
   zeal of the monks of Nazianzus.

   [3355] Judges xvi. 19.

   [3356] The Supporter, Constantius, who died a.d. 360.

   [3357] The hostile shepherd, George.

   [3358] Crowning, Clémencet renders "Appointing an evil head over an
   empire which was not evil," sc. Julian the Apostate.

   [3359] Camel.  On the death of Constantius, the pagans of Alexandria
   murdered George, and carried his mangled body through the streets on
   the back of a camel.

   [3360] We ought, etc.  S. Gregory seems to imply that the deed had been
   done by Christians.  Historical writers and Julian's letter to the
   people make it clear that this was not really the case.

   [3361] Acts v. 15.

   [3362] S. Luke xix. 35.

   [3363] S. John ii. 15.

   [3364] to boulesthai, lit. "to will"--i.e. be willing to listen to, and
   understand the interests for which others were contending, in a
   conciliatory spirit--for the sake of truth, not of victory.

   [3365] He...a rebel like himself.  Envy, personifying the Evil one.
   Cf. supra § 18.

   [3366] In three struggles.  He was thrice banished.  a.d. 336 by
   Constantine, a.d. 356 under Constantius, and a.d. 362 by Julian.

   [3367] The offender, Julian.

   [3368] Another king--the Emperor Jovian.

   [3369] Exod. i. 8.

   [3370] A written account.  A synodal letter drawn up in council,
   probably at Alexandria, and conveyed and presented to Jovian at Antioch
   by S. Athanasius.

   [3371] Properties.  Cf. Orat. xliii. 30. note.

   [3372] The Italians, etc.  Cf. Newman's Arians, pp. 376-384.  S.
   Athanasius' Orations against the Arians, Ed. Bright, p. lxxxi. Pelav.
   de Trin. IV. ii. 5-10 and iv.

   [3373] Bound them, etc.  At the Council of Alexandria, a.d. 362.
   Newman's Arians, pp. 364, sqq.

   [3374] Acts of discipline.  chameunion, "lying on the ground."

   [3375] Hospitable, etc., titles given to Zeus, and other Greek gods.

   [3376] Closed his life a.d. 373.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introduction to the "Theological" Orations.

   "It has been said with truth," says the writer of the Article on
   Gregory of Nazianzus in the Dictionary of Christian Biography, "that
   these discourses would lose their chief charm in a
   translation....Critics have rivalled each other in the praises they
   have heaped upon them, but no praise is so high as that of the many
   Theologians who have found in them their own best thoughts.  A Critic
   who cannot be accused of partiality towards Gregory has given in a few
   words perhaps the truest estimate of them:  A solidity of thought, the
   concentration of all that is spread through the writings of Hilary,
   Basil, and Athanasius, a flow of softened eloquence which does not halt
   or lose itself for a moment, an argument nervous without dryness on the
   one hand, and without useless ornament on the other, give these five
   Discourses a place to themselves among the monuments of this fine
   Genius, who was not always in the same degree free from grandiloquence
   and affectation.  In a few pages, and in a few hours, Gregory has
   summed up and closed the controversy of a whole Century.'" [3377]
   They were preached in the Church called Anastasia, [3378] at
   Constantinople, between 379 and 381, and have gained for their author
   the title of The Theologian, which he shares with S. John the
   Evangelist alone.  It should perhaps, however, be noted that the word
   is not here used in the wide and general sense in which we employ it,
   but in a narrower and more specific way, denoting emphatically the
   Defender of the Deity of the Logos.  His principal opponents were the
   followers of Eunomius and Macedonius, and it is almost entirely against
   them that these Orations on Theology, or the Godhead of the Word and
   the Holy Ghost, are directed.  The chief object of the Preacher in
   these and most other of his public utterances, is to maintain the
   Nicene Faith of the Trinity or Trinity of God; that is, the Doctrine
   that while there is but One Substance or Essence [3379] in the Godhead,
   and by consequence God is in the most absolute sense One, yet God is
   not Unipersonal, but within this Undivided Unity there are three
   Self-determining Subjects or Persons, distinguished from one another by
   special characteristics (idiotetes) or personal properties--Father,
   Son, and Holy Ghost.  With this object he entered into conflict with
   the heretics named above, who denied either the Consubstantiality of
   the Son with the Father, or the perfect Godhead and Personality of the
   Holy Ghost.

   Eunomius, whom Ullmann calls one of the most interesting heretics of
   the Fourth Century, was by birth a Cappadocian, and slightly older than
   Gregory.  As a young man he was a pupil and amanuensis of Aëtius, by
   whom the Arian heresy was developed to its extreme results.  The
   disciple never shrank from drawing the furthest logical conclusions
   from his master's premises, or from stating them with a frankness,
   which to those who regarded the premises themselves from which he
   reasoned as horrible blasphemies, seemed nothing less than diabolical
   in its impiety.  So precisely did he complete and formulate his
   teacher's heretical tenets, that the Anomoean Arians were ever
   afterwards called Eunomians, rather than Aëtians.  They asserted the
   absolute Unlikeness of the Being of the Father and of the Son.
   Starting with the conception of God as Absolute Being, of Whom no
   Generation can be predicated, Unbegotten and incapable of Begetting,
   they went on to say that an Eternal Generation is inconceivable, and
   that the Generation of the Son of God must have had a beginning.  Of
   course, therefore, the Arian conclusion followed, namely, that there
   was a time when the Son did not exist (en pote hote ouk en), and His
   Essence is altogether unlike that of the Unbegotten Father.  Equality
   of essence and Similarity of essence, are alike untenable, from the
   mere fact that the one Essence is Unbegotten, and the other is
   Begotten.  The Son, they said, is the First Creation of the Divine
   Energy, and is the Instrument by whom God created the world, and in
   this sense, as the Organ of creative power, may be said to be the
   Express Image and Likeness of the Energy of the Father. [3380]

   As they viewed the Holy Ghost as sharing the Divine Nature in an even
   remoter degree, as being only the noblest production of the
   Only-begotten Son, Eunomius was the first person heretically to
   discontinue the practice of threefold immersion in Holy Baptism.  He
   also corrupted the Form of that Sacrament, by setting aside the use of
   the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and baptizing people "in
   the name of the Creator, and into the death of Christ."  Therefore the
   Council of Constantinople ordered that converts from Eunomianism should
   be baptized, although those from other forms of Arianism were admitted
   into the Catholic Church by simple imposition of hands.  Through the
   influence of the followers of Aëtius, Eunomius became, in 360, Bishop
   of Cyzicus in Mysia, but he does not appear to have occupied the See
   very long.  At any rate when Gregory came, in 379, to Constantinople,
   he was living in retirement near Chalcedon.  All parties concur in
   representing him as a consummate Dialectician, but the Orthodox
   declared that he had turned Theology into a mere Technology.  Readiness
   of Dialectic was the great characteristic of his Sect, and it was they
   who introduced into the Capital that bad spirit of theological
   disputatiousness which Gregory deplores in the first of these famous
   Orations.  He also differed entirely from Gregory, not merely in the
   conclusions at which he arrived, but in the method by which he reached
   them; following the system of Aristotle, rather than of Plato, and
   using an exclusively intellectual method, while Gregory treated
   Religion as belonging to the entire man.  The point at issue between
   them, besides this of the Interior relations of the Three Blessed
   Persons within the Godhead, was mainly the question as to the complete
   comprehensibility of the Divine Nature, which the Eunomians maintained,
   and Gregory denied.  The latter argued that, while we have a sure
   conviction that God is, we have not a full understanding of What He
   is.  He would not, however, exclude us from all knowledge of God's
   Nature, only he limits our capacity to so much as God has been pleased
   to reveal to us of Himself.  "In my opinion," he says (Or. xxiv. 4),
   "it is impossible to express God, and yet more impossible to conceive
   Him--seeing that the thick covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the
   understanding of the truth."  Similarly in the Fourth of these Orations
   (Or. xxx. 17) he says, "The Deity cannot be expressed in words.  And
   this is proved to us, not only by arguments, but by the wisest and most
   ancient of the Hebrews, so far as they have given us reason for
   conjecture.  For they appropriated certain characters to the honour of
   the Deity, and would not even allow the name of anything inferior to
   God to be written with the same letters as that of God, because to
   their mind it was improper that the Deity should even to that extent
   admit any of His creatures to a share with Himself.  How then could
   they have admitted that the indivisible and separate Nature can be
   explained by divisible words?"

   In the mind of Gregory, the Orthodox doctrine of the Blessed Trinity is
   the fundamental dogma of Christianity, in contrast with all other
   religions, and with all heretical systems.  "Remember your confession,"
   he says to his hearers in an Oration against the Arians; "Into what
   were you baptized?  The Father?  Good, but still Jewish.  The Son?
   Good; no longer Jewish, but not yet perfect.  The Holy Ghost?  Very
   good; this is perfect.  Was it then simply into these, or was there
   some one common Name of these?  Yes, there was, and it is God."  And in
   the same oration he calls Arianism a new Judaism, because it ascribes
   full Deity only to the Father; and he speaks of One Nature in Three
   Individualities, intelligent, perfect, self-existent, distinct
   numerically, but one in Godhead.  "In created things," says Ullmann,
   "the several individuals are embraced in a common conception, though in
   themselves only connected together in thought, while in fact they are
   not one.  Manhood is only an intellectual conception; in fact there
   exist only Men.  But in the Godhead the Three Persons are not only in
   conception, but in fact, One; and this Unity is not only a relative but
   an absolute Unity, because the Divine Being is perfect in all Three
   Persons, and in all in a perfect equality.  In this sense therefore
   Gregory and all orthodox Trinitarians maintain the Unity of God.  But
   within this Unity there is a true Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
   a Trinity of Persons in a Unity of Nature."  We worship, he says (Or.
   xxxiii. 16), the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One Nature in Three
   Individualities.  So that, as he says elsewhere (Or. in laud.
   Athanasii, xxi. 10), the Trinity is a true Trinity; not a numbering of
   unlike things, but a binding together of equals.  Each of the Persons
   is God in the fullest sense.  The Son and the Holy Ghost have their
   Source of Being in the Father, but in such sense that They are fully
   consubstantial with Him, and that neither of Them differs from Him in
   any particular of Essence.  The points of difference lie in the
   Personal Attributes; the Father Unoriginate, and Source of Deity; the
   Son deriving His Being eternally from the Father, and Himself the
   Source of all created existence; the Holy Ghost proceeding eternally
   from God, and sent into the world.

   In the first of these five discourses the Preacher sets himself to
   clear the ground for the fitting presentation of his great theme.  He
   endeavours to lay down the principles on which Theologians should
   proceed in such discussions, and very earnestly deprecates the habit of
   promiscuous argument in all sorts of places, upon all sorts of
   occasions, and before all sorts of hearers, of the deepest and most
   sacred truths and mysteries of the Faith.  They only should be allowed
   to engage in such conversation who are fitted for it by the practice of
   Christian virtue.  For others there are many other subjects upon which
   they can exercise their dialectical attainments, without doing or
   incurring any injury.

   In the second oration Gregory lays down the position referred to above,
   that it is impossible for even the most exalted human reason fully to
   grasp the Nature of God, though His Existence is patent to all.  We can
   only, he says, predicate negatives concerning Him.  He gives three
   reasons for this incapacity.  First to enhance our estimation of this
   knowledge, when attained hereafter; secondly to save us from the danger
   of falling through pride, like Lucifer, if we attained it prematurely;
   and thirdly, to support and sustain us in the trials and conflicts of
   this life, by the certainty that its attainment hereafter will be the
   reward of faithful service in them.  The cause of our present inability
   is the body with which our soul is united, the grossness of whose
   present condition hinders us from rising to the complete apprehension
   of the invisible and immaterial.  God, out of compassion for our
   weakness, has been pleased to designate Himself in Holy Scripture by
   various names taken from material objects, or from moral virtues; but
   these are only stepping-stones to the truth, and have indeed been
   sometimes perverted, and made a basis for polytheism.  It is, however,
   only natural that the Divine Essence should be shrouded in Mystery, for
   the same is the case with the created essences also.

   In the Third and Fourth he deals with the question of the Son.  His
   position may be summed up as follows:  The Son is absolutely of One
   Substance with the Father, and shares with Him all the Attributes of
   Godhead.  Yet He is a distinct Person, marked off by the fact that He
   is begotten of the Father.  But we must be careful not to allow this
   term "Begotten" to suggest to us any analogy with created things.  It
   is wholly independent of time and space and sense.

   This position he had to defend against many assailants, and especially
   against the Eunomians.  These heretics maintained that the use of this
   term necessarily implied a beginning of the Essence of the Son, and
   they asked the orthodox to tell them when that beginning took place.
   Gregory replies that the Generation of God the Son is beyond all time;
   pointing out that Paternity is an Essential attribute of God the
   Father, and therefore is as eternal as His Essence, so that there never
   was a time when He was not the Father, and consequently never a time
   when the Generation of the Son began.  He admits that there is a sense
   in which it is possible to say that the Son and the Spirit are not
   unoriginate, but then you must be careful not to use the word Origin in
   the sense of Beginning, but in that of Cause.  They derive Their Being
   eternally from the Father, and all Three Persons are coeternal
   together.  In respect of cause They are not unoriginate, but the cause
   is not necessarily prior in time to its effect, just as the Sun is not
   prior to its own light.  In respect of time, then, They may be said to
   be unoriginate, for the Sources of time cannot be subject to time.  "If
   the Father has not ceased to beget, His Generation is an imperfect one;
   and if He has ceased, He must have begun, for an end implies a
   beginning."  "Not so," says Gregory, "unless you are prepared to admit
   that what has no end has necessarily no beginning; and in that case
   what will you say about the Angels, or the human soul?  These will have
   no end; had either of them therefore no beginning?"  By a similar
   process of Reductio ad absurdum he dissipates all the quibbles of
   Eunomian sophistry, and lays down the orthodox Faith of the Church.
   Then in the remainder of the Third and Fourth Orations he goes on to
   examine the Scriptural testimony adduced by his opponents, and to shew
   by a similar catena on the other side that the overwhelming
   preponderance of the authority of the Bible is clearly against them.
   In connection with this point he lays down the canon that in the
   interpretation of Scripture in regard to our Lord, all expressions
   savouring of humility or weakness are to be referred to that pure
   Humanity which He assumed for our sake; while all that speaks of
   Majesty and Power belongs to His Godhead.

   In the Fifth he deals with the doctrine of the Holy Ghost.  The heresy
   of Arius was at first directly concerned only with the Person of our
   Lord, though not without a side-glance at that also of the Holy Ghost.
   The Council of Nicæa had confined itself to the first question, and its
   Creed ended with, "We believe in the Holy Ghost."  This, it was
   afterwards argued, was enough to proclaim His Divinity, and so Gregory
   argues in this Oration, "If He be only a creature, how do we believe on
   Him, how are we made perfect in Him, for the first of these belongs to
   Deity, the second may be said of anything" (c. vi.).  The reason,
   however, that the Great Synod made no express definition on the point
   seems to have been that the controversy had not yet been carried so far
   in direct terms (cf. S. Basil, Epp. lxxviii. ccclxxxvii.).  But fifty
   years later the growth of the heresy rendered a definition of the
   Church's faith on this point needful; and in 363, on his return from
   his fourth period of exile, S. Athanasius held a provincial Synod at
   Alexandria, in whose Synodical Letter to the Emperor Jovian the Godhead
   of the Holy Ghost is maintained in terms which, as Canon Bright says,
   partly anticipate the language of the Creed of Constantinople (Dict.
   Biog. Art. Athanasius).  The new development of the heresy had begun to
   appear at Constantinople as well as in Thrace and Asia Minor.
   Macedonius, a Semi-Arian, had been elected Bishop of Constantinople in
   341, and in spite of violent opposition, which he met by still more
   violent measures, had maintained his position till 360, when he was
   deposed and driven out by the Anomoean Arians.  He then in his
   retirement became the leader of the Semi-Arian party.  Accepting the
   statement that the Son was Like in Essence to the Father, he would not
   concede even this to the Holy Ghost, but declared Him to be a mere
   creature (Thdt. Hist. Eccl. ii. 6), and the servant or minister of the
   Son; applying to Him terms which without error could only be used of
   the Angels (Sozomen. H. E. iv. 27).  His followers were known as
   Macedonians, or sometimes Marathonians, from a certain Marathonius,
   formerly a Paymaster of the Prætorian Guards, who had become a Deacon
   of Constantinople, and, having done much in the way of founding and
   maintaining Monastic Houses and Houses of Charity in the City, was
   consecrated by Macedonius as Bishop of Nicomedia.  They were also known
   as Pneumatomachi, from the nature of their Heresy.  A controversy had
   now begun to arise as to the precise position which the true faith was
   to assign to the Holy Spirit.  There were those who left it doubtful
   whether He had indeed a separate Personality, or whether He were not
   rather a mere Influence or Activity of the Father and the Son.  Gregory
   tells us how, when he came to the Metropolis, he found the wildest
   confusion prevalent.  Some, he says, conceived of the Holy Ghost as a
   mere Energy of God, others thought Him a Creature, others believed Him
   to be God; while many out of an alleged reverence for Holy Scripture,
   hesitated to give Him the Name of God.  To this last class belonged,
   according to Socrates (H. E. ii. 45), Eustathius, who had been ejected
   from the Bishopric of Sebasteia in Pontus.  He refused to admit that
   the Holy Spirit is God, while yet He did not dare to affirm that He is
   a mere creature.  When Gregory proceeded to preach the Deity of the
   Spirit, he was accused of introducing a strange and unscriptural god,
   because, as he acknowledges, the letter of the Bible is not so clear on
   the doctrine of the Spirit as it is on that of the Son.  But he points
   out that it is possible to be superstitious in one's reverence for the
   letter of the Bible, and that such superstition leads directly to
   heresy.  He explains the reticence of the New Testament on this point
   by shewing (in this Oration, cc. 26, 27) how God's Self-Revelation to
   man has always been a gradual one; how the Old Testament revealed the
   Father clearly, with obscure hints about the Son; and the New Testament
   manifested the Son, but only hinted at the Godhead of the Spirit; but
   now, he says, the Spirit dwells among us, and allows us to recognize
   Him more clearly.  For it would not have been advisable, as long as the
   Godhead of the Father was not acknowledged, to proclaim that of the
   Son; and while the Deity of the Son was not yet accepted, to add
   another burden in that of the Holy Spirit.  Recognizing thus a Divine
   economy in the Self-Revelations of God, he was not averse to using a
   similar caution in his own dealings with weak or ill-instructed minds.
   [3381]   But yet when real necessity arose, he could speak out with
   perfect plainness on this subject; and he even incurred danger to life
   and limb from the violence of the opposing party.  He met their
   opposition by the clearest statements of the Catholic Dogma.  "Is the
   Spirit God?" he asks.  "Yes."  "But is He consubstantial?"  "Yes, if He
   is God."  (Orat. xxxi. 10.)  He appeals both to the Bible, and to the
   experience of the Christian life.  If the Spirit is not to be adored,
   how can He deify me in Baptism?  From the Spirit comes our new Birth;
   from the new Birth our new Life; and from the new Life our knowledge of
   the Dignity of Him from Whom it is derived (Ibid. C. 29).  He is,
   however, milder in his treatment of these heretics than of the strict
   Arians, both, as he says, because they approached more nearly to the
   Orthodox belief on the subject of the Son, and because their
   conspicuous piety of life shewed that their error was not altogether
   wilful.  In this Oration he shows that though the Name of God may not
   actually be given in the New Testament to the Holy Ghost, yet all the
   attributes of God are ascribed to Him, and that therefore the use of
   the Name is a matter of legitimate inference.  He carries on the
   argument in the Oration on Pentecost (No. XLI.  See the Introduction to
   that Oration in the present Volume).

   With regard to the doctrine of the Procession, Gregory gives us no
   clear information.  He is silent as to the Procession from the Son.  It
   is enough for him that the Spirit is not Begotten but Proceeding (in
   SS. Lumina, c. 12), and that Procession is His distinctive Property,
   which involves at once His Personality and His Essential Deity.

   At length in 381 the work of local Synods and episcopal conferences was
   completed and clinched by the Ruling of a Second Ecumenical Council.
   It is true that the Council which Theodosius summoned to meet at
   Constantinople could scarcely have regarded itself as possessing
   Ecumenical authority; whilst in the West it certainly was not regarded
   in this light before the Sixth Century.  Nevertheless the honours of
   Ecumenicity were ultimately awarded to it by the whole Church, because
   it completes the series of Great Councils by which the Doctrine of the
   Deity of the Holy Spirit was affirmed; and in fact it expressed the
   final judgment of the Catholic Church upon the Macedonian controversy.
   Its first Canon anathematises the Semiarians or Pneumatomachi by name
   as well as the Eunomians or Anomoean Arians (cf. Dict. Biog. Art.
   Gregory of Nazianzus, by Dr. H. B. Swete).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3377] De Broglie, "L'Eglise et l'Empire," v. 385.--"Ce sont autant de
   modèles dans l'art délicat d'imprimer la forme oratoire aux
   développements philosophiques.  Une pensée substantielle, formée de
   tous les sucs répandus dans les écrits d'Hilaire, de Basile et
   d'Athanase; un courant d'éloquence tempérée qui ne se ralentit, ni ne
   s'égare en aucun moment; une argumentation nerveuse sans sècheresse,
   mais sans vaine parure d'ornements, font à ces cinq discours une place
   à part parmi les monuments de ce beau génie, auquel l'emphase et
   l'affectation ne furent pas toujours aussi étrangers.  En quelques
   pages, et en quelques heures, Grégoire avait résumé et clos la
   controverse de tout un siècle."

   [3378] See Prolegomena p. 171.

   [3379] "There is but one divine Essence or Substance; Father, Son, and
   Spirit, are one in essence, or consubstantial.  They are in one
   another, inseparable, and cannot be conceived without each other.  In
   this point the Nicene doctrine is thoroughly monotheistic, or
   monarchian, in distinction from tritheism, which is but a new form of
   the polytheism of the pagans. "The terms Essence (ousia) and Nature
   (phusis), in the philosophical sense, denote not an individual, a
   personality, but the Genus or Species; not Unum in Numero, but Ens Unum
   in Multis.  All men are of the same substance, partake of the same
   human nature; though as persons and individuals they are very
   different.  The term Homo-ousion, in its strict grammatical sense,
   differs from Mono-ousion or Touto-ousion, as well as from
   Hetero-ousion, and signifies not numerical identity, but equality of
   essence or community of nature among several beings.  It is clearly
   thus used in the Chalcedonian Symbol, where it is said that Christ is
   consubstantial (Homo-ousios) with the Father as touching the Godhead,
   and consubstantial with us (and yet individually distinct from us) as
   touching the Manhood.'  But in the Divine Trinity consubstantiality
   denotes not only sameness of kind, but at the same time Numerical
   unity; not merely the Unum in Specie, but also the Unum in Numero.  The
   three Persons are related to the Divine Substance not as three
   individuals to their species, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or Peter,
   John, and Paul, to human nature; they are only one God.  The divine
   Substance is absolutely indivisible by reason of its simplicity, and
   absolutely inextensible and untransferable by reason of its infinity;
   whereas a corporeal substance can be divided, and the human nature can
   be multiplied by generation.  Three Divine substances would limit and
   exclude each other, and therefore could not be infinite or absolute.
   The whole fulness of the one undivided Essence of God, with all its
   attributes, is in all the Persons of the Trinity, though in each in His
   own way; in the Father as Original Principle, in the Son by eternal
   Generation, in the Spirit by eternal Procession.  The Church teaches
   not One Divine Essence and Three Persons, but One Essence In Three
   Persons.  Father, Son, and Spirit cannot be conceived as Three separate
   individuals, but are in one another, and form a solidaric Unity."
   (Schaff, History of the Church, Nic. & Post-Nic. Period, Div. ii. p.
   672.)

   [3380] Two terms borrowed from Holy Scripture (Heb. i. 3).  But
   observe, borrowed with a difference--not "the Image of His Substance,"
   which they would not admit, but of His "Energy," which is a very
   different conception.

   [3381] In his Fifty-third Epistle, addressed to S. Basil, there is an
   amusing instance of his defence of this tolerant disposition, which S.
   Basil also displayed in dealing with minds of this class.

