# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume VII.   Cyril of Jerusalem, Gregory Nazianzen
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume VII
# father: gregory_nazianzen
# work: The Five Theological Orations (Orations XXVII-XXXI)
# clavis: CPG-3010
# extracted: 2026-09-25
# note: Public-domain Schaff/Browne/Swallow English extract of the Five Theological Orations.

   Oration XXVII.

   The First Theological Oration.

   A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eunomians.

   I.  I am to speak against persons who pride themselves on their
   eloquence; so, to begin with a text of Scripture, "Behold, I am against
   thee, O thou proud one," [3382] not only in thy system of teaching, but
   also in thy hearing, and in thy tone of mind.  For there are certain
   persons who have not only their ears [3383] and their tongues, but
   even, as I now perceive, their hands too, itching for our words; who
   delight in profane babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so
   called, [3384] and strifes about words, which tend to no profit; for so
   Paul, the Preacher and Establisher of the "Word cut short," [3385] the
   disciple and teacher of the Fishermen, [3386] calls all that is
   excessive or superfluous in discourse.  But as to those to whom we
   refer, would that they, whose tongue is so voluble and clever in
   applying itself to noble and approved language, would likewise pay some
   attention to actions.  For then perhaps in a little while they would
   become less sophistical, and less absurd and strange acrobats of words,
   if I may use a ridiculous expression about a ridiculous subject.

   II.  But since they neglect every path of righteousness, and look only
   to this one point, namely, which of the propositions submitted to them
   they shall bind or loose, (like those persons who in the theatres
   perform wrestling matches in public, but not that kind of wrestling in
   which the victory is won according to the rules of the sport, but a
   kind to deceive the eyes of those who are ignorant in such matters, and
   to catch applause), and every marketplace must buzz with their talking;
   and every dinner party be worried to death with silly talk and boredom;
   and every festival be made unfestive and full of dejection, and every
   occasion of mourning be consoled by a greater calamity [3387] --their
   questions--and all the women's apartments accustomed to simplicity be
   thrown into confusion and be robbed of its flower of modesty by the
   torrent of their words...since, I say this is so, the evil is
   intolerable and not to be borne, and our Great Mystery is in danger of
   being made a thing of little moment.  Well then, let these spies [3388]
   bear with us, moved as we are with fatherly compassion, and as holy
   Jeremiah says, torn in our hearts; [3389] let them bear with us so far
   as not to give a savage reception to our discourse upon this subject;
   and let them, if indeed they can, restrain their tongues for a short
   while and lend us their ears.  However that may be, you shall at any
   rate suffer no loss.  For either we shall have spoken in the ears of
   them that will hear, [3390] and our words will bear some fruit, namely
   an advantage to you (since the Sower soweth the Word [3391] upon every
   kind of mind; and the good and fertile bears fruit), or else you will
   depart despising this discourse of ours as you have despised others,
   and having drawn from it further material for gainsaying and railing at
   us, upon which to feast yourselves yet more.

   And you must not be astonished if I speak a language which is strange
   to you and contrary to your custom, who profess to know everything and
   to teach everything in a too impetuous and generous manner...not to
   pain you by saying ignorant and rash.

   III.  Not to every one, my friends, does it belong to philosophize
   about God; not to every one; the Subject is not so cheap and low; and I
   will add, not before every audience, nor at all times, nor on all
   points; but on certain occasions, and before certain persons, and
   within certain limits.

   Not to all men, because it is permitted only to those who have been
   examined, and are passed masters in meditation, and who have been
   previously purified in soul and body, or at the very least are being
   purified.  For the impure to touch the pure is, we may safely say, not
   safe, just as it is unsafe to fix weak eyes upon the sun's rays.  And
   what is the permitted occasion?  It is when we are free from all
   external defilement or disturbance, and when that which rules within us
   is not confused with vexatious or erring images; like persons mixing up
   good writing with bad, or filth with the sweet odours of unguents.  For
   it is necessary to be truly at leisure to know God; and when we can get
   a convenient season, to discern the straight road of the things
   divine.  And who are the permitted persons?  They to whom the subject
   is of real concern, and not they who make it a matter of pleasant
   gossip, like any other thing, after the races, or the theatre, or a
   concert, or a dinner, or still lower employments.  To such men as
   these, idle jests and pretty contradictions about these subjects are a
   part of their amusement.

   IV.  Next, on what subjects and to what extent may we philosophize?  On
   matters within our reach, and to such an extent as the mental power and
   grasp of our audience may extend.  No further, lest, as excessively
   loud sounds injure the hearing, or excess of food the body, or, if you
   will, as excessive burdens beyond the strength injure those who bear
   them, or excessive rains the earth; so these too, being pressed down
   and overweighted by the stiffness, if I may use the expression, of the
   arguments should suffer loss even in respect of the strength they
   originally possessed. [3392]

   V.  Now, I am not saying that it is not needful to remember God at all
   times;...I must not be misunderstood, or I shall be having these nimble
   and quick people down upon me again.  For we ought to think of God even
   more often than we draw our breath; and if the expression is
   permissible, we ought to do nothing else.  Yea, I am one of those who
   entirely approve that Word which bids us meditate day and night, [3393]
   and tell at eventide and morning and noon day, [3394] and praise the
   Lord at every time; [3395] or, to use Moses' words, whether a man lie
   down, or rise up, or walk by the way, or whatever else he be doing
   [3396] --and by this recollection we are to be moulded to purity.  So
   that it is not the continual remembrance of God that I would hinder,
   but only the talking about God; nor even that as in itself wrong, but
   only when unseasonable; nor all teaching, but only want of moderation.
   As of even honey repletion and satiety, though it be of honey, produce
   vomiting; [3397] and, as Solomon says and I think, there is a time for
   every thing, [3398] and that which is good ceases to be good if it be
   not done in a good way; just as a flower is quite out of season in
   winter, and just as a man's dress does not become a woman, nor a
   woman's a man; and as geometry is out of place in mourning, or tears at
   a carousal; shall we in this instance alone disregard the proper time,
   in a matter in which most of all due season should be respected?
   Surely not, my friends and brethren (for I will still call you
   Brethren, though you do not behave like brothers).  Let us not think so
   nor yet, like hot tempered and hard mouthed horses, throwing off our
   rider Reason, and casting away Reverence, that keeps us within due
   limits, run far away from the turning point, [3399] but let us
   philosophize within our proper bounds, and not be carried away into
   Egypt, nor be swept down into Assyria [3400] , nor sing the Lord's song
   in a strange land, by which I mean before any kind of audience,
   strangers or kindred, hostile or friendly, kindly or the reverse, who
   watch what we do with over great care, and would like the spark of what
   is wrong in us to become a flame, and secretly kindle and fan it and
   raise it to heaven with their breath and make it higher than the
   Babylonian flame which burnt up every thing around it.  For since their
   strength lies not in their own dogmas, they hunt for it in our weak
   points.  And therefore they apply themselves to our--shall I say
   "misfortunes" or "failings"?--like flies to wounds.  But let us at
   least be no longer ignorant of ourselves, or pay too little attention
   to the due order in these matters.  And if it be impossible to put an
   end to the existing hostility, let us at least agree upon this, that we
   will utter Mysteries under our breath, and holy things in a holy
   manner, and we will not cast to ears profane that which may not be
   uttered, nor give evidence that we possess less gravity than those who
   worship demons, and serve shameful fables and deeds; for they would
   sooner give their blood to the uninitiated than certain words.  But let
   us recognize that as in dress and diet and laughter and demeanour there
   is a certain decorum, so there is also in speech and silence; since
   among so many titles and powers of God, we pay the highest honour to
   The Word.  Let even our disputings then be kept within bounds.

   VI.  Why should a man who is a hostile listener to such words be
   allowed to hear about the Generation of God, or his creation, or how
   God was made out of things which had no existence, or of section and
   analysis and division? [3401]   Why do we make our accusers judges?
   Why do we put swords into the hands of our enemies?  How, thinkest
   thou, or with what temper, will the arguments about such subjects be
   received by one who approves of adulteries, and corruption of children,
   and who worships the passions and cannot conceive of aught higher than
   the body...who till very lately set up gods for himself, and gods too
   who were noted for the vilest deeds?  Will it not first be from a
   material standpoint, shamefully and ignorantly, and in the sense to
   which he has been accustomed?  Will he not make thy Theology a defence
   for his own gods and passions?  For if we ourselves wantonly misuse
   these words, [3402] it will be a long time before we shall persuade
   them to accept our philosophy.  And if they are in their own persons
   inventors of evil things, how should they refrain from grasping at such
   things when offered to them?  Such results come to us from mutual
   contest.  Such results follow to those who fight for the Word beyond
   what the Word approves; they are behaving like mad people, who set
   their own house on fire, or tear their own children, or disavow their
   own parents, taking them for strangers.

   VII.  But when we have put away from the conversation those who are
   strangers to it, and sent the great legion [3403] on its way to the
   abyss into the herd of swine, the next thing is to look to ourselves,
   and polish our theological self to beauty like a statue.  The first
   point to be considered is--What is this great rivalry of speech and
   endless talking?  What is this new disease of insatiability?  Why have
   we tied our hands and armed our tongues?  We do not praise either
   hospitality, or brotherly love, or conjugal affection, or virginity;
   nor do we admire liberality to the poor, or the chanting of Psalms, or
   nightlong vigils, [3404] or tears.  We do not keep under the body by
   fasting, or go forth to God by prayer; nor do we subject the worse to
   the better--I mean the dust to the spirit--as they would do who form a
   just judgment of our composite nature; we do not make our life a
   preparation for death; nor do we make ourselves masters of our
   passions, mindful of our heavenly nobility; nor tame our anger when it
   swells and rages, nor our pride that bringeth to a fall, nor
   unreasonable grief, nor unchastened pleasure, nor meretricious
   laughter, nor undisciplined eyes, nor insatiable ears, nor excessive
   talk, nor absurd thoughts, nor aught of the occasions which the Evil
   One gets against us from sources within ourselves; bringing upon us the
   death that comes through the windows, [3405] as Holy Scripture saith;
   that is, through the senses.  Nay we do the very opposite, and have
   given liberty to the passions of others, as kings give releases from
   service in honour of a victory, only on condition that they incline to
   our side, and make their assault upon God more boldly, or more
   impiously.  And we give them an evil reward for a thing which is not
   good, license of tongue for their impiety.

   VIII.  And yet, O talkative Dialectician, I will ask thee one small
   question, [3406] and answer thou me, as He saith to Job, Who through
   whirlwind and cloud giveth Divine admonitions. [3407]   Are there many
   mansions in God's House, as thou hast heard, or only one?  Of course
   you will admit that there are many, and not only one.  Now, are they
   all to be filled, or only some, and others not; so that some will be
   left empty, and will have been prepared to no purpose?  Of course all
   will be filled, for nothing can be in vain which has been done by God.
   And can you tell me what you will consider this Mansion to be?  Is it
   the rest and glory which is in store There for the Blessed, or
   something else?--No, not anything else.  Since then we are agreed upon
   this point, let us further examine another also.  Is there any thing
   that procures these Mansions, as I think there is; or is there
   nothing?--Certainly there is--What is it?  Is it not that there are
   various modes of conduct, and various purposes, one leading one way,
   another another way, according to the proportion of faith, and these we
   call Ways?  Must we, then, travel all, or some of these Ways...the same
   individual along them all, if that be possible; or, if not, along as
   many as may be; or else along some of them?  And even if this may not
   be, it would still be a great thing, at least as it appears to me, to
   travel excellently along even one.--"You are right in your
   conception."--What then when you hear there is but One way, and that a
   narrow one, [3408] does the word seem to you to shew?  That there is
   but one on account of its excellence.  For it is but one, even though
   it be split into many parts.  And narrow because of its difficulties,
   and because it is trodden by few in comparison with the multitude of
   the adversaries, and of those who travel along the road of wickedness.
   "So I think too."  Well, then, my good friend, since this is so, why do
   you, as though condemning our doctrine for a certain poverty, rush
   headlong down that one which leads through what you call arguments and
   speculations, but I frivolities and quackeries?  Let Paul reprove you
   with those bitter reproaches, in which, after his list of the Gifts of
   Grace, he says, Are all Apostles?  Are all Prophets? etc. [3409]

   IX.  But, be it so.  Lofty thou art, even beyond the lofty, even above
   the clouds, if thou wilt, a spectator of things invisible, a hearer of
   things unspeakable; one who hast ascended after Elias, and who after
   Moses hast been deemed worthy of the Vision of God, and after Paul hast
   been taken up into heaven; why dost thou mould the rest of thy fellows
   in one day into Saints, and ordain them Theologians, and as it were
   breathe into them instruction, and make them many councils of ignorant
   oracles?  Why dost thou entangle those who are weaker in thy spider's
   web, if it were something great and wise?  Why dost thou stir up wasps'
   nests against the Faith?  Why dost thou suddenly spring a flood of
   dialectics upon us, as the fables of old did the Giants?  Why hast thou
   collected all that is frivolous and unmanly among men, like a rabble,
   into one torrent, and having made them more effeminate by flattery,
   fashioned a new workshop, cleverly making a harvest for thyself out of
   their want of understanding?  Dost thou deny that this is so, and are
   the other matters of no account to thee?  Must thy tongue rule at any
   cost, and canst thou not restrain the birthpang of thy speech?  Thou
   mayest find many other honourable subjects for discussion.  To these
   turn this disease of thine with some advantage.  Attack the silence of
   Pythagoras, [3410] and the Orphic beans, and the novel brag about "The
   Master said."  Attack the ideas of Plato, [3411] and the
   transmigrations and courses of our souls, and the reminiscences, and
   the unlovely loves of the soul for lovely bodies.  Attack the atheism
   of Epicurus, [3412] and his atoms, and his unphilosophic pleasure; or
   Aristotle's petty Providence, and his artificial system, and his
   discourses about the mortality of the soul, and the humanitarianism of
   his doctrine.  Attack the superciliousness of the Stoa, [3413] or the
   greed and vulgarity of the Cynic. [3414]   Attack the "Void and Full"
   (what nonsense), and all the details about the gods and the sacrifices
   and the idols and demons, whether beneficent or malignant, and all the
   tricks that people play with divination, evoking of gods, or of souls,
   and the power of the stars.  And if these things seem to thee unworthy
   of discussion as petty and already often confuted, and thou wilt keep
   to thy line, and seek the satisfaction of thy ambition in it; then here
   too I will provide thee with broad paths.  Philosophize about the world
   or worlds; about matter; about soul; about natures endowed with reason,
   good or bad; about resurrection, about judgment, about reward, or the
   Sufferings of Christ.  For in these subjects to hit the mark is not
   useless, and to miss it is not dangerous.  But with God we shall have
   converse, in this life only in a small degree; but a little later, it
   may be, more perfectly, in the Same, our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be
   glory for ever.  Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3382] Jer. l. 31.

   [3383] 2 Tim. iv. 3.

   [3384] Ib. ii. 16.

   [3385] Rom. ix. 28.

   [3386] S. Paul is called a disciple of the fishermen, as having been in
   some sense their follower (though in fact he was never a literal
   disciple of any of them); and their teacher as having taught such
   Successors of the Apostles as SS. Timothy and Titus.

   [3387] i.e. be thrown into the shade by something more serious which
   caused them by comparison to be scarcely felt any longer.

   [3388] kataskopoi quasi pseudepiskopoi.

   [3389] Jer. iv. 19.

   [3390] Ecclus. xxv. 9.

   [3391] S. Mark iv. 3 and 14.  "He that soweth the Word soweth upon,"
   etc.  So Billius and the Benedictines, but the rendering in the text
   seems preferable.

   [3392] i.e. Should not only fail to be strengthened thereby, but be
   actually weakened, through their inability to understand the argument.
   A bad defence weakens a good cause.

   [3393] Ps. i. 2.

   [3394] Ps. lv. 17.

   [3395] Ps. xxxiv. 1.

   [3396] Deut. vi. 7.

   [3397] Prov. xxv. 16.

   [3398] Eccles. iii. 1.

   [3399] The course of the chariot races in the Greek Games was round the
   Hippodrome a certain number of times.  To facilitate this arrangement,
   a party wall was built down the middle, and at either end of it certain
   posts were set up called nussai, or in Latin Metæ, round which the cars
   were to turn.  The object of the charioteers was to turn round these as
   close as possible, to save distance; and to do this well it was
   necessary to have the horses under perfect control, as well as
   perfectly trained, to make the semicircle at full gallop almost on the
   axis of the car.  The horses that got out of hand and galloped wildly
   round a large circle would almost certainly lose distance enough to
   lose the race, while the driver would be laughed at for his
   unskilfulness.

   [3400] Dan. iii. 12.

   [3401] The allusion is to the Arian and Eunomian habit of gossiping
   about the most sacred subjects in every sort of place or company or
   time, in order to promote their heresy.

   [3402] Such expressions as Generation and the like would certainly be
   understood in a material sense by the heathen; and so would place an
   unnecessary stumbling-block in the way of their conversion.

   [3403] Luke viii. 31.

   [3404] S. John Chrysostom, consecrated Archbishop of Constantinople in
   397, incurred much unpopularity among his clergy by insisting on the
   revival of the Night Hours of prayer.

   [3405] Jer. ix. 21.

   [3406] Job xxxviii. 3.

   [3407] Job xxxviii. 1.

   [3408] Matt. vii. 14.

   [3409] 1 Cor. xii. 29.

   [3410] The disciples of Pythagoras were made to keep silence absolutely
   for five years as a qualification for initiation into the mysteries of
   his order.  Further, they were bidden to abstain from eating beans, as
   these were said to be one receptacle of human souls in the course of
   their peregrinations; and when asked for proof of their peculiar
   doctrines, contented themselves with the reply, "autos etha" "the
   master said so."

   [3411] Plato taught that all things that exist are copies of certain
   objective archetypal Forms, emanations from the Mind of God, which God
   copied in creation.  He also taught a doctrine of transmigration of
   souls.

   [3412] Epicurus, an Athenian philosopher, of a materialistic type,
   taught that God had no existence, and that the world was made by a
   fortuitous concourse of innumerable atoms of matter, which are
   self-existent; and he placed the highest good in pleasure, which he
   defined as the absence of pain.

   [3413] The Stoa, a school of philosophers opposed to the Epicureans,
   took their name from a certain Colonnade at Athens, in which Zeno,
   their founder, used to teach.  Their highest good consisted in the
   complete subdual of all feeling; and so they were not unnaturally
   characterized by a haughty affectation of indifference.

   [3414] The Cynics, so called from their snarling way, were a school
   founded by Antisthenes.  They professed to despise everything human.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Oration XXVIII.

   The Second Theological Oration.

   I.  In the former Discourse we laid down clearly with respect to the
   Theologian, both what sort of character he ought to bear, and on what
   kind of subject he may philosophize, and when, and to what extent.  We
   saw that he ought to be, as far as may be, pure, in order that light
   may be apprehended by light; and that he ought to consort with serious
   men, in order that his word be not fruitless through falling on an
   unfruitful soil; and that the suitable season is when we have a calm
   within from the whirl of outward things; so as not like madmen [3415]
   to lose our breath; and that the extent to which we may go is that to
   which we have ourselves advanced, or to which we are advancing.  Since
   then these things are so, and we have broken up for ourselves the
   fallows of Divinity [3416] , so as not to sow upon thorns, [3417] and
   have made plain the face of the ground, [3418] being moulded and
   moulding others by Holy Scripture...let us now enter upon Theological
   questions, setting at the head thereof the Father, the Son, and the
   Holy Ghost, of Whom we are to treat; that the Father may be well
   pleased, and the Son may help us, and the Holy Ghost may inspire us; or
   rather that one illumination may come upon us from the One God, One in
   diversity, diverse in Unity, wherein is a marvel.

   II.  Now when I go up eagerly into the Mount [3419] --or, to use a
   truer expression, when I both eagerly long, and at the same time am
   afraid (the one through my hope and the other through my weakness) to
   enter within the Cloud, and hold converse with God, for so God
   commands; if any be an Aaron, let him go up with me, and let him stand
   near, being ready, if it must be so, to remain outside the Cloud.  But
   if any be a Nadad or an Abihu, or of the Order of the Elders, let him
   go up indeed, but let him stand afar off, according to the value of his
   purification.  But if any be of the multitude, who are unworthy of this
   height of contemplation, if he be altogether impure let him not
   approach at all, [3420] for it would be dangerous to him; but if he be
   at least temporarily purified, let him remain below and listen to the
   Voice alone, and the trumpet, [3421] the bare words of piety, and let
   him see the Mountain smoking and lightening, a terror at once and a
   marvel to those who cannot get up.  But if any is an evil and savage
   beast, and altogether incapable of taking in the subject matter of
   Contemplation and Theology, let him not hurtfully and malignantly lurk
   in his den among the woods, to catch hold of some dogma or saying by a
   sudden spring, and to tear sound doctrine to pieces by his
   misrepresentations, but let him stand yet afar off and withdraw from
   the Mount, or he shall be stoned and crushed, and shall perish
   miserably in his wickedness.  For to those who are like wild beasts
   true and sound discourses are stones.  If he be a leopard let him die
   with his spots. [3422]   If a ravening and roaring lion, seeking what
   he may devour [3423] of our souls or of our words; or a wild boar,
   trampling under foot the precious and translucent pearls of the Truth;
   [3424] or an Arabian [3425] and alien wolf, or one keener even than
   these in tricks of argument; or a fox, that is a treacherous and
   faithless soul, changing its shape according to circumstances or
   necessities, feeding on dead or putrid bodies, or on little vineyards
   [3426] when the large ones have escaped them; or any other carnivorous
   beast, rejected by the Law as unclean for food or enjoyment; our
   discourse must withdraw from such and be engraved on solid tables of
   stone, and that on both sides because the Law is partly visible, and
   partly hidden; the one part belonging to the mass who remain below, the
   other to the few who press upward into the Mount.

   III.  What is this that has happened to me, O friends, and initiates,
   and fellow-lovers of the truth?  I was running to lay hold on God, and
   thus I went up into the Mount, and drew aside the curtain of the Cloud,
   and entered away from matter and material things, and as far as I could
   I withdrew within myself.  And then when I looked up, I scarce saw the
   back parts of God; [3427] although I was sheltered by the Rock, the
   Word that was made flesh for us.  And when I looked a little closer, I
   saw, not the First and unmingled Nature, known to Itself--to the
   Trinity, I mean; not That which abideth within the first [3428] veil,
   and is hidden by the Cherubim; but only that Nature, which at last even
   reaches to us.  And that is, as far as I can learn, the Majesty, or as
   holy David calls it, the Glory [3429] which is manifested among the
   creatures, which It has produced and governs.  For these are the Back
   Parts of God, which He leaves behind Him, as tokens of Himself [3430]
   like the shadows and reflection of the sun in the water, which shew the
   sun to our weak eyes, because we cannot look at the sun himself, for by
   his unmixed light he is too strong for our power of perception.  In
   this way then shalt thou discourse of God; even wert thou a Moses and a
   god to Pharaoh; [3431] even wert thou caught up like Paul to the Third
   Heaven, [3432] and hadst heard unspeakable words; even wert thou raised
   above them both, and exalted to Angelic or Archangelic place and
   dignity.  For though a thing be all heavenly, or above heaven, and far
   higher in nature and nearer to God than we, yet it is farther distant
   from God, and from the complete comprehension of His Nature, than it is
   lifted above our complex and lowly and earthward sinking composition.

   IV.  Therefore we must begin again thus.  It is difficult to conceive
   God but to define Him in words is an impossibility, as one of the Greek
   teachers of Divinity [3433] taught, not unskilfully, as it appears to
   me; with the intention that he might be thought to have apprehended
   Him; in that he says it is a hard thing to do; and yet may escape being
   convicted of ignorance because of the impossibility of giving
   expression to the apprehension.  But in my opinion it is impossible to
   express Him, and yet more impossible to conceive Him.  For that which
   may be conceived may perhaps be made clear by language, if not fairly
   well, at any rate imperfectly, to any one who is not quite deprived of
   his hearing, or slothful of understanding.  But to comprehend the whole
   of so great a Subject as this is quite impossible and impracticable,
   not merely to the utterly careless and ignorant, but even to those who
   are highly exalted, and who love God, and in like manner to every
   created nature; seeing that the darkness of this world and the thick
   covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the full understanding of the
   truth.  I do not know whether it is the same with the higher natures
   and purer Intelligences [3434] which because of their nearness to God,
   and because they are illumined with all His Light, may possibly see, if
   not the whole, at any rate more perfectly and distinctly than we do;
   some perhaps more, some less than others, in proportion to their rank.

   V.  But enough has been said on this point.  As to what concerns us, it
   is not only the Peace of God [3435] which passeth all understanding and
   knowledge, nor only the things which God hath stored up in promise for
   the righteous, which "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor mind
   conceived" [3436] except in a very small degree, nor the accurate
   knowledge of the Creation.  For even of this I would have you know that
   you have only a shadow when you hear the words, "I will consider the
   heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars," [3437] and
   the settled order therein; not as if he were considering them now, but
   as destined to do so hereafter.  But far before them is That nature
   Which is above them, and out of which they spring, the Incomprehensible
   and Illimitable--not, I mean, as to the fact of His being, but as to
   Its nature.  For our preaching is not empty, nor our Faith vain, [3438]
   nor is this the doctrine we proclaim; for we would not have you take
   our candid statement as a starting point for a quibbling denial of God,
   or of arrogance on account of our confession of ignorance.  For it is
   one thing to be persuaded of the existence of a thing, and quite
   another to know what it is.

   VI.  Now our very eyes and the Law of Nature teach us that God exists
   and that He is the Efficient and Maintaining Cause of all things:  our
   eyes, because they fall on visible objects, and see them in beautiful
   stability and progress, immovably moving and revolving if I may so say;
   natural Law, because through these visible things and their order, it
   reasons back to their Author.  For how could this Universe have come
   into being or been put together, unless God had called it into
   existence, and held it together?  For every one who sees a beautifully
   made lute, and considers the skill with which it has been fitted
   together and arranged, or who hears its melody, would think of none but
   the lutemaker, or the luteplayer, and would recur to him in mind,
   though he might not know him by sight.  And thus to us also is
   manifested That which made and moves and preserves all created things,
   even though He be not comprehended by the mind.  And very wanting in
   sense is he who will not willingly go thus far in following natural
   proofs; but not even this which we have fancied or formed, or which
   reason has sketched for us, proves the existence of a God.  But if any
   one has got even to some extent a comprehension of this, how is God's
   Being to be demonstrated?  Who ever reached this extremity of wisdom?
   Who was ever deemed worthy of so great a gift?  Who has opened the
   mouth of his mind and drawn in the Spirit, [3439] so as by Him that
   searcheth all things, yea the deep thing of God, [3440] to take in God,
   and no longer to need progress, since he already possesses the Extreme
   Object of desire, and That to which all the social life and all the
   intelligence of the best men press forward?

   VII.  For what will you conceive the Deity to be, if you rely upon all
   the approximations of reason?  Or to what will reason carry you, O most
   philosophic of men and best of Theologians, who boast of your
   familiarity with the Unlimited?  Is He a body?  How then is He the
   Infinite and Limitless, and formless, and intangible, and invisible? or
   are these attributes of a body?  What arrogance for such is not the
   nature of a body!  Or will you say that He has a body, but not these
   attributes?  O stupidity, that a Deity should possess nothing more than
   we do.  For how is He an object of worship if He be circumscribed?  Or
   how shall He escape being made of elements, and therefore subject to be
   resolved into them again, or even altogether dissolved?  For every
   compound is a starting point of strife, and strife of separation, and
   separation of dissolution.  But dissolution is altogether foreign to
   God and to the First Nature.  Therefore there can be no separation,
   that there may be no dissolution, and no strife that there may be no
   separation, and no composition that there may be no strife.  Thus also
   there must be no body, that there may be no composition, and so the
   argument is established by going back from last to first.

   VIII.  And how shall we preserve the truth that God pervades all things
   and fills all, as it is written "Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith
   the Lord," [3441] and "The Spirit of the Lord filleth the world,"
   [3442] if God partly contains and partly is contained?  For either He
   will occupy an empty Universe, and so all things will have vanished for
   us, with this result, that we shall have insulted God by making Him a
   body, and by robbing Him of all things which He has made; or else He
   will be a body contained in other bodies, which is impossible; or He
   will be enfolded in them, or contrasted with them, as liquids are
   mixed, and one divides and is divided by another;--a view which is more
   absurd and anile than even the atoms of Epicurus [3443] and so this
   argument concerning the body will fall through, and have no body and no
   solid basis at all.  But if we are to assert that He is immaterial (as
   for example that Fifth Element which some [3444] have imagined), and
   that He is carried round in the circular movement...let us assume that
   He is immaterial, and that He is the Fifth Element; and, if they
   please, let Him be also bodiless in accordance with the independent
   drift and arrangement of their argument; for I will not at present
   differ with them on this point; in what respect then will He be one of
   those things which are in movement and agitation, to say nothing of the
   insult involved in making the Creator subject to the same movement as
   the creatures, and Him That carries all (if they will allow even this)
   one with those whom He carries.  Again, what is the force that moves
   your Fifth Element, and what is it that moves all things, and what
   moves that, and what is the force that moves that?  And so on ad
   infinitum.  And how can He help being altogether contained in space if
   He be subject to motion?  But if they assert that He is something other
   than this Fifth Element; suppose it is an angelic nature that they
   attribute to Him, how will they shew that Angels are corporeal, or what
   sort of bodies they have?  And how far in that case could God, to Whom
   the Angels minister, be superior to the Angels?  And if He is above
   them, there is again brought in an irrational swarm of bodies, and a
   depth of nonsense, that has no possible basis to stand upon.

   IX.  And thus we see that God is not a body.  For no inspired teacher
   has yet asserted or admitted such a notion, nor has the sentence of our
   own Court allowed it.  Nothing then remains but to conceive of Him as
   incorporeal.  But this term Incorporeal, though granted, does not yet
   set before us--or contain within itself His Essence, any more than
   Unbegotten, or Unoriginate, or Unchanging, or Incorruptible, or any
   other predicate which is used concerning God or in reference to Him.
   For what effect is produced upon His Being or Substance [3445] by His
   having no beginning, and being incapable of change or limitation?  Nay,
   the whole question of His Being is still left for the further
   consideration and exposition of him who truly has the mind of God and
   is advanced in contemplation.  For just as to say "It is a body," or
   "It was begotten," is not sufficient to present clearly to the mind the
   various objects of which these predicates are used, but you must also
   express the subject of which you use them, if you would present the
   object of your thought clearly and adequately (for every one of these
   predicates, corporeal, begotten, mortal, may be used of a man, or a
   cow, or a horse).  Just so he who is eagerly pursuing the nature of the
   Self-existent will not stop at saying what He is not, but must go on
   beyond what He is not, and say what He is; inasmuch as it is easier to
   take in some single point than to go on disowning point after point in
   endless detail, in order, both by the elimination of negatives and the
   assertion of positives to arrive at a comprehension of this subject.

   But a man who states what God is not without going on to say what He
   is, acts much in the same way as one would who when asked how many
   twice five make, should answer, "Not two, nor three, nor four, nor
   five, nor twenty, nor thirty, nor in short any number below ten, nor
   any multiple of ten;" but would not answer "ten," nor settle the mind
   of his questioner upon the firm ground of the answer.  For it is much
   easier, and more concise to shew what a thing is not from what it is,
   than to demonstrate what it is by stripping it of what it is not.  And
   this surely is evident to every one.

   X.  Now since we have ascertained that God is incorporeal, let us
   proceed a little further with our examination.  Is He Nowhere or
   Somewhere.  For if He is Nowhere, [3446] then some person of a very
   inquiring turn of mind might ask, How is it then that He can even
   exist?  For if the non-existent is nowhere, then that which is nowhere
   is also perhaps non-existent.  But if He is Somewhere, He must be
   either in the Universe, or above the Universe.  And if He is in the
   Universe, then He must be either in some part or in the whole.  If in
   some part, then He will be circumscribed by that part which is less
   than Himself; but if everywhere, then by one which is further and
   greater--I mean the Universal, which contains the Particular; if the
   Universe is to be contained by the Universe, and no place is to be free
   from circumscription.  This follows if He is contained in the
   Universe.  And besides, where was He before the Universe was created,
   for this is a point of no little difficulty.  But if He is above the
   Universe, is there nothing to distinguish this from the Universe, and
   where is this above situated?  And how could this Transcendence and
   that which is transcended be distinguished in thought, if there is not
   a limit to divide and define them?  Is it not necessary that there
   shall be some mean to mark off the Universe from that which is above
   the Universe?  And what could this be but Place, which we have already
   rejected?  For I have not yet brought forward the point that God would
   be altogether circumscript, if He were even comprehensible in thought:
   for comprehension is one form of circumscription.

   XI.  Now, why have I gone into all this, perhaps too minutely for most
   people to listen to, and in accordance with the present manner of
   discourse, which despises noble simplicity, and has introduced a
   crooked and intricate [3447] style?  That the tree may be known by its
   fruits; [3448] I mean, that the darkness which is at work in such
   teaching may be known by the obscurity of the arguments.  For my
   purpose in doing so was, not to get credit for myself for astonishing
   utterances, or excessive wisdom, through tying knots and solving
   difficulties (this was the great miraculous gift of Daniel), [3449] but
   to make clear the point at which my argument has aimed from the first.
   And what was this?  That the Divine Nature cannot be apprehended by
   human reason, and that we cannot even represent to ourselves all its
   greatness.  And this not out of envy, for envy is far from the Divine
   Nature, which is passionless, and only good and Lord of all; [3450]
   especially envy of that which is the most honourable [3451] of all His
   creatures.  For what does the Word prefer to the rational and speaking
   creatures?  Why, even their very existence is a proof of His supreme
   goodness.  Nor yet is this incomprehensibility for the sake of His own
   glory and honour, Who is full, [3452] as if His possession of His glory
   and majesty depended upon the impossibility of approaching Him.  For it
   is utterly sophistical and foreign to the character, I will not say of
   God, but of any moderately good man, who has any right ideas about
   himself, to seek his own supremacy by throwing a hindrance in the way
   of another.

   XII.  But whether there be other causes for it also, let them see who
   are nearer God, and are eye witnesses and spectators of His
   unsearchable judgments; [3453] if there are any who are so eminent in
   virtue, and who walk in the paths of the Infinite, as the saying is.
   As far, however, as we have attained, who measure with our little
   measure things hard to be understood, perhaps one reason is to prevent
   us from too readily throwing away the possession because it was so
   easily come by.  For people cling tightly to that which they acquire
   with labour; but that which they acquire easily they quickly throw
   away, because it can be easily recovered.  And so it is turned into a
   blessing, at least to all men who are sensible, that this blessing is
   not too easy.  Or perhaps it is in order that we may not share the fate
   of Lucifer, who fell, and in consequence of receiving the full light
   make our necks stiff against the Lord Almighty, and suffer a fall, of
   all things most pitiable, from the height we had attained.  Or perhaps
   it may be to give a greater reward hereafter for their labour and
   glorious life to those who have here been purified, and have exercised
   long patience in respect of that which they desired.

   Therefore this darkness of the body has been placed between us and God,
   like the cloud of old between the Egyptians and the Hebrews; [3454] and
   this is perhaps what is meant by "He made darkness His secret place,"
   [3455] namely our dulness, through which few can see even a little.
   But as to this point, let those discuss it whose business it is; and
   let them ascend as far as possible in the examination.  To us who are
   (as Jeremiah saith), "prisoners of the earth," [3456] and covered with
   the denseness of carnal nature, this at all events is known, that as it
   is impossible for a man to step over his own shadow, however fast he
   may move (for the shadow will always move on as fast as it is being
   overtaken) or, as it is impossible for the eye to draw near to visible
   objects apart from the intervening air and light, or for a fish to
   glide about outside of the waters; so it is quite impracticable for
   those who are in the body to be conversant with objects of pure thought
   apart altogether from bodily objects.  For something in our own
   environment is ever creeping in, even when the mind has most fully
   detached itself from the visible, and collected itself, and is
   attempting to apply itself to those invisible things which are akin to
   itself.

   XIII.  This will be made clear to you as follows:--Are not Spirit, and
   Fire, and Light, Love, and Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Mind and
   Reason, and the like, the names of the First Nature?  What then?  Can
   you conceive of Spirit apart from motion and diffusion; or of Fire
   without its fuel and its upward motion, and its proper colour and
   form?  Or of Light unmingled with air, and loosed from that which is as
   it were its father and source?  And how do you conceive of a mind?  Is
   it not that which is inherent in some person not itself, and are not
   its movements thoughts, silent or uttered?  And Reason...what else can
   you think it than that which is either silent within ourselves, or else
   outpoured (for I shrink from saying loosed)?  And if you conceive of
   Wisdom, what is it but the habit of mind which you know as such, and
   which is concerned with contemplations either divine or human?  And
   Justice and Love, are they not praiseworthy dispositions, the one
   opposed to injustice, the other to hate, and at one time intensifying
   themselves, at another relaxed, now taking possession of us, now
   leaving us alone, and in a word, making us what we are, and changing us
   as colours do bodies?  Or are we rather to leave all these things, and
   to look at the Deity absolutely, as best we can, collecting a
   fragmentary perception of It from Its images?  What then is this
   subtile thing, which is of these, and yet is not these, or how can that
   Unity which is in its Nature uncomposite and incomparable, still be all
   of these, and each one of them perfectly?  Thus our mind faints to
   transcend corporeal things, and to consort with the Incorporeal,
   stripped of all clothing of corporeal ideas, as long as it has to look
   with its inherent weakness at things above its strength.  For every
   rational nature longs for God and for the First Cause, but is unable to
   grasp Him, for the reasons I have mentioned.  Faint therefore with the
   desire, and as it were restive and impatient of the disability, it
   tries a second course, either to look at visible things, and out of
   some of them to make a god...(a poor contrivance, for in what respect
   and to what extent can that which is seen be higher and more godlike
   than that which sees, that this should worship that?) or else through
   the beauty and order of visible things to attain to that which is above
   sight; but not to suffer the loss of God through the magnificence of
   visible things.

   XIV.  From this cause some have made a god of the Sun, others of the
   Moon, others of the host of Stars, others of heaven itself with all its
   hosts, to which they have attributed the guiding of the Universe,
   according to the quality or quantity of their movement.  Others again
   of the Elements, earth, air, water, fire, because of their useful
   nature, since without them human life cannot possibly exist.  Others
   again have worshipped any chance visible objects, setting up the most
   beautiful of what they saw as their gods.  And there are those who
   worship pictures and images, at first indeed of their own ancestors--at
   least, this is the case with the more affectionate and sensual--and
   honour the departed with memorials; and afterwards even those of
   strangers are worshipped by men of a later generation separated from
   them by a long interval; through ignorance of the First Nature, and
   following the traditional honour as lawful and necessary; for usage
   when confirmed by time was held to be Law.  And I think that some who
   were courtiers of arbitrary power and extolled bodily strength and
   admired beauty, made a god in time out of him whom they honoured,
   perhaps getting hold of some fable to help on their imposture.

   XV.  And those of them who were most subject to passion deified their
   passions, or honoured them among their gods; Anger and
   Blood-thirstiness, Lust and Drunkenness, and every similar wickedness;
   and made out of this an ignoble and unjust excuse for their own sins.
   And some they left on earth, and some they hid beneath the earth (this
   being the only sign of wisdom about them), and some they raised to
   heaven. [3457]   O ridiculous distribution of inheritance!  Then they
   gave to each of these concepts the name of some god or demon, by the
   authority and private judgment of their error, and set up statues whose
   costliness is a snare, and thought to honour them with blood and the
   steam of sacrifices, and sometimes even by most shameful actions,
   frenzies and manslaughter.  For such honours were the fitting due of
   such gods.  And before now men have insulted themselves by worshipping
   monsters, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things, [3458] and of the
   very vilest and most absurd, and have made an offering to them of the
   glory of God; so that it is not easy to decide whether we ought most to
   despise the worshippers or the objects of their worship.  Probably the
   worshippers are far the most contemptible, for though they are of a
   rational nature, and have received grace from God, they have set up the
   worse as the better.  And this was the trick of the Evil One, who
   abused good to an evil purpose, as in most of his evil deeds.  For he
   laid hold of their desire in its wandering in search of God, in order
   to distort to himself [3459] the power, and steal the desire, leading
   it by the hand, like a blind man asking a road; and he hurled down and
   scattered some in one direction and some in another, into one pit of
   death and destruction.

   XVI.  This was their course.  But reason receiving us in our desire for
   God, and in our sense of the impossibility of being without a leader
   and guide, and then making us apply ourselves to things visible and
   meeting with the things which have been since the beginning, doth not
   stay its course even here.  For it was not the part of Wisdom to grant
   the sovereignty to things which are, as observation tells us, of equal
   rank.  By these then it leads to that which is above these, and by
   which being is given to these.  For what is it which ordered things in
   heaven and things in earth, and those which pass through air, and those
   which live in water; or rather the things which were before these,
   heaven and earth, air and water?  Who mingled these, and who
   distributed them?  What is it that each has in common with the other,
   and their mutual dependence and agreement?  For I commend the man,
   though he was a heathen, who said, What gave movement to these, and
   drives their ceaseless and unhindered motion?  Is it not the Artificer
   of them Who implanted reason in them all, in accordance with which the
   Universe is moved and controlled?  Is it not He who made them and
   brought them into being?  For we cannot attribute such a power to the
   Accidental.  For, suppose that its existence is accidental, to what
   will you let us ascribe its order?  And if you like we will grant you
   this:  to what then will you ascribe its preservation and protection in
   accordance with the terms of its first creation.  Do these belong to
   the Accidental, or to something else?  Surely not to the Accidental.
   And what can this Something Else be but God?  Thus reason that proceeds
   from God, that is implanted in all from the beginning and is the first
   law in us, and is bound up in all, leads us up to God through visible
   things.  Let us begin again, and reason this out.

   XVII.  What God is in nature and essence, no man ever yet has
   discovered or can discover.  Whether it will ever be discovered is a
   question which he who will may examine and decide.  In my opinion it
   will be discovered when that within us which is godlike and divine, I
   mean our mind and reason, shall have mingled with its Like, and the
   image shall have ascended to the Archetype, of which it has now the
   desire.  And this I think is the solution of that vexed problem as to
   "We shall know even as we are known." [3460]   But in our present life
   all that comes to us is but a little effluence, and as it were a small
   effulgence from a great Light.  So that if anyone has known God, or has
   had the testimony of Scripture to his knowledge of God, we are to
   understand such an one to have possessed a degree of knowledge which
   gave him the appearance of being more fully enlightened than another
   who did not enjoy the same degree of illumination; and this relative
   superiority is spoken of as if it were absolute knowledge, not because
   it is really such, but by comparison with the power of that other.

   XVIII.  Thus Enos "hoped to call upon the Name of the Lord." [3461]
   Hope was that for which he is commended; and that, not that he should
   know God, but that he should call upon him.  And Enoch was translated,
   [3462] but it is not yet clear whether it was because he already
   comprehended the Divine Nature, or in order that he might comprehend
   it.  And Noah's [3463] glory was that he was pleasing to God; he who
   was entrusted with the saving of the whole world from the waters, or
   rather of the Seeds of the world, escaped the Deluge in a small Ark.
   And Abraham, great Patriarch though he was, was justified by faith,
   [3464] and offered a strange victim, [3465] the type of the Great
   Sacrifice.  Yet he saw not God as God, but gave Him food as a man.
   [3466]   He was approved because he worshipped as far as he
   comprehended. [3467]   And Jacob dreamed of a lofty ladder and stair of
   Angels, and in a mystery anointed a pillar [3468] --perhaps to signify
   the Rock that was anointed for our sake--and gave to a place the name
   of The House of God [3469] in honour of Him whom he saw; and wrestled
   with God in human form; whatever this wrestling of God with man may
   mean...possibly it refers to the comparison of man's virtue with God's;
   and he bore on his body the marks of the wrestling, setting forth the
   defeat of the created nature; and for a reward of his reverence he
   received a change of his name; being named, instead of Jacob,
   Israel--that great and honourable name.  Yet neither he nor any one on
   his behalf, unto this day, of all the Twelve Tribes who were his
   children, could boast that he comprehended the whole nature or the pure
   sight of God.

   XIX.  To Elias neither the strong wind, nor the fire, nor the
   earthquake, as you learn from the story, [3470] but a light breeze
   adumbrated the Presence of God, and not even this His Nature.  And who
   was this Elias?  The man whom a chariot of fire took up to heaven,
   signifying the superhuman excellency of the righteous man.  And are you
   not amazed at Manoah the Judge of yore, and at Peter the disciple in
   later days; the one being unable to endure the sight even of one in
   whom was a representation of God; and saying, "We are undone, O wife,
   we have seen God;" [3471] speaking as though even a vision of God could
   not be grasped by human beings, let alone the Nature of God; and the
   other unable to endure the Presence of Christ in his boat and therefore
   bidding Him depart; [3472] and this though Peter was more zealous than
   the others for the knowledge of Christ, and received a blessing for
   this, [3473] and was entrusted with the greatest gifts.  What would you
   say of Isaiah or Ezekiel, who was an eyewitness of very great
   mysteries, and of the other Prophets; for one of these saw the Lord of
   Sabaoth sitting on the Throne of glory, [3474] and encircled and
   praised and hidden by the sixwinged Seraphim, and was himself purged by
   the live coal, and equipped for his prophetic office.  And the other
   describes the Cherubic Chariot [3475] of God, and the Throne upon them,
   and the Firmament over it, and Him that shewed Himself in the
   Firmament, and Voices, and Forces, and Deeds. [3476]   And whether this
   was an appearance by day, only visible to Saints, or an unerring vision
   of the night, or an impression on the mind holding converse with the
   future as if it were the present; or some other ineffable form of
   prophecy, I cannot say; the God of the Prophets knoweth, and they know
   who are thus inspired.  But neither these of whom I am speaking, nor
   any of their fellows ever stood before the Council [3477] and Essence
   of God, as it is written, or saw, or proclaimed the Nature of God.

   XX.  If it had been permitted to Paul to utter what the Third Heaven
   [3478] contained, and his own advance, or ascension, or assumption
   thither, perhaps we should know something more about God's Nature, if
   this was the mystery of the rapture.  But since it was ineffable, we
   too will honour it by silence.  Thus much we will hear Paul say about
   it, that we know in part and we prophesy in part. [3479]   This and the
   like to this are the confessions of one who is not rude in knowledge,
   [3480] who threatens to give proof of Christ speaking in him, the great
   doctor and champion of the truth.  Wherefore he estimates all knowledge
   on earth only as through a glass darkly, [3481] as taking its stand
   upon little images of the truth.  Now, unless I appear to anyone too
   careful, and over anxious about the examination of this matter, perhaps
   it was of this and nothing else that the Word Himself intimated that
   there were things which could not now be borne, but which should be
   borne and cleared up hereafter, [3482] and which John the Forerunner of
   the Word and great Voice of the Truth declared even the whole world
   could not contain. [3483]

   XXI.  The truth then, and the whole Word is full of difficulty and
   obscurity; and as it were with a small instrument we are undertaking a
   great work, when with merely human wisdom we pursue the knowledge of
   the Self-existent, and in company with, or not apart from, the senses,
   by which we are borne hither and thither, and led into error, we apply
   ourselves to the search after things which are only to be grasped by
   the mind, and we are unable by meeting bare realities with bare
   intellect to approximate somewhat more closely to the truth, and to
   mould the mind by its concepts.

   Now the subject of God is more hard to come at, [3484] in proportion as
   it is more perfect than any other, and is open to more objections, and
   the solutions of them are more laborious.  For every objection, however
   small, stops and hinders the course of our argument, and cuts off its
   further advance, just like men who suddenly check with the rein the
   horses in full career, and turn them right round by the unexpected
   shock.  Thus Solomon, who was the wisest of all men, [3485] whether
   before him or in his own time, to whom God gave breadth of heart, and a
   flood of contemplation, more abundant than the sand, even he, the more
   he entered into the depth, the more dizzy he became, and declared the
   furthest point of wisdom to be the discovery of how very far off she
   was from him. [3486]   Paul also tries to arrive at, I will not say the
   nature of God, for this he knew was utterly impossible, but only the
   judgments of God; and since he finds no way out, and no halting place
   in the ascent, and moreover, since the earnest searching of his mind
   after knowledge does not end in any definite conclusion, because some
   fresh unattained point is being continually disclosed to him (O marvel,
   that I have a like experience), he closes his discourse with
   astonishment, and calls this the riches of God, [3487] and the depth,
   and confesses the unsearchableness of the judgments of God, in almost
   the very words of David, who at one time calls God's judgments the
   great deep whose foundations cannot be reached by measure or sense;
   [3488] and at another says that His knowledge of him and of his own
   constitution was marvellous, [3489] and had attained greater strength
   than was in his own power or grasp.

   XXII.  For if, he says, I leave everything else alone, and consider
   myself and the whole nature and constitution of man, and how we are
   mingled, and what is our movement, and how the mortal was compounded
   with the immortal, and how it is that I flow downwards, and yet am
   borne upwards, and how the soul is circumscribed; [3490] and how it
   gives life and shares in feelings; and how the mind is at once
   circumscribed and unlimited, [3491] abiding in us and yet travelling
   over the Universe in swift motion and flow; how it is both received and
   imparted by word, and passes through air, and enters with all things;
   how it shares in sense, and enshrouds itself away from sense.  And even
   before these questions--what was our first moulding and composition in
   the workshop of nature, and what is our last formation and completion?
   What is the desire for and imparting of nourishment, and who brought us
   spontaneously to those first springs and sources of life?  How is the
   body nourished by food, and the soul by reason?  What is the drawing of
   nature, and the mutual relation between parents and children, that it
   should be held together by a spell of love?  How is it that species are
   permanent, and are different in their characteristics, although there
   are so many that their individual marks cannot be described?  How is it
   that the same animal is both mortal and immortal [3492] , the one by
   decease, the other by coming into being?  For one departs, and another
   takes its place, just like the flow of a river, which is never still,
   yet ever constant.  And you might discuss many more points concerning
   men's members and parts, and their mutual adaptation both for use and
   beauty, and how some are connected and others disjoined, some are more
   excellent and others less comely, some are united and others divided,
   some contain and others are contained, according to the law and reason
   of Nature.  Much too might be said about voices and ears.  How is it
   that the voice is carried by the vocal organs, and received by the
   ears, and both are joined by the smiting and resounding of the medium
   of the air?  Much too of the eyes, which have an indescribable
   communion with visible objects, and which are moved by the will alone,
   and that together, and are affected exactly as is the mind.  For with
   equal speed the mind is joined to the objects of thought, the eye to
   those of sight.  Much too concerning the other senses, not objects of
   the research of reason.  And much concerning our rest in sleep, and the
   figments of dreams, and of memory and remembrance; of calculation, and
   anger, and desire; and in a word, all by which this little world called
   Man is swayed.

   XXIII.  Shall I reckon up for you the differences of the other animals,
   both from us and from each other,--differences of nature, and of
   production, and of nourishment, and of region, and of temper, and as it
   were of social life?  How is it that some are gregarious and others
   solitary, some herbivorous and others carnivorous, some fierce and
   others tame, some fond of man and domesticated, others untamable and
   free?  And some we might call bordering on reason and power of
   learning, while others are altogether destitute of reason, and
   incapable of being taught.  Some with fuller senses, others with less;
   some immovable, and some with the power of walking, and some very
   swift, and some very slow; some surpassing in size or beauty, or in one
   or other of these respects; others very small or very ugly, or both;
   some strong, others weak, some apt at self-defence, others timid and
   crafty [3493] and others again are unguarded.  Some are laborious and
   thrifty, others altogether idle and improvident.  And before we come to
   such points as these, how is it that some are crawling things, and
   others upright; some attached to one spot, some amphibious; some
   delight in beauty and others are unadorned; some are married and some
   single; some temperate and others intemperate; some have numerous
   offspring and others not; some are long-lived and others have but short
   lives?  It would be a weary discourse to go through all the details.

   XXIV.  Look also at the fishy tribe gliding through the waters, and as
   it were flying through the liquid element, and breathing its own air,
   but in danger when in contact with ours, as we are in the waters; and
   mark their habits and dispositions, their intercourse and their births,
   their size and their beauty, and their affection for places, and their
   wanderings, and their assemblings and departings, and their properties
   which so nearly resemble those of the animals that dwell on land; in
   some cases community, in others contrast of properties, both in name
   and shape.  And consider the tribes of birds, and their varieties of
   form and colour, both of those which are voiceless and of songbirds.
   What is the reason of their melody, and from whom came it?  Who gave to
   the grasshopper the lute in his breast, and the songs and chirruping on
   the branches, when they are moved by the sun to make their midday
   music, and sing among the groves, and escort the wayfarer with their
   voices?  Who wove the song for the swan when he spreads his wings to
   the breezes, and makes melody of their rustling?  For I will not speak
   of the forced voices, and all the rest that art contrives against the
   truth.  Whence does the peacock, that boastful bird of Media, get his
   love of beauty and of praise (for he is fully conscious of his own
   beauty), so that when he sees any one approaching, or when, as they
   say, he would make a show before his hens, raising his neck and
   spreading his tail in circle around him, glittering like gold and
   studded with stars, he makes a spectacle of his beauty to his lovers
   with pompous strides?  Now Holy Scripture admires the cleverness in
   weaving even of women, saying, Who gave to woman skill in weaving and
   cleverness in the art of embroidery? [3494]   This belongeth to a
   living creature that hath reason, and exceedeth in wisdom and maketh
   way even as far as the things of heaven.

   XXV.  But I would have you marvel at the natural knowledge even of
   irrational creatures, and if you can, explain its cause.  How is it
   that birds have for nests rocks and trees and roofs, and adapt them
   both for safety and beauty, and suitably for the comfort of their
   nurslings?  Whence do bees and spiders get their love of work and art,
   by which the former plan their honeycombs, and join them together by
   hexagonal and co-ordinate tubes, and construct the foundation by means
   of a partition and an alternation of the angles with straight lines;
   and this, as is the case, in such dusky hives and dark combs; and the
   latter weave their intricate webs by such light and almost airy threads
   stretched in divers ways, and this from almost invisible beginnings, to
   be at once a precious dwelling, and a trap for weaker creatures with a
   view to enjoyment of food?  What Euclid ever imitated these, while
   pursuing philosophical enquiries with lines that have no real
   existence, and wearying himself with demonstrations?  From what
   Palamedes came the tactics, and, as the saying is, the movements and
   configurations of cranes, and the systems of their movement in ranks
   and their complicated flight?  Who were their Phidiæ and Zeuxides, and
   who were the Parrhasii and Aglaophons who knew how to draw and mould
   excessively beautiful things?  What harmonious Gnossian chorus of
   Dædalus, wrought for a girl [3495] to the highest pitch of beauty?
   What Cretan Labyrinth, hard to get through, hard to unravel, as the
   poets say, and continually crossing itself through the tricks of its
   construction?  I will not speak of the ants' storehouses and
   storekeepers, and of their treasurings of wood in quantities
   corresponding to the time for which it is wanted, and all the other
   details which we know are told of their marches and leaders and their
   good order in their works.

   XXVI.  If this knowledge has come within your reach and you are
   familiar with these branches of science, look at the differences of
   plants also, up to the artistic fashion of the leaves, which is adapted
   both to give the utmost pleasure to the eye, and to be of the greatest
   advantage to the fruit.  Look too at the variety and lavish abundance
   of fruits, and most of all at the wondrous beauty of such as are most
   necessary.  And consider the power of roots, and juices, and flowers,
   and odours, not only so very sweet, but also serviceable as medicines;
   and the graces and qualities of colours; and again the costly value,
   and the brilliant transparency of precious stones.  Since nature has
   set before you all things as in an abundant banquet free to all, both
   the necessaries and the luxuries of life, in order that, if nothing
   else, you may at any rate know God by His benefits, and by your own
   sense of want be made wiser than you were.  Next, I pray you, traverse
   the length and breadth of earth, the common mother of all, and the
   gulfs of the sea bound together with one another and with the land, and
   the beautiful forests, and the rivers and springs abundant and
   perennial, not only of waters cold and fit for drinking, and on the
   surface of the earth; but also such as running beneath the earth, and
   flowing under caverns, are then forced out by a violent blast, and
   repelled, and then filled with heat by this violence of strife and
   repulsion, burst out by little and little wherever they get a chance,
   and hence supply our need of hot baths in many parts of the earth, and
   in conjunction with the cold give us a healing which is without cost
   and spontaneous.  Tell me how and whence are these things?  What is
   this great web unwrought by art?  These things are no less worthy of
   admiration, in respect of their mutual relations than when considered
   separately.

   How is it that the earth stands solid and unswerving?  On what is it
   supported?  What is it that props it up, and on what does that rest?
   For indeed even reason has nothing to lean upon, but only the Will of
   God.  And how is it that part of it is drawn up into mountain summits,
   and part laid down in plains, and this in various and differing ways?
   And because the variations are individually small, it both supplies our
   needs more liberally, and is more beautiful by its variety; part being
   distributed into habitations, and part left uninhabited, namely all the
   great height of Mountains, and the various clefts of its coast line cut
   off from it.  Is not this the clearest proof of the majestic working of
   God?

   XXVII.  And with respect to the Sea even if I did not marvel at its
   greatness, yet I should have marvelled at its gentleness, in that
   although loose it stands within its boundaries; and if not at its
   gentleness, yet surely at its greatness; but since I marvel at both, I
   will praise the Power that is in both.  What collected it?  What
   bounded it?  How is it raised and lulled to rest, as though respecting
   its neighbour earth?  How, moreover, does it receive all the rivers,
   and yet remain the same, through the very superabundance of its
   immensity, if that term be permissible?  How is the boundary of it,
   though it be an element of such magnitude, only sand?  Have your
   natural philosophers with their knowledge of useless details anything
   to tell us, those men I mean who are really endeavouring to measure the
   sea with a wineglass, and such mighty works by their own conceptions?
   Or shall I give the really scientific explanation of it from Scripture
   concisely, and yet more satisfactorily and truly than by the longest
   arguments?  "He hath fenced the face of the water with His command."
   [3496]   This is the chain of fluid nature.  And how doth He bring upon
   it the Nautilus that inhabits the dry land (i.e., man) in a little
   vessel, and with a little breeze (dost thou not marvel at the sight of
   this,--is not thy mind astonished?), that earth and sea may be bound
   together by needs and commerce, and that things so widely separated by
   nature should be thus brought together into one for man?  What are the
   first fountains of springs?  Seek, O man, if you can trace out or find
   any of these things.  And who was it who cleft the plains and the
   mountains for the rivers, and gave them an unhindered course?  And how
   comes the marvel on the other side, that the Sea never overflows, nor
   the Rivers cease to flow?  And what is the nourishing power of water,
   and what the difference therein; for some things are irrigated from
   above, and others drink from their roots, if I may luxuriate a little
   in my language when speaking of the luxuriant gifts of God.

   XXVIII.  And now, leaving the earth and the things of earth, soar into
   the air on the wings of thought, that our argument may advance in due
   path; and thence I will take you up to heavenly things, and to heaven
   itself, and things which are above heaven; for to that which is beyond
   my discourse hesitates to ascend, but still it shall ascend as far as
   may be.  Who poured forth the air, that great and abundant wealth, not
   measured to men by their rank or fortunes; not restrained by
   boundaries; not divided out according to people's ages; but like the
   distribution of the Manna, [3497] received in sufficiency, and valued
   for its equality of distribution; the chariot of the winged creation;
   the seat of the winds; the moderator of the seasons; the quickener of
   living things, or rather the preserver of natural life in the body; in
   which bodies have their being, and by which we speak; in which is the
   light and all that it shines upon, and the sight which flows through
   it?  And mark, if you please, what follows.  I cannot give to the air
   the whole empire of all that is thought to belong to the air.  What are
   the storehouses of the winds? [3498]   What are the treasuries of the
   snow?  Who, as Scripture hath said, hath begotten the drops of dew?
   Out of Whose womb came the ice? and Who bindeth the waters in the
   clouds, and, fixing part in the clouds (O marvel!) held by His Word
   though its nature is to flow, poureth out the rest upon the face of the
   whole earth, and scattereth it abroad in due season, and in just
   proportions, and neither suffereth the whole substance of moisture to
   go out free and uncontrolled (for sufficient was the cleansing in the
   days of Noah; and He who cannot lie is not forgetful of His own
   covenant);...nor yet restraineth it entirely that we should not again
   stand in need of an Elias [3499] to bring the drought to an end.  If He
   shall shut up heaven, it saith, who shall open it?  If He open the
   floodgates, who shall shut them up? [3500]   Who can bring an excess or
   withhold a sufficiency of rain, unless he govern the Universe by his
   own measures and balances?  What scientific laws, pray, can you lay
   down concerning thunder and lightning, O you who thunder from the
   earth, and cannot shine with even little sparks of truth?  To what
   vapours from earth will you attribute the creation of cloud, or is it
   due to some thickening of the air, or pressure or crash of clouds of
   excessive rarity, so as to make you think the pressure the cause of the
   lightning, and the crash that which makes the thunder?  Or what
   compression of wind having no outlet will account to you for the
   lightning by its compression, and for the thunder by its bursting out?

   Now if you have in your thought passed through the air and all the
   things of air, reach with me to heaven and the things of heaven.  And
   let faith lead us rather than reason, if at least you have learnt the
   feebleness of the latter in matters nearer to you, and have known
   reason by knowing the things that are beyond reason, so as not to be
   altogether on the earth or of the earth, because you are ignorant even
   of your ignorance.

   XXIX.  Who spread the sky around us, and set the stars in order?  Or
   rather, first, can you tell me, of your own knowledge of the things in
   heaven, what are the sky and the stars; you who know not what lies at
   your very feet, and cannot even take the measure of yourself, and yet
   must busy yourself about what is above your nature, and gape at the
   illimitable?  For, granted that you understand orbits and periods, and
   waxings and wanings, and settings and risings, and some degrees and
   minutes, and all the other things which make you so proud of your
   wonderful knowledge; you have not arrived at comprehension of the
   realities themselves, but only at an observation of some movement,
   which, when confirmed by longer practice, and drawing the observations
   of many individuals into one generalization, and thence deducing a law,
   has acquired the name of Science (just as the lunar phenomena have
   become generally known to our sight), being the basis of this
   knowledge.  But if you are very scientific on this subject, and have a
   just claim to admiration, tell me what is the cause of this order and
   this movement.  How came the sun to be a beacon-fire to the whole
   world, and to all eyes like the leader of some chorus, concealing all
   the rest of the stars by his brightness, more completely than some of
   them conceal others.  The proof of this is that they shine against him,
   but he outshines them and does not even allow it to be perceived that
   they rose simultaneously with him, fair as a bridegroom, swift and
   great as a giant [3501] for I will not let his praises be sung from any
   other source than my own Scriptures--so mighty in strength that from
   one end to the other of the world he embraces all things in his heat,
   and there is nothing hid from the feeling thereof, but it fills both
   every eye with light, and every embodied creature with heat; warming,
   yet not burning, by the gentleness of its temper, and the order of its
   movement, present to all, and equally embracing all.

   XXX.  Have you considered the importance of the fact that a heathen
   writer [3502] speaks of the sun as holding the same position among
   material objects as God does among objects of thought?  For the one
   gives light to the eyes, as the Other does to the mind; and is the most
   beautiful of the objects of sight, as God is of those of thought.  But
   who gave him motion at first?  And what is it which ever moves him in
   his circuit, though in his nature stable and immovable, truly
   unwearied, and the giver and sustainer of life, and all the rest of the
   titles which the poets justly sing of him, and never resting in his
   course or his benefits?  How comes he to be the creator of day when
   above the earth, and of night when below it? or whatever may be the
   right expression when one contemplates the sun?  What are the mutual
   aggressions and concessions of day and night, and their regular
   irregularities--to use a somewhat strange expression?  How comes he to
   be the maker and divider of the seasons, that come and depart in
   regular order, and as in a dance interweave with each other, or stand
   apart by a law of love on the one hand, and of order on the other, and
   mingle little by little, and steal on their neighbour, just as nights
   and days do, so as not to give us pain by their suddenness.  This will
   be enough about the sun.

   Do you know the nature and phenomena of the Moon, and the measures and
   courses of light, and how it is that the sun bears rule over the day,
   and the moon presides over the night; and while She gives confidence to
   wild beasts, He stirs Man up to work, raising or lowering himself as
   may be most serviceable?  Know you the bond of Pleiades, or the fence
   of Orion [3503] as He who counteth the number of the stars and calleth
   them all by their names? [3504]   Know you the differences of the glory
   [3505] of each, and the order of their movement, that I should trust
   you, when by them you weave the web of human concerns, and arm the
   creature against the Creator?

   XXXI.  What say you?  Shall we pause here, after discussing nothing
   further than matter and visible things, or, since the Word knows the
   Tabernacle of Moses to be a figure of the whole creation--I mean the
   entire system of things visible and invisible--shall we pass the first
   veil, and stepping beyond the realm of sense, shall we look into the
   Holy Place, the Intellectual and Celestial creation?  But not even this
   can we see in an incorporeal way, though it is incorporeal, since it is
   called--or is--Fire and Spirit.  For He is said to make His Angels
   spirits, and His Ministers a flame of fire [3506] ...though perhaps
   this "making" means preserving by that Word by which they came into
   existence.  The Angel then is called spirit and fire; Spirit, as being
   a creature of the intellectual sphere; Fire, as being of a purifying
   nature; for I know that the same names belong to the First Nature.
   But, relatively to us at least, we must reckon the Angelic Nature
   incorporeal, or at any rate as nearly so as possible.  Do you see how
   we get dizzy over this subject, and cannot advance to any point, unless
   it be as far as this, that we know there are Angels and Archangels,
   Thrones, Dominions, Princedoms, Powers, Splendours, Ascents,
   Intelligent Powers or Intelligencies, pure natures and unalloyed,
   immovable to evil, or scarcely movable; ever circling in chorus round
   the First Cause (or how should we sing their praises?) illuminated
   thence with the purest Illumination, or one in one degree and one in
   another, proportionally to their nature and rank...so conformed to
   beauty and moulded that they become secondary Lights, and can enlighten
   others by the overflowings and largesses of the First Light?
   Ministrants of God's Will, strong with both inborn and imparted
   strength, traversing all space, readily present to all at any place
   through their zeal for ministry and the agility of their
   nature...different individuals of them embracing different parts of the
   world, or appointed over different districts of the Universe, as He
   knoweth who ordered and distributed it all.  Combining all things in
   one, solely with a view to the consent of the Creator of all things;
   Hymners of the Majesty of the Godhead, eternally contemplating the
   Eternal Glory, not that God may thereby gain an increase of glory, for
   nothing can be added to that which is full--to Him, who supplies good
   to all outside Himself but that there may never be a cessation of
   blessings to these first natures after God.  If we have told these
   things as they deserve, it is by the grace of the Trinity, and of the
   one Godhead in Three Persons; but if less perfectly than we have
   desired, yet even so our discourse has gained its purpose.  For this is
   what we were labouring to shew, that even the secondary natures surpass
   the power of our intellect; much more then the First and (for I fear to
   say merely That which is above all), the only Nature.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3415] A marginal reading noted by the Benedictines gives "sobbing" or
   "panting," which is a better sense.

   [3416] Jerem. iv. 3.

   [3417] Matt. xiii. 7.

   [3418] Isa. xxviii. 25.

   [3419] Exod. xxiv. 1.

   [3420] Ib. xix. 14.

   [3421] Ib. xix. 16-18.

   [3422] Jer. xiii. 23.

   [3423] 1 Pet. v. 8.

   [3424] Matt. vii. 6.

   [3425] Arabian:  So the LXX. renders the word which in A.V. Jer. v. 6,
   is translated "of the evening," and in the Vulg. "at evening."  R.V.
   gives as an alternative, "of the deserts."

   [3426] The LXX. in Cant. xi. 15, admits of this translation as well as
   of that followed by A.V.

   [3427] Exod. xxxiii. 23.

   [3428] This veil of the Mercy Seat, spoken of in Exod. xxvi. 31,
   signifies in Gregory's sense the denial of contemplation of that
   Highest Nature.

   [3429] Ps. viii. 1.

   [3430] The Face of God signifies His Essence and Deity, which were
   before all worlds:  His back parts are Creation and Providence, by
   which He reveals Himself.

   [3431] Exod. iv. 2.

   [3432] 2 Cor. xii. 2.

   [3433] Plato, Tim., 28 E.

   [3434] No one doubts, say the Benedictine Editors, that the Angels do
   see God, and that men, too, will see Him, when they attain to Eternal
   Bliss.  S. Thomas (Summa I. qu. xii. 4) argues that the Angels have
   cognition of God's Essence not by nature but by grace:  but yet (Ib.
   qu. lvi. 3) that they have by nature a certain cognition of Him, as
   represented and as it were mirrored in their own essence; though not
   the actual vision of His Essence.  The Angel, he says again (Ib. qu.
   lxiv. 1) has a higher cognition of God than man has, on account of the
   perfection of his intellect; and this cognition remains even in the
   fallen Angels.

   [3435] Phil. iv. 7.

   [3436] Isa. lxiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [3437] Ps. viii. 3.

   [3438] 1 Cor. xv. 19.

   [3439] Ps. cxix. 21.

   [3440] 1 Cor. ii. 10.

   [3441] Jer. xxiii. 24.

   [3442] Wisd. i. 7.

   [3443] Epicurus taught that Matter is eternal, and consists of an
   indefinite number of Atoms or indivisible units, floating about in
   space, and mutually attracting and repelling each other; and that all
   that exists is due to some chance meeting and coalition of these atoms.

   [3444] This is a speculation of Aristotle, who imagined a Fifth
   Element, consisting of formless matter.

   [3445] Petavius (De Trin. IV. ii. 7) notes that hupostasis seems used
   here of the Essence and Nature common to the Three Persons of the
   Blessed Trinity.

   [3446] Nowhere is in this passage used in an ambiguous sense.  As
   asserted of God, it means that His being is in no way limited by
   place:  not that He has no existence in place, for He is everywhere,
   and He transcends all place.  Before the creation of the Universe He
   existed, and He created Place, which therefore cannot be the seat of
   His Being.

   [3447] v. 1.  Affected.  The allusion is especially to the ostentatious
   dialectics and tedious arguments of Aëtius and his followers, Eunomius
   and others.

   [3448] Luke vi. 44.

   [3449] cf. Dan. v. 12.

   [3450] Plato, Tim., 10.

   [3451] v. 1.  Most Akin to Himself.  Combefis.

   [3452] Isa. i. 11.

   [3453] Rom. xi. 33.

   [3454] Exod. xiv. 20.

   [3455] Ps. xviii. 11.

   [3456] Lam. iii. 34.

   [3457] Referring to the mythical partition of the Universe, which gave
   heaven to Zeus, the sea to Poseidon, and the infernal regions to
   Aidoneus.

   [3458] Rom. i. 23.

   [3459] It was a very general belief in the early Church that the gods
   whom the heathen worshipped were in reality actual evil spirits; and
   this belief is certainly supported by S. Paul's argument about
   eidolothuton in 1 Cor. x. 19-21.

   [3460] 1 Cor. xiii. 12, but with a reading epignosesthe, which is not
   in the New Testament.

   [3461] Gen. iv. 26.  The verb has by some been taken as passive, and
   not middle, "hoped that the Name of the Lord would be called upon."

   [3462] Ib. v. 24, Ecclus. xlix. 14.

   [3463] Gen. vi. 8.

   [3464] Ib. xviii. 18.

   [3465] Ib. xxviii. 2.

   [3466] Gen. xviii. 2.  Elias Cretensis sees in this occurrence a
   foreshadowing of the Incarnation; and also with many others, a
   revelation of the Trinity, in that Abraham saw Three and conversed with
   One.

   [3467] Gen. xxxii. 28.

   [3468] Ib. ver. 28.

   [3469] v. l. The Form of God, which would refer to the occasion cited
   below.  The reading is grammatically easier, as an accusative is
   required; but in that case we might have expected the wrestling with
   the Angel to have been mentioned first, as the name Penuel was given by
   Jacob on the day following the night in which he wrestled, and received
   his own change of name.  The Benedictines, while retaining House in
   text and version, express a preference for Form, because the subject of
   the argument is the Vision of God.

   [3470] 1 Kings xix. 11, 12.  LXX. has a Sound of a Light breeze.

   [3471] Judg. xiii. 22.

   [3472] Luke v. 8.

   [3473] Matt. xvi. 16, 17.

   [3474] Isa. vi. 1 sqq.

   [3475] Ezek. i. 4-28.

   [3476] v. l. Orders, i.e. of angels.

   [3477] This is a quotation from the LXX. of Jer. xxiii. 18, where for
   hupostemati Aquila has aporreto, and Symmachus homilia, (according to
   Trommius).  hupostema properly means a Station of troops, and such is
   the meaning in the other two places where the word occurs in the LXX.,
   viz.:--2 Sam. xxiii. 14, and 1 Chron. xi. 16.  The Hebrew word which it
   represents in this passage is one of frequent use, and means "a
   Council," or, in a sense derived from this, Familiar Intercourse.  In
   Job xv. 8 it is rendered in A.V. The Secret of God, where the LXX. has
   suntagma.  The Vulgate in both cases has Concilium Dei; the
   Benedictines however render it Substance.  A.V. has Counsel, and in
   marg. Secret; while R.V. reads Council, with no marginal alternative.

   [3478] 2 Cor. xii. 2.

   [3479] 1 Cor. xiii. 9.

   [3480] 2 Cor. xi. 6.

   [3481] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [3482] John xvi. 12.

   [3483] S. John xxi. 25.  By a curious slip of the tongue S. Gregory
   here attributes to the Baptist words of the Evangelist.

   [3484] cf. Petav. de Deo, iii., c. 7.

   [3485] 1 Kings iii. 12.

   [3486] Ecc. vii. 23.

   [3487] Rom. xi. 23.

   [3488] Ps. xxxvi. 7.

   [3489] Ib. cxxxix. 6.

   [3490] v. l.  And how the soul is carried round.

   [3491] v. l.  Invisible.

   [3492] Gregory is not here speaking of the immorality of the individual
   soul, but of that of the Race, which it shares with other animals, and
   which is effected by continual succession.

   [3493] The Benedictines here insert Some well protected; but it is
   their own conjecture, and is not found in the Manuscripts.

   [3494] Job xxxviii. 36.  LXX.

   [3495] The allusion is to a group made by Dædalus for Ariadne,
   representing a chorus of youths and maidens, which seemed to be moving
   in musical rhythm.  It is described by Homer (Il., xviii., 592 sqq.).

   [3496] Job xxvi. 10.  LXX.

   [3497] Exod. xvi. 18.

   [3498] Job xxxvii. 9, 10.

   [3499] 1 Kings xviii. 44.

   [3500] Job xii. 14.

   [3501] Ps. xix. 5.

   [3502] Plato.

   [3503] Job xxxviii. 31.

   [3504] Ps. cxlvii. 4.

   [3505] 1 Cor. xv. 41.

   [3506] Ps. civ. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Oration XXIX.

   The Third Theological Oration.

   On the Son.

   I.  This then is what might be said to cut short our opponents'
   readiness to argue and their hastiness with its consequent insecurity
   in all matters, but above all in those discussions which relate to
   God.  But since to rebuke others is a matter of no difficulty whatever,
   but a very easy thing, which any one who likes can do; whereas to
   substitute one's own belief for theirs is the part of a pious and
   intelligent man; let us, relying on the Holy Ghost, Who among them is
   dishonoured, but among us is adored, bring forth to the light our own
   conceptions about the Godhead, whatever these may be, like some noble
   and timely birth.  Not that I have at other times been silent; for on
   this subject alone I am full of youthful strength and daring; but the
   fact is that under present circumstances I am even more bold to declare
   the truth, that I may not (to use the words of Scripture) by drawing
   back fall into the condemnation of being displeasing to God. [3507]
   And since every discourse is of a twofold nature, the one part
   establishing one's own, and the other overthrowing one's opponents'
   position; let us first of all state our own position, and then try to
   controvert that of our opponents;--and both as briefly as possible, so
   that our arguments may be taken in at a glance (like those of the
   elementary treatises which they have devised to deceive simple or
   foolish persons), and that our thoughts may not be scattered by reason
   of the length of the discourse, like water which is not contained in a
   channel, but flows to waste over the open land.

   II.  The three most ancient opinions concerning God are Anarchia,
   Polyarchia, and Monarchia.  The first two are the sport of the children
   of Hellas, and may they continue to be so.  For Anarchy is a thing
   without order; and the Rule of Many is factious, and thus anarchical,
   and thus disorderly.  For both these tend to the same thing, namely
   disorder; and this to dissolution, for disorder is the first step to
   dissolution.

   But Monarchy is that which we hold in honour.  It is, however, a
   Monarchy that is not limited to one Person, for it is possible for
   Unity if at variance with itself to come into a condition of plurality;
   [3508] but one which is made of an equality of Nature and a Union of
   mind, and an identity of motion, and a convergence of its elements to
   unity--a thing which is impossible to the created nature--so that
   though numerically distinct there is no severance of Essence.
   Therefore Unity [3509] having from all eternity arrived by motion at
   Duality, found its rest in Trinity.  This is what we mean by Father and
   Son and Holy Ghost.  The Father is the Begetter and the Emitter; [3510]
   without passion of course, and without reference to time, and not in a
   corporeal manner.  The Son is the Begotten, and the Holy Ghost the
   Emission; for I know not how this could be expressed in terms
   altogether excluding visible things.  For we shall not venture to speak
   of "an overflow of goodness," as one of the Greek Philosophers dared to
   say, as if it were a bowl overflowing, and this in plain words in his
   Discourse on the First and Second Causes. [3511]   Let us not ever look
   on this Generation as involuntary, like some natural overflow, hard to
   be retained, and by no means befitting our conception of Deity.
   Therefore let us confine ourselves within our limits, and speak of the
   Unbegotten and the Begotten and That which proceeds from the Father, as
   somewhere God the Word Himself saith.

   III.  When did these come into being?  They are above all "When."  But,
   if I am to speak with something more of boldness,--when the Father
   did.  And when did the Father come into being.  There never was a time
   when He was not.  And the same thing is true of the Son and the Holy
   Ghost.  Ask me again, and again I will answer you, When was the Son
   begotten?  When the Father was not begotten.  And when did the Holy
   Ghost proceed?  When the Son was, not proceeding but, begotten--beyond
   the sphere of time, and above the grasp of reason; although we cannot
   set forth that which is above time, if we avoid as we desire any
   expression which conveys the idea of time.  For such expressions as
   "when" and "before" and "after" and "from the beginning" are not
   timeless, however much we may force them; unless indeed we were to take
   the Æon, that interval which is coextensive with the eternal things,
   and is not divided or measured by any motion, or by the revolution of
   the sun, as time is measured.

   How then are They not alike unoriginate, if They are coeternal?
   Because They are from Him, though not after Him.  For that which is
   unoriginate is eternal, but that which is eternal is not necessarily
   unoriginate, so long as it may be referred to the Father as its
   origin.  Therefore in respect of Cause They are not unoriginate; but it
   is evident that the Cause is not necessarily prior to its effects, for
   the sun is not prior to its light.  And yet They are in some sense
   unoriginate, in respect of time, even though you would scare simple
   minds with your quibbles, for the Sources of Time are not subject to
   time.

   IV.  But how can this generation be passionless?  In that it is
   incorporeal.  For if corporeal generation involves passion, incorporeal
   generation excludes it.  And I will ask of you in turn, How is He God
   if He is created?  For that which is created is not God.  I refrain
   from reminding you that here too is passion if we take the creation in
   a bodily sense, as time, desire, imagination, thought, hope, pain,
   risk, failure, success, all of which and more than all find a place in
   the creature, as is evident to every one.  Nay, I marvel that you do
   not venture so far as to conceive of marriages and times of pregnancy,
   and dangers of miscarriage, as if the Father could not have begotten at
   all if He had not begotten thus; or again, that you did not count up
   the modes of generation of birds and beasts and fishes, and bring under
   some one of them the Divine and Ineffable Generation, or even eliminate
   the Son out of your new hypothesis.  And you cannot even see this, that
   as His Generation according to the flesh differs from all others (for
   where among men do you know of a Virgin Mother?), so does He differ
   also in His spiritual Generation; or rather He, Whose Existence is not
   the same as ours, differs from us also in His Generation.

   V.  Who then is that Father Who had no beginning?  One Whose very
   Existence had no beginning; for one whose existence had a beginning
   must also have begun to be a Father.  He did not then become a Father
   after He began to be, for His being had no beginning.  And He is Father
   in the absolute sense, for He is not also Son; just as the Son is Son
   in the absolute sense, because He is not also Father.  These names do
   not belong to us in the absolute sense, because we are both, and not
   one more than the other; and we are of both, and not of one only; and
   so we are divided, and by degrees become men, and perhaps not even men,
   and such as we did not desire, leaving and being left, so that only the
   relations remain, without the underlying facts. [3512]

   But, the objector says, the very form of the expression "He begat" and
   "He was begotten," brings in the idea of a beginning of generation.
   But what if you do not use this expression, but say, "He had been
   begotten from the beginning" so as readily to evade your far-fetched
   and time-loving objections?  Will you bring Scripture against us, as if
   we were forging something contrary to Scripture and to the truth?  Why,
   every one knows that in practice we very often find tenses interchanged
   when time is spoken of; and especially is this the custom of Holy
   Scripture, not only in respect of the past tense, and of the present;
   but even of the future, as for instance "Why did the heathen rage?"
   [3513] when they had not yet raged and "they shall cross over the river
   on foot," [3514] where the meaning is they did cross over.  It would be
   a long task to reckon up all the expressions of this kind which
   students have noticed.

   VI.  So much for this point.  What is their next objection, how full of
   contentiousness and impudence?  He, they say, either voluntarily begat
   the Son, or else involuntarily.  Next, as they think, they bind us on
   both sides with cords; these however are not strong, but very weak.
   For, they say, if it was involuntarily He was under the sway of some
   one, and who exercised this sway?  And how is He, over whom it is
   exercised, God?  But if voluntarily, the Son is a Son of Will; how then
   is He of the Father?--and they thus invent a new sort of Mother for
   him,--the Will,--in place of the Father.  There is one good point which
   they may allege about this argument of theirs; namely, that they desert
   Passion, and take refuge in Will.  For Will is not Passion.

   Secondly, let us look at the strength of their argument.  And it were
   best to wrestle with them at first at close quarters.  You yourself,
   who so recklessly assert whatever takes your fancy; were you begotten
   voluntarily or involuntarily by your father?  If involuntarily, then he
   was under some tyrant's sway (O terrible violence!) and who was the
   tyrant?  You will hardly say it was nature,--for nature is tolerant of
   chastity.  If it was voluntarily, then by a few syllables your father
   is done away with, for you are shewn to be the son of Will, and not of
   your father.  But I pass to the relation between God and the creature,
   and I put your own question to your own wisdom.  Did God create all
   things voluntarily or under compulsion?  If under compulsion, here also
   is the tyranny, and one who played the tyrant; if voluntarily, the
   creatures also are deprived of their God, and you before the rest, who
   invent such arguments and tricks of logic.  For a partition is set up
   between the Creator and the creatures in the shape of Will.  And yet I
   think that the Person who wills is distinct from the Act of willing; He
   who begets from the Act of begetting; the Speaker from the speech, or
   else we are all very stupid.  On the one side we have the mover, and on
   the other that which is, so to speak, the motion.  Thus the thing
   willed is not the child of will, for it does not always result
   therefrom; nor is that which is begotten the child of generation, nor
   that which is heard the child of speech, but of the Person who willed,
   or begat, or spoke.  But the things of God are beyond all this, for
   with Him perhaps the Will to beget is generation, and there is no
   intermediate action (if we may accept this altogether, and not rather
   consider generation superior to will).

   VII.  Will you then let me play a little upon this word Father, for
   your example encourages me to be so bold?  The Father is God either
   willingly or unwillingly; and how will you escape from your own
   excessive acuteness?  If willingly, when did He begin to will?  It
   could not have been before He began to be, for there was nothing prior
   to Him.  Or is one part of Him Will and another the object of Will?  If
   so, He is divisible.  So the question arises, as the result of your
   argument, whether He Himself is not the Child of Will.  And if
   unwillingly, what compelled Him to exist, and how is He God if He was
   compelled--and that to nothing less than to be God?  How then was He
   begotten, says my opponent.  How was He created, if as you say, He was
   created?  For this is a part of the same difficulty.  Perhaps you would
   say, By Will and Word.  You have not yet solved the whole difficulty;
   for it yet remains for you to shew how Will and Word gained the power
   of action.  For man was not created in this way.

   VIII.  How then was He begotten?  This Generation would have been no
   great thing, if you could have comprehended it who have no real
   knowledge even of your own generation, or at least who comprehend very
   little of it, and of that little you are ashamed to speak; and then do
   you think you know the whole?  You will have to undergo much labour
   before you discover the laws of composition, formation, manifestation,
   and the bond whereby soul is united to body,--mind to soul, and reason
   to mind; and movement, increase, assimilation of food, sense, memory,
   recollection, and all the rest of the parts of which you are
   compounded; and which of them belongs to the soul and body together,
   and which to each independently of the other, and which is received
   from each other.  For those parts whose maturity comes later, yet
   received their laws at the time of conception.  Tell me what these laws
   are?  And do not even then venture to speculate on the Generation of
   God; for that would be unsafe.  For even if you knew all about your
   own, yet you do not by any means know about God's.  And if you do not
   understand your own, how can you know about God's?  For in proportion
   as God is harder to trace out than man, so is the heavenly Generation
   harder to comprehend than your own.  But if you assert that because you
   cannot comprehend it, therefore He cannot have been begotten, it will
   be time for you to strike out many existing things which you cannot
   comprehend; and first of all God Himself.  For you cannot say what He
   is, even if you are very reckless, and excessively proud of your
   intelligence.  First, cast away your notions of flow and divisions and
   sections, and your conceptions of immaterial as if it were material
   birth, and then you may perhaps worthily conceive of the Divine
   Generation.  How was He begotten?--I repeat the question in
   indignation.  The Begetting of God must be honoured by silence.  It is
   a great thing for you to learn that He was begotten.  But the manner of
   His generation we will not admit that even Angels can conceive, much
   less you.  Shall I tell you how it was?  It was in a manner known to
   the Father Who begat, and to the Son Who was begotten.  Anything more
   than this is hidden by a cloud, and escapes your dim sight.

   IX.  Well, but the Father begat a Son who either was or was not in
   existence. [3515]   What utter nonsense!  This is a question which
   applies to you or me, who on the one hand were in existence, as for
   instance Levi in the loins of Abraham; [3516] and on the other hand
   came into existence; and so in some sense we are partly of what
   existed, and partly of what was nonexistent; whereas the contrary is
   the case with the original matter, which was certainly created out of
   what was non-existent, notwithstanding that some pretend that it is
   unbegotten.  But in this case "to be begotten," even from the
   beginning, is concurrent with "to be."  On what then will you base this
   captious question?  For what is older than that which is from the
   beginning, if we may place there the previous existence or
   non-existence of the Son?  In either case we destroy its claim to be
   the Beginning.  Or perhaps you will say, if we were to ask you whether
   the Father was of existent or non-existent substance, that he is
   twofold, partly pre-existing, partly existing; or that His case is the
   same with that of the Son; that is, that He was created out of
   non-existing matter, because of your ridiculous questions and your
   houses of sand, which cannot stand against the merest ripple.

   I do not admit either solution, and I declare that your question
   contains an absurdity, and not a difficulty to answer.  If however you
   think, in accordance with your dialectic assumptions, that one or other
   of these alternatives must necessarily be true in every case, let me
   ask you one little question:  Is time in time, or is it not in time?
   If it is contained in time, then in what time, and what is it but that
   time, and how does it contain it?  But if it is not contained in time,
   what is that surpassing wisdom which can conceive of a time which is
   timeless?  Now, in regard to this expression, "I am now telling a lie,"
   admit one of these alternatives, either that it is true, or that it is
   a falsehood, without qualification (for we cannot admit that it is
   both).  But this cannot be.  For necessarily he either is lying, and so
   is telling the truth, or else he is telling the truth, and so is
   lying.  What wonder is it then that, as in this case contraries are
   true, so in that case they should both be untrue, and so your clever
   puzzle prove mere foolishness?  Solve me one more riddle.  Were you
   present at your own generation, and are you now present to yourself, or
   is neither the case?  If you were and are present, who were you, and
   with whom are you present?  And how did your single self become thus
   both subject and object?  But if neither of the above is the case, how
   did you get separated from yourself, and what is the cause of this
   disjoining?  But, you will say, it is stupid to make a fuss about the
   question whether or no a single individual is present to himself; for
   the expression is not used of oneself but of others.  Well, you may be
   certain that it is even more stupid to discuss the question whether
   That which was begotten from the beginning existed before its
   generation or not.  For such a question arises only as to matter
   divisible by time.

   X.  But they say, The Unbegotten and the Begotten are not the same; and
   if this is so, neither is the Son the same as the Father.  It is clear,
   without saying so, that this line of argument manifestly excludes
   either the Son or the Father from the Godhead.  For if to be Unbegotten
   is the Essence of God, to be begotten is not that Essence; if the
   opposite is the case, the Unbegotten is excluded.  What argument can
   contradict this?  Choose then whichever blasphemy you prefer, my good
   inventor of a new theology, if indeed you are anxious at all costs to
   embrace a blasphemy.  In the next place, in what sense do you assert
   that the Unbegotten and the Begotten are not the same?  If you mean
   that the Uncreated and the created are not the same, I agree with you;
   for certainly the Unoriginate and the created are not of the same
   nature.  But if you say that He That begat and That which is begotten
   are not the same, the statement is inaccurate.  For it is in fact a
   necessary truth that they are the same.  For the nature of the relation
   of Father to Child is this, that the offspring is of the same nature
   with the parent.  Or we may argue thus again.  What do you mean by
   Unbegotten and Begotten, for if you mean the simple fact of being
   unbegotten or begotten, these are not the same; but if you mean Those
   to Whom these terms apply, how are They not the same?  For example,
   Wisdom and Unwisdom are not the same in themselves, but yet both are
   attributes of man, who is the same; and they mark not a difference of
   essence, but one external to the essence. [3517]   Are immortality and
   innocence and immutability also the essence of God?  If so God has many
   essences and not one; or Deity is a compound of these.  For He cannot
   be all these without composition, if they be essences.

   XI.  They do not however assert this, for these qualities are common
   also to other beings.  But God's Essence is that which belongs to God
   alone, and is proper to Him.  But they, who consider matter and form to
   be unbegotten, would not allow that to be unbegotten is the property of
   God alone (for we must cast away even further the darkness of the
   Manichæans). [3518]   But suppose that it is the property of God
   alone.  What of Adam?  Was he not alone the direct creature of God?
   Yes, you will say.  Was he then the only human being?  By no means.
   And why, but because humanity does not consist in direct creation?  For
   that which is begotten is also human.  Just so neither is He Who is
   Unbegotten alone God, though He alone is Father.  But grant that He Who
   is Begotten is God; for He is of God, as you must allow, even though
   you cling to your Unbegotten.  Then how do you describe the Essence of
   God?  Not by declaring what it is, but by rejecting what it is not.
   For your word signifies that He is not begotten; it does not present to
   you what is the real nature or condition of that which has no
   generation.  What then is the Essence of God?  It is for your
   infatuation to define this, since you are so anxious about His
   Generation too; but to us it will be a very great thing, if ever, even
   in the future, we learn this, when this darkness and dulness is done
   away for us, as He has promised Who cannot lie.  This then may be the
   thought and hope of those who are purifying themselves with a view to
   this.  Thus much we for our part will be bold to say, that if it is a
   great thing for the Father to be Unoriginate, it is no less a thing for
   the Son to have been Begotten of such a Father.  For not only would He
   share the glory of the Unoriginate, since he is of the Unoriginate, but
   he has the added glory of His Generation, a thing so great and august
   in the eyes of all those who are not altogether grovelling and material
   in mind.

   XII.  But, they say, if the Son is the Same as the Father in respect of
   Essence, then if the Father is unbegotten, the Son must be so
   likewise.  Quite so--if the Essence of God consists in being
   unbegotten; and so He would be a strange mixture, begottenly
   unbegotten.  If, however, the difference is outside the Essence, how
   can you be so certain in speaking of this?  Are you also your father's
   father, so as in no respect to fall short of your father, since you are
   the same with him in essence?  Is it not evident that our enquiry into
   the Nature of the Essence of God, if we make it, will leave Personality
   absolutely unaffected?  But that Unbegotten is not a synonym of God is
   proved thus.  If it were so, it would be necessary that since God is a
   relative term, Unbegotten should be so likewise; or that since
   Unbegotten is an absolute term, so must God be....God of no one.  For
   words which are absolutely identical are similarly applied.  But the
   word Unbegotten is not used relatively.  For to what is it relative?
   And of what things is God the God?  Why, of all things.  How then can
   God and Unbegotten be identical terms?  And again, since Begotten and
   Unbegotten are contradictories, like possession and deprivation, it
   would follow that contradictory essences would co-exist, which is
   impossible. [3519]   Or again, since possessions are prior to
   deprivations, and the latter are destructive of the former, not only
   must the Essence of the Son be prior to that of the Father, but it must
   be destroyed by the Father, on your hypothesis.

   XIII.  What now remains of their invincible arguments?  Perhaps the
   last they will take refuge in is this.  If God has never ceased to
   beget, the Generation is imperfect; and when will He cease?  But if He
   has ceased, then He must have begun.  Thus again these carnal minds
   bring forward carnal arguments.  Whether He is eternally begotten or
   not, I do not yet say, until I have looked into the statement, "Before
   all the hills He begetteth Me," [3520] more accurately.  But I cannot
   see the necessity of their conclusion.  For if, as they say, everything
   that is to come to an end had also a beginning, then surely that which
   has no end had no beginning.  What then will they decide concerning the
   soul, or the Angelic nature?  If it had a beginning, it will also have
   an end; and if it has no end, it is evident that according to them it
   had no beginning.  But the truth is that it had a beginning, and will
   never have an end.  Their assertion, then, that which will have an end
   had also a beginning, is untrue.  Our position, however, is, that as in
   the case of a horse, or an ox, or a man, the same definition applies to
   all the individuals of the same species, and whatever shares the
   definition has also a right to the Name; so in the very same way there
   is One Essence of God, and One Nature, and One Name; although in
   accordance with a distinction in our thoughts we use distinct Names and
   that whatever is properly called by this Name really is God; and what
   He is in Nature, That He is truly called--if at least we are to hold
   that Truth is a matter not of names but of realities.  But our
   opponents, as if they were afraid of leaving any stone unturned to
   subvert the Truth, acknowledge indeed that the Son is God when they are
   compelled to do so by arguments [3521] and evidences; but they only
   mean that He is God in an ambiguous sense, and that He only shares the
   Name.

   XIV.  And when we advance this objection against them, "What do you
   mean to say then?  That the Son is not properly God, just as a picture
   of an animal is not properly an animal?  And if not properly God, in
   what sense is He God at all?"  They reply, Why should not these terms
   be ambiguous, and in both cases be used in a proper sense?  And they
   will give us such instances as the land-dog and the dogfish; where the
   word Dog is ambiguous, and yet in both cases is properly used, for
   there is such a species among the ambiguously named, or any other case
   in which the same appellative is used for two things of different
   nature.  But, my good friend, in this case, when you include two
   natures under the same name, you do not assert that either is better
   than the other, or that the one is prior and the other posterior, or
   that one is in a greater degree and the other in a lesser that which is
   predicated of them both, for there is no connecting link which forces
   this necessity upon them.  One is not a dog more than the other, and
   one less so; either the dogfish more than the land-dog, or the land-dog
   than the dogfish.  Why should they be, or on what principle?  But the
   community of name is here between things of equal value, though of
   different nature.  But in the case of which we are speaking, you couple
   the Name of God with adorable Majesty, and make It surpass every
   essence and nature (an attribute of God alone), and then you ascribe
   this Name to the Father, while you deprive the Son of it, and make Him
   subject to the Father, and give Him only a secondary honour and
   worship; and even if in words you bestow on Him one which is Equal, yet
   in practice you cut off His Deity, and pass malignantly from a use of
   the same Name implying an exact equality, to one which connects things
   which are not equal.  And so the pictured and the living man are in
   your mouth an apter illustration of the relations of Deity than the
   dogs which I instanced.  Or else you must concede to both an equal
   dignity of nature as well as a common name--even though you introduced
   these natures into your argument as different; and thus you destroy the
   analogy of your dogs, which you invented as an instance of inequality.
   For what is the force of your instance of ambiguity, if those whom you
   distinguish are not equal in honour?  For it was not to prove an
   equality but an inequality that you took refuge in your dogs.  How
   could anybody be more clearly convicted of fighting both against his
   own arguments, and against the Deity?

   XV.  And if, when we admit that in respect of being the Cause the
   Father is greater than the Son, they should assume the premiss that He
   is the Cause by Nature, and then deduce the conclusion that He is
   greater by Nature also, it is difficult to say whether they mislead
   most themselves or those with whom they are arguing.  For it does not
   absolutely follow that all that is predicated of a class can also be
   predicated of all the individuals composing it; for the different
   particulars may belong to different individuals.  For what hinders me,
   if I assume the same premiss, namely, that the Father is greater by
   Nature, and then add this other, Yet not by nature in every respect
   greater nor yet Father--from concluding, Therefore the Greater is not
   in every respect greater, nor the Father in every respect Father?  Or,
   if you prefer it, let us put it in this way:  God is an Essence:  But
   an Essence is not in every case God; and draw the conclusion for
   yourself--Therefore God is not in every case God.  I think the fallacy
   here is the arguing from a conditioned to an unconditioned use of a
   term, [3522] to use the technical expression of the logicians.  For
   while we assign this word Greater to His Nature viewed as a Cause, they
   infer it of His Nature viewed in itself.  It is just as if when we said
   that such a one was a dead man they were to infer simply that he was a
   Man.

   XVI.  How shall we pass over the following point, which is no less
   amazing than the rest?  Father, they say, is a name either of an
   essence or of an Action, thinking to bind us down on both sides.  If we
   say that it is a name of an essence, they will say that we agree with
   them that the Son is of another Essence, since there is but one Essence
   of God, and this, according to them, is preoccupied by the Father.  On
   the other hand, if we say that it is the name of an Action, we shall be
   supposed to acknowledge plainly that the Son is created and not
   begotten.  For where there is an Agent there must also be an Effect.
   And they will say they wonder how that which is made can be identical
   with That which made it.  I should myself have been frightened with
   your distinction, if it had been necessary to accept one or other of
   the alternatives, and not rather put both aside, and state a third and
   truer one, namely, that Father is not a name either of an essence or of
   an action, most clever sirs.  But it is the name of the Relation in
   which the Father stands to the Son, and the Son to the Father.  For as
   with us these names make known a genuine and intimate relation, so, in
   the case before us too, they denote an identity of nature between Him
   That is begotten and Him That begets.  But let us concede to you that
   Father is a name of essence, it will still bring in the idea of Son,
   and will not make it of a different nature, according to common ideas
   and the force of these names.  Let it be, if it so please you, the name
   of an action; you will not defeat us in this way either.  The
   Homoousion would be indeed the result of this action, or otherwise the
   conception of an action in this matter would be absurd.  You see then
   how, even though you try to fight unfairly, we avoid your sophistries.
   But now, since we have ascertained how invincible you are in your
   arguments and sophistries, let us look at your strength in the Oracles
   of God, if perchance you may choose to persuade us out of them.

   XVII.  For we have learnt to believe in and to teach the Deity of the
   Son from their great and lofty utterances.  And what utterances are
   these?  These:  God--The Word--He That Was In The Beginning and With
   The Beginning, and The Beginning.  "In the Beginning was The Word, and
   the Word was with God, and the Word was God," [3523] and "With Thee is
   the Beginning," [3524] and "He who calleth her The Beginning from
   generations." [3525]   Then the Son is Only-begotten:  The only
   "begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, it says, He hath
   declared Him." [3526]   The Way, the Truth, the Life, the Light.  "I am
   the Way, the Truth, and the Life;" and "I am the Light of the World."
   [3527]   Wisdom and Power, "Christ, the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
   God." [3528]   The Effulgence, the Impress, the Image, the Seal; "Who
   being the Effulgence of His glory and the Impress of His Essence,"
   [3529] and "the Image of His Goodness," [3530] and "Him hath God the
   Father sealed." [3531]   Lord, King, He That Is, The Almighty.  "The
   Lord rained down fire from the Lord;" [3532] and "A sceptre of
   righteousness is the sceptre of Thy Kingdom;" [3533] and "Which is and
   was and is to come, the Almighty" [3534] --all which are clearly spoken
   of the Son, with all the other passages of the same force, none of
   which is an afterthought, or added later to the Son or the Spirit, any
   more than to the Father Himself.  For Their Perfection is not affected
   by additions.  There never was a time when He was without the Word, or
   when He was not the Father, or when He was not true, or not wise, or
   not powerful, or devoid of life, or of splendour, or of goodness.

   But in opposition to all these, do you reckon up for me the expressions
   which make for your ignorant arrogance, such as "My God and your God,"
   [3535] or greater, or created, or made, or sanctified; [3536] Add, if
   you like, Servant [3537] and Obedient [3538] and Gave [3539] and
   Learnt, [3540] and was commanded, [3541] was sent, [3542] can do
   nothing of Himself, either say, or judge, or give, or will. [3543]
   And further these,--His ignorance, [3544] subjection, [3545] prayer,
   [3546] asking, [3547] increase, [3548] being made perfect. [3549]   And
   if you like even more humble than these; such as speak of His sleeping,
   [3550] hungering, [3551] being in an agony, [3552] and fearing; [3553]
   or perhaps you would make even His Cross and Death a matter of reproach
   to Him.  His Resurrection and Ascension I fancy you will leave to me,
   for in these is found something to support our position.  A good many
   other things too you might pick up, if you desire to put together that
   equivocal and intruded god of yours, Who to us is True God, and equal
   to the Father.  For every one of these points, taken separately, may
   very easily, if we go through them one by one, be explained to you in
   the most reverent sense, and the stumbling-block of the letter be
   cleaned away--that is, if your stumbling at it be honest, and not
   wilfully malicious.  To give you the explanation in one sentence.  What
   is lofty you are to apply to the Godhead, and to that Nature in Him
   which is superior to sufferings and incorporeal; but all that is lowly
   to the composite condition [3554] of Him who for your sakes made
   Himself of no reputation and was Incarnate--yes, for it is no worse
   thing to say, was made Man, and afterwards was also exalted.  The
   result will be that you will abandon these carnal and grovelling
   doctrines, and learn to be more sublime, and to ascend with His
   Godhead, and you will not remain permanently among the things of sight,
   but will rise up with Him into the world of thought, and come to know
   which passages refer to His Nature, and which to His assumption of
   Human Nature. [3555]

   XIX.  For He Whom you now treat with contempt was once above you.  He
   Who is now Man was once the Uncompounded.  What He was He continued to
   be; what He was not He took to Himself. [3556]   In the beginning He
   was, uncaused; for what is the Cause of God?  But afterwards for a
   cause He was born.  And that cause was that you might be saved, who
   insult Him and despise His Godhead, because of this, that He took upon
   Him your denser nature, having converse with Flesh by means of Mind.
   [3557]   While His inferior Nature, the Humanity, became God, because
   it was united to God, and became One Person [3558] because the Higher
   Nature prevailed in order that I too might be made God so far as He is
   made Man. [3559]   He was born--but He had been begotten:  He was born
   of a woman--but she was a Virgin.  The first is human, the second
   Divine.  In His Human nature He had no Father, but also in His Divine
   Nature no Mother. [3560]   Both these [3561] belong to Godhead.  He
   dwelt in the womb--but He was recognized by the Prophet, [3562] himself
   still in the womb, leaping before the Word, for Whose sake He came into
   being.  He was wrapped in swaddling clothes [3563] --but He took off
   the swathing bands of the grave by His rising again.  He was laid in a
   manger--but He was glorified by Angels, and proclaimed by a star, and
   worshipped by the Magi.  Why are you offended by that which is
   presented to your sight, because you will not look at that which is
   presented to your mind?  He was driven into exile into Egypt--but He
   drove away the Egyptian idols. [3564]   He had no form nor comeliness
   in the eyes of the Jews [3565] --but to David He is fairer than the
   children of men. [3566]   And on the Mountain He was bright as the
   lightning, and became more luminous than the sun, [3567] initiating us
   into the mystery of the future.

   XX.  He was baptized as Man--but He remitted sins as God [3568] --not
   because He needed purificatory rites Himself, but that He might
   sanctify the element of water.  He was tempted as Man, but He conquered
   as God; yea, He bids us be of good cheer, for He has overcome the
   world. [3569]   He hungered--but He fed thousands; [3570] yea, He is
   the Bread that giveth life, and That is of heaven.  He thirsted--but He
   cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. [3571]   Yea,
   He promised that fountains should flow from them that believe.  He was
   wearied, but He is the Rest of them that are weary and heavy laden.
   [3572]   He was heavy with sleep, but He walked lightly over the sea.
   [3573]   He rebuked the winds, He made Peter light as he began to sink.
   [3574]   He pays tribute, but it is out of a fish; [3575] yea, He is
   the King of those who demanded it. [3576]   He is called a Samaritan
   and a demoniac; [3577] --but He saves him that came down from Jerusalem
   and fell among thieves; [3578] the demons acknowledge Him, and He
   drives out demons and sinks in the sea legions of foul spirits, [3579]
   and sees the Prince of the demons falling like lightning. [3580]   He
   is stoned, but is not taken.  He prays, but He hears prayer.  He weeps,
   but He causes tears to cease.  He asks where Lazarus was laid, for He
   was Man; but He raises Lazarus, for He was God. [3581]   He is sold,
   and very cheap, for it is only for thirty pieces of silver; [3582] but
   He redeems the world, and that at a great price, for the Price was His
   own blood. [3583]   As a sheep He is led to the slaughter, [3584] but
   He is the Shepherd of Israel, and now of the whole world also.  As a
   Lamb He is silent, yet He is the Word, and is proclaimed by the Voice
   of one crying in the wilderness. [3585]   He is bruised and wounded,
   but He healeth every disease and every infirmity. [3586]   He is lifted
   up and nailed to the Tree, but by the Tree of Life He restoreth us;
   yea, He saveth even the Robber crucified with Him; [3587] yea, He
   wrapped the visible world in darkness.  He is given vinegar to drink
   mingled with gall.  Who?  He who turned the water into wine [3588] ,
   who is the destroyer of the bitter taste, who is Sweetness and
   altogether desire. [3589]   He lays down His life, but He has power to
   take it again; [3590] and the veil is rent, for the mysterious doors of
   Heaven are opened; the rocks are cleft, the dead arise. [3591]   He
   dies, but He gives life, and by His death destroys death.  He is
   buried, but He rises again; He goes down into Hell, but He brings up
   the souls; He ascends to Heaven, and shall come again to judge the
   quick and the dead, and to put to the test such words as yours.  If the
   one give you a starting point for your error, let the others put an end
   to it.

   XXI.  This, then, is our reply to those who would puzzle us; not given
   willingly indeed (for light talk and contradictions of words are not
   agreeable to the faithful, and one Adversary is enough for us), but of
   necessity, for the sake of our assailants (for medicines exist because
   of diseases), that they may be led to see that they are not all-wise
   nor invincible in those superfluous arguments which make void the
   Gospel.  For when we leave off believing, and protect ourselves by mere
   strength of argument, and destroy the claim which the Spirit has upon
   our faith by questionings, and then our argument is not strong enough
   for the importance of the subject (and this must necessarily be the
   case, since it is put in motion by an organ of so little power as is
   our mind), what is the result?  The weakness of the argument appears to
   belong to the mystery, and thus elegance of language makes void the
   Cross, as Paul also thought. [3592]   For faith is that which completes
   our argument.  But may He who proclaimeth unions and looseth those that
   are bound, and who putteth into our minds to solve the knots of their
   unnatural dogmas, if it may be, change these men and make them faithful
   instead of rhetoricians, Christians instead of that which they now are
   called.  This indeed we entreat and beg for Christ's sake.  Be ye
   reconciled to God, [3593] and quench not the Spirit; [3594] or rather,
   may Christ be reconciled to you, and may the Spirit enlighten you,
   though so late.  But if you are too fond of your quarrel, we at any
   rate will hold fast to the Trinity, and by the Trinity may we be saved,
   remaining pure and without offence, until the more perfect shewing
   forth of that which we desire, in Him, Christ our Lord, to Whom be the
   glory for ever.  Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3507] Heb. ii. 4; x. 38.

   [3508] Billius and others here read Authority, which is not supported
   by the best mss., or by the context.

   [3509] Elias explains this to mean that of old men knew only One Person
   in the Godhead:  and until the Incarnation this knowledge was
   sufficient; but from that time forward they acknowledged a Second
   Person, and through Him a Third also, the Holy Ghost.  But this
   explanation falls far short of Gregory's meaning, which certainly is
   that the movement of self-consciousness in God from all Eternity made
   the Generation of the Son, and the Procession of the Holy Ghost, a
   necessity.  All is objective in God.  cf. Petav. de Deo, II., viii.,
   16; also, Greg. Naz., Or. xxiii. 5.

   [3510] proboleus-probole was a term used by the Gnostics to describe
   the Emanations by which the distance between the Finite and the
   Infinite was according to them bridged over; and on this account it
   fell under suspicion, and was rejected by both Arius and Athanasius.
   Tertullian used it with an explanation which is satisfactory as regards
   the probole of the Son; but when he comes to apply it to the Procession
   of the Holy Ghost he uses an illustration which is in almost the very
   words rejected by Gregory (c. Prax., 7, 8.  See Swete, p. 56).  Origen
   did not admit it.  Later when this danger was past, the word came into
   use again as the equivalent of ekporeusis, at first with reserve and
   explanations in the text, but later on as an accepted term.  See Swete
   ,"On The Doctrine Of The Holy Spirit," p. 36.

   [3511] The expression is from Plato.

   [3512] Elias explains this to refer to the fact that children leave and
   are left by parents; or else to the death of either one or the other.

   [3513] Ps. ii. 1.

   [3514] Ps. lxvi. 6.

   [3515] This is the Arian dilemma, "Did the Son exist before he was
   begotten?"

   [3516] Heb. vii. 10.

   [3517] cf. Petavius De Trin., V. ii., 2.

   [3518] The Manichæans, who believed in two eternal principles of good
   and evil, light and darkness, held that darkness too was unbegotten
   (Elias).

   [3519] Because "Son" implies "begotten."  But (ex hyp.) "Unbegotten" is
   synonymous with "God."

   [3520] Prov. viii. 25.

   [3521] The Benedictines here translate logo by "Scripture," on the
   ground that Reason is not competent to assert the Divinity of the Word.

   [3522] Or as the schoolmen say the fallacy is, A dicto secundum quid ad
   dictum simpliciter, one of the many forms of Undistributed Middle
   Term.  Petavius, however (De Trin.. II., v., 12), pronounces the
   argument of this section unsatisfactory.

   [3523] John i. 1.

   [3524] Ps. cx. 3.

   [3525] Isa. xli. 4.

   [3526] John i. 18.

   [3527] John vii. 12; ix. 5; xiv. 6.

   [3528] 1 Cor. i. 24.

   [3529] Heb. i. 3 R.V.

   [3530] Wisd. vii. 26.

   [3531] John vi. 27.

   [3532] Gen. xix. 24.

   [3533] Ps. xlv. 6.

   [3534] Rev. i. 8.

   [3535] John xx. 17, 28.

   [3536] Prov. viii. 22; John x. 36; Acts ii. 36.

   [3537] Phil. ii. 7.

   [3538] Phil. ii. 8.

   [3539] John i. 12.

   [3540] Heb. v. 8.

   [3541] John x. 18; xiv. 31.

   [3542] Ib. iv. 34; v. 23, sq.

   [3543] Ib. v. 19, 30.

   [3544] Mark xiii. 32.

   [3545] 1 Cor. xv. 28.

   [3546] Luke vi. 12.

   [3547] John xiv. 16.

   [3548] Luke ii. 52.

   [3549] Heb. v. 9, etc.

   [3550] Matt. viii. 24; Mark iv. 38.

   [3551] Matt. iv. 2; Luke iv. 2.

   [3552] Luke xxii. 44.

   [3553] Heb. v. 7.

   [3554] S. Gregory often speaks of Human Nature as our composite being;
   and here he means the Sacred Humanity exclusively; there is no shadow
   of suspicion of Nestorianism or Eutychianism attaching to his name.

   [3555] The word oikonomia is used in four principal senses:  (a) The
   ministry of the Gospel, cf. Ephes. iii. 2; Col. i. 25; etc., and S.
   Cyril Hieros., has the expression "Economy of the Mystery" (Cat.
   xxv.).  It is also used absolutely by S. Chrysostom and others.  (b)
   The Providence of God, as by Epiphanius, Greg. Nyss., and others.  (c)
   The Incarnation, as in the text, without any epithet--in which use it
   is opposed to he theotes.  Sometimes however epithets are added.  (d)
   The whole Mystery of Redemption, including the Passion.

   [3556] cf. S. Leo, Serm. xxi., De Nativ. Dei, c. ii.  "Remaining what
   He was, and putting on what He was not, He united the true form of a
   servant to that form in which He was equal to God the Father, and
   combined both natures in a union so close that the lower was not
   consumed by receiving glory, nor the higher lessened by assuming
   lowliness.

   [3557] "Mediante anima," cf. Orat. xxxviii., 13.  S. T. Aq., Summa,
   III., vi.  Jungmann, de Verbo Incarn., c. 68.  Forbes, On Nicene Creed,
   p. 188.  Petav. de Incarn, IV., xiii., 2.

   [3558] genomenos anthropos ho kato theos.  The passage is one of great
   difficulty.  Elias Cretensis renders the words as follows:--"Becoming
   Man, the inferior God, because humanity was" etc.; but his rendering is
   rejected as impossible by Petavius (de Incarn., IV., ix., 2, 3).  (i.)
   It is grammatically possible (Madvig, Gk. Syntax, 9 a. rem. 3) for ho
   kato, standing as it does, to qualify anthropos.  (ii.) But the kai
   genomenos ...theos may be taken as a nom. absolute, which would have
   been expressed by a gen. if anthropos had not been the same Person as
   homilesas.

   [3559] As by the Incarnation He who was God was made perfect Man, so
   Man was made perfect God, and each nature retained its own qualities.
   Or it may mean that God Incarnate was made Man in respect of body,
   soul, and mind; that is, in all points:  and the Humanity which He
   assumed was in all these points Deified; and therefore they who are His
   kindred and imitators share to that extent the Deification (Elias).  In
   the First Epistle to Cledonius (v. infra) the Priest, against
   Apollinarius, which is sometimes reckoned as the 51st Oration, S.
   Gregory says, "The Godhead and the Manhood are two natures, just as
   soul and body are.  But there are not two Sons or two Gods; although
   Paul did thus entangle the outward man and the inward.  And, to speak
   succinctly, the Natures which make our Saviour are distinct, for the
   Invisible is not the same as the visible, nor the Timeless as that
   which is subject to time; but He is not two Persons, God forbid, for
   both these are one in the union, God being made Man, and Man being made
   God, or however else you may express it."  And upon this S. Thomas
   Aquinas remarks that it is true, if by Man you understand simply Human
   Nature, and not a Human Person; in this sense it was brought to pass
   that Man was God; or in other words Human Nature was made that of the
   Son of God.  (Summa, III., xvi., 7.)

   [3560] "If any does not admit Mary to be the Mother of God (theotokon),
   he is separated from God.  If any say that He passed through the Virgin
   as through a conduit, and that He was not formed in her both divinely
   and humanly (divinely, because without a human father; humanly, because
   in accordance with the laws of gestation), he is in like manner
   atheistic.  If any assert that the Humanity was thus formed, and the
   Deity subsequently added, he is condemned; for this is not a generation
   of God, but an evasion of generation" (S. G. N. ad Cled., Ep. i.)  S.
   Thomas Aquinas explains the fitness of the title thus:  The Blessed
   Virgin could be denied to be the Mother of God only if either His
   Humanity had been conceived and born before That Man was the Son of
   God:--which was the position taken up by Photinus; or else if the
   Humanity had not been assumed into the unity of the Person (or
   Hypostasis) of the Son of God;--which was the position of Nestorius.
   Both these positions are erroneous.  Therefore to deny that the Blessed
   Virgin is the Mother of God is heretical (Summa, III.. xxxv. 4).  In
   the text S. Gregory merely means that the Godhead of our Lord was not
   derived from His Blessed Mother, just as his Manhood was not derived
   from any man; but, as the extract at the beginning of this Note shews,
   he would be the last to take up the Nestorian notion, which was
   afterwards condemned at the Council of Ephesus.

   [3561] Both These, i.e., the being without Father, and without Mother
   is a condition which belongs only to the Godhead.

   [3562] S. John the Baptist (S. Luke i.).

   [3563] Luke ii. 41.

   [3564] Referring, perhaps, to the tradition that at the coming of
   Christ into Egypt all the Idols in the land fell down and were broken.

   [3565] Isa. liii. 2.

   [3566] Ps. xlv. 2.

   [3567] Matt. xvii. 2.

   [3568] Matt. iii. 13; ix. 6.

   [3569] John xvi. 33.

   [3570] Ib. vi. 10.

   [3571] Ib. vii. 37.

   [3572] Matt. xi. 28.

   [3573] Ib. viii. 24.

   [3574] Ib. xiv. 25, 30.

   [3575] Ib. xvii. 24.

   [3576] John xix. 19.

   [3577] Ib. viii. 48.

   [3578] Luke x. 30, etc.

   [3579] Luke viii. 28-33.

   [3580] Ib. x. 18.

   [3581] John xi. 43.

   [3582] Matt. xxvi. 15.

   [3583] 1 Pet. i. 19.

   [3584] Isa. liii. 7.

   [3585] John i. 23.

   [3586] Isa. liii. 23.

   [3587] Luke xxiii. 43.

   [3588] John ii. 1-11.

   [3589] Cant. v. 16.

   [3590] John x. 18.

   [3591] Matt. xxvii. 51.

   [3592] 1 Cor. i. 17.

   [3593] 2 Cor. v. 20.

   [3594] 1 Thess. v. 19.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Oration XXX.

   The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

   I.  Since I have by the power of the Spirit sufficiently overthrown the
   subtleties and intricacies of the arguments, and already solved in the
   mass the objections and oppositions drawn from Holy Scripture, with
   which these sacrilegious robbers of the Bible and thieves of the sense
   of its contents draw over the multitude to their side, and confuse the
   way of truth; and that not without clearness, as I believe all candid
   persons will say; attributing to the Deity the higher and diviner
   expressions, and the lower and more human to Him Who for us men was the
   Second Adam, and was God made capable of suffering to strive against
   sin; yet we have not yet gone through the passages in detail, because
   of the haste of our argument.  But since you demand of us a brief
   explanation of each of them, that you may not be carried away by the
   plausibilities of their arguments, we will therefore state the
   explanations summarily, dividing them into numbers for the sake of
   carrying them more easily in mind.

   II.  In their eyes the following is only too ready to hand "The Lord
   created me at the beginning of His ways with a view to His works."
   [3595]   How shall we meet this?  Shall we bring an accusation against
   Solomon, or reject his former words because of his fall in after-life?
   Shall we say that the words are those of Wisdom herself, as it were of
   Knowledge and the Creator-word, in accordance with which all things
   were made?  For Scripture often personifies many even lifeless objects;
   as for instance, "The Sea said" [3596] so and so; and, "The Depth
   saith, It is not in me;" [3597] and "The Heavens declare the glory of
   God;" [3598] and again a command is given to the Sword; [3599] and the
   Mountains and Hills are asked the reason of their skipping. [3600]   We
   do not allege any of these, though some of our predecessors used them
   as powerful arguments.  But let us grant that the expression is used of
   our Saviour Himself, the true Wisdom.  Let us consider one small point
   together.  What among all things that exist is unoriginate?  The
   Godhead.  For no one can tell the origin of God, that otherwise would
   be older than God.  But what is the cause of the Manhood, which for our
   sake God assumed?  It was surely our Salvation.  What else could it
   be?  Since then we find here clearly both the Created and the Begetteth
   Me, the argument is simple.  Whatever we find joined with a cause we
   are to refer to the Manhood, but all that is absolute and unoriginate
   we are to reckon to the account of His Godhead.  Well, then, is not
   this "Created" said in connection with a cause?  He created Me, it so
   says, as the beginning of His ways, with a view to his works.  Now, the
   Works of His Hands are verity and judgment; [3601] for whose sake He
   was anointed with Godhead; [3602] for this anointing is of the Manhood;
   but the "He begetteth Me" is not connected with a cause; or it is for
   you to shew the adjunct.  What argument then will disprove that Wisdom
   is called a creature, in connection with the lower generation, but
   Begotten in respect of the first and more incomprehensible?

   III.  Next is the fact of His being called Servant [3603] and serving
   many well, and that it is a great thing for Him to be called the Child
   of God.  For in truth He was in servitude to flesh and to birth and to
   the conditions of our life with a view to our liberation, and to that
   of all those whom He has saved, who were in bondage under sin.  What
   greater destiny can befall man's humility than that he should be
   intermingled with God, and by this intermingling should be deified,
   [3604] and that we should be so visited by the Dayspring from on high,
   [3605] that even that Holy Thing that should be born should be called
   the Son of the Highest, [3606] and that there should be bestowed upon
   Him a Name which is above every name?  And what else can this be than
   God?--and that every knee should bow to Him That was made of no
   reputation for us, and That mingled the Form of God with the form of a
   servant, and that all the House of Israel should know that God hath
   made Him both Lord and Christ? [3607]   For all this was done by the
   action of the Begotten, and by the good pleasure of Him That begat Him.

   IV.  Well, what is the second of their great irresistible passages?
   "He must reign," [3608] till such and such a time...and "be received by
   heaven until the time of restitution," [3609] and "have the seat at the
   Right Hand until the overthrow of His enemies." [3610]   But after
   this?  Must He cease to be King, or be removed from Heaven?  Why, who
   shall make Him cease, or for what cause?  What a bold and very
   anarchical interpreter you are; and yet you have heard that Of His
   Kingdom there shall be no end. [3611]   Your mistake arises from not
   understanding that Until is not always exclusive of that which comes
   after, but asserts up to that time, without denying what comes after
   it.  To take a single instance--how else would you understand, "Lo, I
   am with you always, even unto the end of the world?" [3612]   Does it
   mean that He will no longer be so afterwards.  And for what reason?
   But this is not the only cause of your error; you also fail to
   distinguish between the things that are signified.  He is said to reign
   in one sense as the Almighty King, both of the willing and the
   unwilling; but in another as producing in us submission, and placing us
   under His Kingship as willingly acknowledging His Sovereignty.  Of His
   Kingdom, considered in the former sense, there shall be no end.  But in
   the second sense, what end will there be?  His taking us as His
   servants, on our entrance into a state of salvation.  For what need is
   there to Work Submission in us when we have already submitted?  After
   which He arises to judge the earth, and to separate the saved from the
   lost.  After that He is to stand as God in the midst of gods, [3613]
   that is, of the saved, distinguishing and deciding of what honour and
   of what mansion each is worthy.

   V.  Take, in the next place, the subjection by which you subject the
   Son to the Father.  What, you say, is He not now subject, or must He,
   if He is God, be subject to God? [3614]   You are fashioning your
   argument as if it concerned some robber, or some hostile deity.  But
   look at it in this manner:  that as for my sake He was called a curse,
   [3615] Who destroyed my curse; and sin, [3616] who taketh away the sin
   of the world; and became a new Adam [3617] to take the place of the
   old, just so He makes my disobedience His own as Head of the whole
   body.  As long then as I am disobedient and rebellious, both by denial
   of God and by my passions, so long Christ also is called disobedient on
   my account.  But when all things shall be subdued unto Him on the one
   hand by acknowledgment of Him, and on the other by a reformation, then
   He Himself also will have fulfilled His submission, bringing me whom He
   has saved to God.  For this, according to my view, is the subjection of
   Christ; namely, the fulfilling of the Father's Will.  But as the Son
   subjects all to the Father, so does the Father to the Son; the One by
   His Work, the Other by His good pleasure, as we have already said.  And
   thus He Who subjects presents to God that which he has subjected,
   making our condition His own.  Of the same kind, it appears to me, is
   the expression, "My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" [3618]
   It was not He who was forsaken either by the Father, or by His own
   Godhead, as some have thought, as if It were afraid of the Passion, and
   therefore withdrew Itself from Him in His Sufferings (for who compelled
   Him either to be born on earth at all, or to be lifted up on the
   Cross?)  But as I said, He was in His own Person representing us.  For
   we were the forsaken and despised before, but now by the Sufferings of
   Him Who could not suffer, we were taken up and saved.  Similarly, He
   makes His own our folly and our transgressions; and says what follows
   in the Psalm, for it is very evident that the Twenty-first [3619] Psalm
   refers to Christ.

   VI.  The same consideration applies to another passage, "He learnt
   obedience by the things which He suffered," [3620] and to His "strong
   crying and tears," and His "Entreaties," and His "being heard," and
   His" Reverence," all of which He wonderfully wrought out, like a drama
   whose plot was devised on our behalf.  For in His character of the Word
   He was neither obedient nor disobedient.  For such expressions belong
   to servants, and inferiors, and the one applies to the better sort of
   them, while the other belongs to those who deserve punishment.  But, in
   the character of the Form of a Servant, He condescends to His fellow
   servants, nay, to His servants, and takes upon Him a strange form,
   bearing all me and mine in Himself, that in Himself He may exhaust the
   bad, as fire does wax, or as the sun does the mists of earth; and that
   I may partake of His nature by the blending.  Thus He honours obedience
   by His action, and proves it experimentally by His Passion.  For to
   possess the disposition is not enough, just as it would not be enough
   for us, unless we also proved it by our acts; for action is the proof
   of disposition.

   And perhaps it would not be wrong to assume this also, that by the art
   [3621] of His love for man He gauges our obedience, and measures all by
   comparison with His own Sufferings, so that He may know our condition
   by His own, and how much is demanded of us, and how much we yield,
   taking into the account, along with our environment, our weakness
   also.  For if the Light shining through the veil [3622] upon the
   darkness, that is upon this life, was persecuted by the other darkness
   (I mean, the Evil One and the Tempter), how much more will the darkness
   be persecuted, as being weaker than it?  And what marvel is it, that
   though He entirely escaped, we have been, at any rate in part,
   overtaken?  For it is a more wonderful thing that He should have been
   chased than that we should have been captured;--at least to the minds
   of all who reason aright on the subject.  I will add yet another
   passage to those I have mentioned, because I think that it clearly
   tends to the same sense.  I mean "In that He hath suffered being
   tempted, He is able to succour them that are tempted." [3623]   But God
   will be all in all in the time of restitution; not in the sense that
   the Father alone will Be; and the Son be wholly resolved into Him, like
   a torch into a great pyre, from which it was reft away for a little
   space, and then put back (for I would not have even the Sabellians
   injured [3624] by such an expression); but the entire Godhead...when we
   shall be no longer divided (as we now are by movements and passions),
   and containing nothing at all of God, or very little, but shall be
   entirely like.

   VII.  As your third point you count the Word Greater; [3625] and as
   your fourth, To My God and your God. [3626]   And indeed, if He had
   been called greater, and the word equal had not occurred, this might
   perhaps have been a point in their favour.  But if we find both words
   clearly used what will these gentlemen have to say?  How will it
   strengthen their argument?  How will they reconcile the
   irreconcilable?  For that the same thing should be at once greater than
   and equal to the same thing is an impossibility; and the evident
   solution is that the Greater refers to origination, while the Equal
   belongs to the Nature; and this we acknowledge with much good will.
   But perhaps some one else will back up our attack on your argument, and
   assert, that That which is from such a Cause is not inferior to that
   which has no Cause; for it would share the glory of the Unoriginate,
   because it is from the Unoriginate.  And there is, besides, the
   Generation, which is to all men a matter so marvellous and of such
   Majesty.  For to say that he is greater than the Son considered as man,
   is true indeed, but is no great thing.  For what marvel is it if God is
   greater than man?  Surely that is enough to say in answer to their talk
   about Greater.

   VIII.  As to the other passages, My God would be used in respect, not
   of the Word, but of the Visible Word.  For how could there be a God of
   Him Who is properly God?  In the same way He is Father, not of the
   Visible, but of the Word; for our Lord was of two Natures; so that one
   expression is used properly, the other improperly in each of the two
   cases; but exactly the opposite way to their use in respect of us.  For
   with respect to us God is properly our God, but not properly our
   Father.  And this is the cause of the error of the Heretics, namely the
   joining of these two Names, which are interchanged because of the Union
   of the Natures.  And an indication of this is found in the fact that
   wherever the Natures are distinguished in our thoughts from one
   another, the Names are also distinguished; as you hear in Paul's words,
   "The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory." [3627]   The
   God of Christ, but the Father of glory.  For although these two terms
   express but one Person, yet this is not by a Unity of Nature, but by a
   Union of the two.  What could be clearer?

   IX.  Fifthly, let it be alleged that it is said of Him that He receives
   life, [3628] judgment, [3629] inheritance of the Gentiles, [3630] or
   power over all flesh, [3631] or glory, [3632] or disciples, or whatever
   else is mentioned.  This also belongs to the Manhood; and yet if you
   were to ascribe it to the Godhead, it would be no absurdity.  For you
   would not so ascribe it as if it were newly acquired, but as belonging
   to Him from the beginning by reason of nature, and not as an act of
   favour.

   X.  Sixthly, let it be asserted that it is written, The Son can do
   nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do. [3633]   The
   solution of this is as follows:--Can and Cannot are not words with only
   one meaning, but have many meanings.  On the one hand they are used
   sometimes in respect of deficiency of strength, sometimes in respect of
   time, and sometimes relatively to a certain object; as for instance, A
   Child cannot be an Athlete, or, A Puppy cannot see, or fight with so
   and so.  Perhaps some day the child will be an athlete, the puppy will
   see, will fight with that other, though it may still be unable to fight
   with Any other.  Or again, they may be used of that which is Generally
   true.  For instance,--A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid;
   [3634] while yet it might possibly be hidden by another higher hill
   being in a line with it.  Or in another sense they are used of a thing
   which is not reasonable; as, Can the Children of the Bridechamber fast
   while the Bridegroom is with them; [3635] whether He be considered as
   visible in bodily form (for the time of His sojourning among us was not
   one of mourning, but of gladness), or, as the Word.  For why should
   they keep a bodily fast who are cleansed by the Word? [3636]   Or,
   again, they are used of that which is contrary to the will; as in, He
   could do no mighty works there because of their unbelief, [3637] --i.e.
   of those who should receive them.  For since in order to healing there
   is need of both faith in the patient and power in the Healer, [3638]
   when one of the two failed the other was impossible.  But probably this
   sense also is to be referred to the head of the unreasonable.  For
   healing is not reasonable in the case of those who would afterwards be
   injured by unbelief.  The sentence The world cannot hate you, [3639]
   comes under the same head, as does also How can ye, being evil, speak
   good things? [3640]   For in what sense is either impossible, except
   that it is contrary to the will?  There is a somewhat similar meaning
   in the expressions which imply that a thing impossible by nature is
   possible to God if He so wills; [3641] as that a man cannot be born a
   second time, [3642] or that a needle will not let a camel through it.
   [3643]   For what could prevent either of these things happening, if
   God so willed?

   XI.  And besides all this, there is the absolutely impossible and
   inadmissible, as that which we are now examining.  For as we assert
   that it is impossible for God to be evil, or not to exist--for this
   would be indicative of weakness in God rather than of strength--or for
   the non-existent to exist, or for two and two to make both four and
   ten, [3644] so it is impossible and inconceivable that the Son should
   do anything that the Father doeth not. [3645]   For all things that the
   Father hath are the Son's; [3646] and on the other hand, all that
   belongs to the Son is the Father's.  Nothing then is peculiar, because
   all things are in common.  For Their Being itself is common and equal,
   even though the Son receive it from the Father.  It is in respect of
   this that it is said I live by the Father; [3647] not as though His
   Life and Being were kept together by the Father, but because He has His
   Being from Him beyond all time, and beyond all cause.  But how does He
   see the Father doing, and do likewise?  Is it like those who copy
   pictures and letters, because they cannot attain the truth unless by
   looking at the original, and being led by the hand by it?  But how
   shall Wisdom stand in need of a teacher, or be incapable of acting
   unless taught?  And in what sense does the Father "Do" in the present
   or in the past?  Did He make another world before this one, or is He
   going to make a world to come?  And did the Son look at that and make
   this?  Or will He look at the other, and make one like it?  According
   to this argument there must be Four worlds, two made by the Father, and
   two by the Son.  What an absurdity!  He cleanses lepers, and delivers
   men from evil spirits, and diseases, and quickens the dead, and walks
   upon the sea, and does all His other works; but in what case, or when
   did the Father do these acts before Him?  Is it not clear that the
   Father impressed the ideas of these same actions, and the Word brings
   them to pass, yet not in slavish or unskilful fashion, but with full
   knowledge and in a masterly way, or, to speak more properly, like the
   Father?  For in this sense I understand the words that whatsoever is
   done by the Father, these things doeth the Son likewise; not, that is,
   because of the likeness of the things done, but in respect of the
   Authority.  This might well also be the meaning of the passage which
   says that the Father worketh hitherto and the Son also; [3648] and not
   only so but it refers also to the government and preservation of the
   things which He has made; as is shewn by the passage which says that He
   maketh His Angels Spirits, [3649] and that the earth is founded upon
   its steadfastness (though once for all these things were fixed and
   made) and that the thunder is made firm and the wind created. [3650]
   Of all these things the Word was given once, but the Action is
   continuous even now.

   XII.  Let them quote in the seventh place that The Son came down from
   Heaven, not to do His own Will, but the Will of Him That sent Him.
   [3651]   Well, if this had not been said by Himself Who came down, we
   should say that the phrase was modelled as issuing from the Human
   Nature, not from Him who is conceived of in His character as the
   Saviour, for His Human Will cannot be opposed to God, seeing it is
   altogether taken into God; but conceived of simply as in our nature,
   inasmuch as the human will does not completely follow the Divine, but
   for the most part struggles against and resists it.  For we understand
   in the same way the words, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
   from Me; Nevertheless let not what I will but Thy Will prevail. [3652]
     For it is not likely that He did not know whether it was possible or
   not, or that He would oppose will to will.  But since, as this is the
   language of Him Who assumed our Nature (for He it was Who came down),
   and not of the Nature which He assumed, we must meet the objection in
   this way, that the passage does not mean that the Son has a special
   will of His own, besides that of the Father, but that He has not; so
   that the meaning would be, "not to do Mine own Will, for there is none
   of Mine apart from, but that which is common to, Me and Thee; for as We
   have one Godhead, so We have one Will." [3653]   For many such
   expressions are used in relation to this Community, and are expressed
   not positively but negatively; as, e.g., God giveth not the Spirit by
   measure, [3654] for as a matter of fact He does not give the Spirit to
   the Son, nor does He measure It, for God is not measured by God; or
   again, Not my transgression nor my sin. [3655]   The words are not used
   because He has these things, but because He has them not.  And again,
   Not for our righteousness which we have done, [3656] for we have not
   done any.  And this meaning is evident also in the clauses which
   follow.  For what, says He, is the Will of My Father?  That everyone
   that believeth on the Son should be saved, [3657] and obtain the final
   Resurrection. [3658]   Now is this the Will of the Father, but not of
   the Son?  Or does He preach the Gospel, and receive men's faith against
   His will?  Who could believe that?  Moreover, that passage, too, which
   says that the Word which is heard is not the Son's [3659] but the
   Father's has the same force.  For I cannot see how that which is common
   to two can be said to belong to one alone, however much I consider it,
   and I do not think any one else can.  If then you hold this opinion
   concerning the Will, you will be right and reverent in your opinion, as
   I think, and as every right-minded person thinks.

   XIII.  The eighth passage is, That they may know Thee, the only true
   God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent; [3660] and There is none
   good save one, that is, God. [3661]   The solution of this appears to
   me very easy.  For if you attribute this only to the Father, where will
   you place the Very Truth?  For if you conceive in this manner of the
   meaning of To the only wise God, [3662] or Who only hath Immortality,
   Dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, [3663] or of to
   the king of the Ages, immortal, invisible, and only wise God, [3664]
   then the Son has vanished under sentence of death, or of darkness, or
   at any rate condemned to be neither wise nor king, nor invisible, nor
   God at all, which sums up all these points.  And how will you prevent
   His Goodness, which especially belongs to God alone, from perishing
   with the rest?  I, however, think that the passage That they may know
   Thee the only true God, was said to overthrow those gods which are
   falsely so called, for He would not have added and Jesus Christ Whom
   Thou hast sent, if The Only True God were contrasted with Him, and the
   sentence did not proceed upon the basis of a common Godhead.  The "None
   is Good" meets the tempting Lawyer, who was testifying to His Goodness
   viewed as Man.  For perfect goodness, He says, is God's alone, even if
   a man is called perfectly good.  As for instance, A good man out of the
   good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things. [3665]   And, I
   will give the kingdom to one who is good above Thee. [3666] ...Words of
   God, speaking to Saul about David.  Or again, Do good, O Lord, unto the
   good [3667] ...and all other like expressions concerning those of us
   who are praised, upon whom it is a kind of effluence from the Supreme
   Good, and has come to them in a secondary degree.  It will be best of
   all if we can persuade you of this.  But if not, what will you say to
   the suggestion on the other side, that on your hypothesis the Son has
   been called the only God.  In what passage?  Why, in this:--This is
   your God; no other shall be accounted of in comparison with Him, and a
   little further on, after this did He shew Himself upon earth, and
   conversed with men. [3668]   This addition proves clearly that the
   words are not used of the Father, but of the Son; for it was He Who in
   bodily form companied with us, and was in this lower world.  Now, if we
   should determine to take these words as said in contrast with the
   Father, and not with the imaginary gods, we lose the Father by the very
   terms which we were pressing against the Son.  And what could be more
   disastrous than such a victory?

   XIV.  Ninthly, they allege, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession
   for us. [3669]   O, how beautiful and mystical and kind.  For to
   intercede does not imply to seek for vengeance, as is most men's way
   (for in that there would be something of humiliation), but it is to
   plead for us by reason of His Mediatorship, just as the Spirit also is
   said to make intercession for us. [3670]   For there is One God, and
   One Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. [3671]   For He
   still pleads even now as Man for my salvation; for He continues to wear
   the Body which He assumed, until He make me God by the power of His
   Incarnation; although He is no longer known after the flesh [3672] --I
   mean, the passions of the flesh, the same, except sin, as ours.  Thus
   too, we have an Advocate, [3673] Jesus Christ, not indeed prostrating
   Himself for us before the Father, and falling down before Him in
   slavish fashion...Away with a suspicion so truly slavish and unworthy
   of the Spirit!  For neither is it seemly for the Father to require
   this, nor for the Son to submit to it; nor is it just to think it of
   God.  But by what He suffered as Man, He as the Word and the Counsellor
   persuades Him to be patient.  I think this is the meaning of His
   Advocacy.

   XV.  Their tenth objection is the ignorance, and the statement that Of
   the last day and hour knoweth no man, not even the Son Himself, but the
   Father. [3674]   And yet how can Wisdom be ignorant of anything--that
   is, Wisdom Who made the worlds, Who perfects them, Who remodels them,
   Who is the Limit of all things that were made, Who knoweth the things
   of God as the spirit of a man knows the things that are in him? [3675]
     For what can be more perfect than this knowledge?  How then can you
   say that all things before that hour He knows accurately, and all
   things that are to happen about the time of the end, but of the hour
   itself He is ignorant?  For such a thing would be like a riddle; as if
   one were to say that he knew accurately all that was in front of the
   wall, but did not know the wall itself; or that, knowing the end of the
   day, he did not know the beginning of the night--where knowledge of the
   one necessarily brings in the other.  Thus everyone must see that He
   knows as God, and knows not as Man;--if one may separate the visible
   from that which is discerned by thought alone.  For the absolute and
   unconditioned use of the Name "The Son" in this passage, without the
   addition of whose Son, gives us this thought, that we are to understand
   the ignorance in the most reverent sense, by attributing it to the
   Manhood, and not to the Godhead.

   XVI.  If then this argument is sufficient, let us stop here, and not
   enquire further.  But if not, our second argument is as follows:--Just
   as we do in all other instances, so let us refer His knowledge of the
   greatest events, in honour of the Father, to The Cause.  And I think
   that anyone, even if he did not read it in the way that one of our own
   Students [3676] did, would soon perceive that not even the Son knows
   the day or hour otherwise than as the Father does.  For what do we
   conclude from this?  That since the Father knows, therefore also does
   the Son, as it is evident that this cannot be known or comprehended by
   any but the First Nature.  There remains for us to interpret the
   passage about His receiving commandment, [3677] and having kept His
   Commandments, and done always those things that please Him; and further
   concerning His being made perfect, [3678] and His exaltation, [3679]
   and His learning obedience by the things which He suffered; and also
   His High Priesthood, and His Oblation, and His Betrayal, and His prayer
   to Him That was able to save Him from death, and His Agony and Bloody
   Sweat and Prayer, [3680] and such like things; if it were not evident
   to every one that such words are concerned, not with That Nature Which
   is unchangeable and above all capacity of suffering, but with the
   passible Humanity.  This, then, is the argument concerning these
   objections, so far as to be a sort of foundation and memorandum for the
   use of those who are better able to conduct the enquiry to a more
   complete working out.  It may, however, be worth while, and will be
   consistent with what has been already said, instead of passing over
   without remark the actual Titles of the Son (there are many of them,
   and they are concerned with many of His Attributes), to set before you
   the meaning of each of them, and to point out the mystical meaning of
   the names.

   XVII.  We will begin thus.  The Deity cannot be expressed in words.
   And this is proved to us, not only by argument, but by the wisest and
   most ancient of the Hebrews, so far as they have given us reason for
   conjecture.  For they appropriated certain characters to the honour of
   the Deity, and would not even allow the name of anything inferior to
   God to be written with the same letters as that of God, because to
   their minds it was improper that the Deity should even to that extent
   admit any of His creatures to a share with Himself.  How then could
   they have admitted that the invisible and separate Nature can be
   explained by divisible words?  For neither has any one yet breathed the
   whole air, nor has any mind entirely comprehended, or speech
   exhaustively contained the Being of God.  But we sketch Him by His
   Attributes, and so obtain a certain faint and feeble and partial idea
   concerning Him, and our best Theologian is he who has, not indeed
   discovered the whole, for our present chain does not allow of our
   seeing the whole, but conceived of Him to a greater extent than
   another, and gathered in himself more of the Likeness or adumbration of
   the Truth, or whatever we may call it.

   XVIII.  As far then as we can reach, He Who Is, and God, are the
   special names of His Essence; and of these especially He Who Is, not
   only because when He spake to Moses in the mount, and Moses asked what
   His Name was, this was what He called Himself, bidding him say to the
   people "I Am hath sent me," [3681] but also because we find that this
   Name is the more strictly appropriate.  For the Name Theos (God), even
   if, as those who are skilful in these matters say, it were derived from
   Theein [3682] (to run) or from Aithein (to blaze), from continual
   motion, and because He consumes evil conditions of things (from which
   fact He is also called A Consuming Fire), [3683] would still be one of
   the Relative Names, and not an Absolute one; as again is the case with
   Lord, [3684] which also is called a name of God.  I am the Lord Thy
   God, He says, that is My name; [3685] and, The Lord is His name. [3686]
     But we are enquiring into a Nature Whose Being is absolute and not
   into Being bound up with something else.  But Being is in its proper
   sense peculiar to God, and belongs to Him entirely, and is not limited
   or cut short by any Before or After, for indeed in him there is no past
   or future.

   XIX.  Of the other titles, some are evidently names of His Authority,
   others of His Government of the world, and of this viewed under a
   twofold aspect, the one before the other in the Incarnation.  For
   instance the Almighty, the King of Glory, or of The Ages, or of The
   Powers, or of The Beloved, or of Kings.  Or again the Lord of Sabaoth,
   that is of Hosts, or of Powers, or of Lords; these are clearly titles
   belonging to His Authority.  But the God either of Salvation or of
   Vengeance, or of Peace, or of Righteousness; or of Abraham, Isaac, and
   Jacob, and of all the spiritual Israel that seeth God,--these belong to
   His Government.  For since we are governed by these three things, the
   fear of punishment, the hope of salvation and of glory besides, and the
   practice of the virtues by which these are attained, the Name of the
   God of Vengeance governs fear, and that of the God of Salvation our
   hope, and that of the God of Virtues our practice; that whoever attains
   to any of these may, as carrying God in himself, press on yet more unto
   perfection, and to that affinity which arises out of virtues.  Now
   these are Names common to the Godhead, but the Proper Name of the
   Unoriginate is Father, and that of the unoriginately Begotten is Son,
   and that of the unbegottenly Proceeding or going forth is The Holy
   Ghost.  Let us proceed then to the Names of the Son, which were our
   starting point in this part of our argument.

   XX.  In my opinion He is called Son because He is identical with the
   Father in Essence; and not only for this reason, but also because He is
   Of Him.  And He is called Only-Begotten, not because He is the only Son
   and of the Father alone, and only a Son; but also because the manner of
   His Sonship is peculiar to Himself and not shared by bodies.  And He is
   called the Word, because He is related to the Father as Word to Mind;
   not only on account of His passionless Generation, but also because of
   the Union, and of His declaratory function.  Perhaps too this relation
   might be compared to that between the Definition and the Thing defined
   [3687] since this also is called Logos. [3688]   For, it says, he that
   hath mental perception of the Son (for this is the meaning of Hath
   Seen) hath also perceived the Father; [3689] and the Son is a concise
   demonstration and easy setting forth of the Father's Nature.  For every
   thing that is begotten is a silent word of him that begat it.  And if
   any one should say that this Name was given Him because He exists in
   all things that are, he would not be wrong.  For what is there that
   consists but by the word?  He is also called Wisdom, as the Knowledge
   of things divine and human.  For how is it possible that He Who made
   all things should be ignorant of the reasons of what He has made?  And
   Power, as the Sustainer of all created things, and the Furnisher to
   them of power to keep themselves together.  And Truth, as being in
   nature One and not many (for truth is one and falsehood is manifold),
   and as the pure Seal of the Father and His most unerring Impress.  And
   the Image as of one substance with Him, and because He is of the
   Father, and not the Father of Him.  For this is of the Nature of an
   Image, to be the reproduction of its Archetype, and of that whose name
   it bears; only that there is more here.  For in ordinary language an
   image is a motionless representation of that which has motion; but in
   this case it is the living reproduction of the Living One, and is more
   exactly like than was Seth to Adam, [3690] or any son to his father.
   For such is the nature of simple Existences, that it is not correct to
   say of them that they are Like in one particular and Unlike in another;
   but they are a complete resemblance, and should rather be called
   Identical than Like.  Moreover he is called Light as being the
   Brightness of souls cleansed by word and life.  For if ignorance and
   sin be darkness, knowledge and a godly life will be Light....And He is
   called Life, because He is Light, and is the constituting and creating
   Power of every reasonable soul.  For in Him we live and move and have
   our being, [3691] according to the double power of that Breathing into
   us; for we were all inspired by Him with breath, [3692] and as many of
   us as were capable of it, and in so far as we open the mouth of our
   mind, with God the Holy Ghost.  He is Righteousness, because He
   distributes according to that which we deserve, and is a righteous
   Arbiter both for those who are under the Law and for those who are
   under Grace, for soul and body, so that the former should rule, and the
   latter obey, and the higher have supremacy over the lower; that the
   worse may not rise in rebellion against the better.  He is
   Sanctification, as being Purity, that the Pure may be contained by
   Purity.  And Redemption, because He sets us free, who were held captive
   under sin, giving Himself a Ransom for us, the Sacrifice to make
   expiation for the world.  And Resurrection, because He raises up from
   hence, and brings to life again us, who were slain by sin.

   XXI.  These names however are still common to Him Who is above us, and
   to Him Who came for our sake.  But others are peculiarly our own, and
   belong to that nature which He assumed.  So He is called Man, not only
   that through His Body He may be apprehended by embodied creatures,
   whereas otherwise this would be impossible because of His
   incomprehensible nature; but also that by Himself He may sanctify
   humanity, and be as it were a leaven to the whole lump; and by uniting
   to Himself that which was condemned may release it from all
   condemnation, becoming for all men all things that we are, except
   sin;--body, soul, mind and all through which death reaches--and thus He
   became Man, who is the combination of all these; God in visible form,
   because He retained that which is perceived by mind alone.  He is Son
   of Man, both on account of Adam, and of the Virgin from Whom He came;
   from the one as a forefather, from the other as His Mother, both in
   accordance with the law of generation, and apart from it.  He is
   Christ, because of His Godhead.  For this is the Anointing of His
   Manhood, and does not, as is the case with all other Anointed Ones,
   sanctify by its action, but by the Presence in His Fulness of the
   Anointing One; the effect of which is that That which anoints is called
   Man, and makes that which is anointed God.  He is The Way, because He
   leads us through Himself; The Door, as letting us in; the Shepherd, as
   making us dwell in a place of green pastures, [3693] and bringing us up
   by waters of rest, and leading us there, and protecting us from wild
   beasts, converting the erring, bringing back that which was lost,
   binding up that which was broken, guarding the strong, and bringing
   them together in the Fold beyond, with words of pastoral knowledge.
   The Sheep, as the Victim:  The Lamb, as being perfect:  the Highpriest,
   as the Offerer; Melchisedec, as without Mother in that Nature which is
   above us, and without Father in ours; and without genealogy above (for
   who, it says, shall declare His generation?) and moreover, as King of
   Salem, which means Peace, and King of Righteousness, and as receiving
   tithes from Patriarchs, when they prevail over powers of evil.  They
   are the titles of the Son.  Walk through them, those that are lofty in
   a godlike manner; those that belong to the body in a manner suitable to
   them; or rather, altogether in a godlike manner, that thou mayest
   become a god, ascending from below, for His sake Who came down from on
   high for ours.  In all and above all keep to this, and thou shalt never
   err, either in the loftier or the lowlier names; Jesus Christ is the
   Same yesterday and to-day in the Incarnation, and in the Spirit for
   ever and ever.  Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3595] Prov. viii. 22.  The A.V. has in the place Possessed, and this
   has very high authority:  but the Hebrew word in almost every case
   signifies to Acquire.  It is used, says Bp. Wordsworth (ad h. l.),
   about eighty times in the O.T., and in only five places is it rendered
   in our Translation by Possess;--in two of which (Gen. xiv. 10, 22, and
   Ps. cxxxix. 13) it might well have the sense of Creating, and in two
   (Jer. xxxii. 15, and Zech. xi. 5) of Getting.  In some ancient Versions
   (LXX. and Syr.) it is rendered by Create.  S. Jerome in his Ep. ad
   Cypr. (ii. 697) says that the word may here be understood of
   possession, but in his Comm. on Ephes. ii. (p. 342) he adopts the
   rendering Create, which he applies to the Incarnation, as in several
   places does S. Athanasius.  But Wordsworth thinks it better to apply
   the words to the Eternal Generation, as S. Hilary expounds it (c.
   Arianos, who argued from it that Christ was a creature); "quia Filius
   Dei non corporalis parturitionis est genitus exemplo, sed ex perfecto
   Deo perfectus Deus natus; et ideo ait creatam se esse Sapientia; omnem
   in generatione sua notionem passionis corporalis excludens."

   [3596] Is. xxiii. 4.

   [3597] Job xxviii. 14.

   [3598] Ps. xix. 1.

   [3599] Zech. xiii. 7.

   [3600] Ps. cxiv. 6.

   [3601] Ps. cxi. 7.

   [3602] Ps. xiv. 7.

   [3603] Isa. xlix. 6; liii. 11.  The LXX. here mistranslates; the Hebrew
   and the Latin have the same word in all the passages quoted below,
   while the LXX. varies, as follows:  Isa. xlii. 1. pais.   19. paides,
   douloi.  xliv. 2. pais.  21. pais.  xlviii. 29. doulon.  xlix. 3.
   doulos.  5. doulon.  6. paida.  7. doulon.  lii. 13. pais.  liii. 11.
   douleuonta.

   [3604] See Prolegomena, sec. ii. and 2 Pet. i. 4.

   [3605] Luke i. 78.

   [3606] Phil. ii. 9.

   [3607] Acts ii. 36.

   [3608] 1 Cor. xv. 35.

   [3609] Acts iii. 21.

   [3610] Ps. cx. 1.

   [3611] Luke i. 33.  Cf. Nic. Creed.

   [3612] Matt. xxviii. 20.

   [3613] Ps. lxxxii. 1.

   [3614] S. Gregory would here shew that the subjection of Christ of
   which S. Paul speaks in the passage quoted, is that of the Head of the
   Church, representing the members of His body.  Cf. S. Ambrose, de Fide
   V. vi., quoted by Petavius, de Trin. III. v. 2.

   [3615] Gal. iii. 13.

   [3616] 2 Cor. v. 21.

   [3617] 1 Cor. xv. 45.

   [3618] Ps. xxii. 1.

   [3619] I.e. Ps. xxii. A.V.

   [3620] Heb. v. 8, etc.

   [3621] Leuvenclavius translates "The art of this lovingkindness
   gauges," etc.

   [3622] The Benedictines render, "In darkness, that is, in this life,
   because of the veil of the body."

   [3623] Heb. ii. 18.

   [3624] The Benedictines take para phtheiresthosan in an active sense:
   "I would not let even the Sabellians wrest such an expression."

   [3625] John xiv. 28.

   [3626] Ib. xx. 17.

   [3627] Ephes. i. 17.

   [3628] John viii. 54.

   [3629] John v. 22.

   [3630] Ps. ii. 8.

   [3631] John xvii. 2.

   [3632] 2 Pet. i. 17, etc.

   [3633] John v. 19.

   [3634] Matt. v. 14.

   [3635] Mark ii. 19.

   [3636] John xv. 3.

   [3637] Mark vi. 5.

   [3638] Note with the Benedictines that S. Gregory is here speaking of
   our Lord alone, not of ordinary Physicians; hence he uses the singular.

   [3639] John vii. 7.

   [3640] Matt. xii. 34.

   [3641] Matt. xix. 26.

   [3642] John iii. 4.

   [3643] Matt. xix. 24.

   [3644] One ms. reads "to be fourteen."

   [3645] John v. 19.

   [3646] Ib. xvi. 15.

   [3647] Ib. vi. 57.

   [3648] John v. 17.

   [3649] Ps. civ. 4, 5, LXX.

   [3650] cf. Amos iv. 13, where A.V. reads, He That formed the mountains
   and created the wind.

   [3651] John vi. 38.

   [3652] Matt. xxvi. 39.

   [3653] Observe that S. Gregory expressly limits this paraphrase to the
   Divine Nature of our Lord, and is not in any way denying to Him a Human
   Will also;--indeed in the preceding sentence he distinctly asserts it.
   The whole passage makes very strongly against the heresy of
   Apollinarius, which adopted the Arian tenet that in our Lord the Divine
   Logos supplied the place of the human soul.

   [3654] John iii. 34.

   [3655] Ps. lix. 3.

   [3656] Dan. ix. 18.

   [3657] John vi. 40.

   [3658] V. l.  Restoration.

   [3659] John xiv. 24.

   [3660] Ib. xvii. 3.

   [3661] Luke xviii. 19.

   [3662] 1 Tim. i. 17.

   [3663] Ib. vi. 16.

   [3664] Ib. i. 17.

   [3665] Mat. xii. 35.

   [3666] 1 Sam. xv. 28.

   [3667] Ps. cxxv. 4.

   [3668] Baruch iii. 35, 37.

   [3669] Heb. vii. 25.

   [3670] Rom. viii. 26.

   [3671] 1 Tim. ii. 5.

   [3672] 2 Cor. v. 16.

   [3673] 1 John ii. 1.

   [3674] Mark xiii. 32.

   [3675] 1 Cor. ii. 11.

   [3676] Elias thinks that the great S. Basil is here referred to.
   Petavius thinks the first argument of c. xvi. forced and
   unsatisfactory.

   [3677] John xii. 49.

   [3678] Heb. v. 7., etc.

   [3679] Phil. ii. 9.

   [3680] Luke xii. 44.

   [3681] Exod. iii. 14.

   [3682] The derivation of Theos from Theein (to run) is given by Plato
   (Crat., 397c).  That from Aithein (to blaze) is found also in S. John
   Damascene (De Fide Orth., I., 12), who however may have borrowed it
   from S. Gregory, or from the source whence the latter took it.  S.
   Athanasius also admits it (De Defin., 11).  Other definitions are,
   according to Suicer, (1) Theasthai (to see), e.g. Greg. Nyss. in Cant.
   Hom., V.  (2) Theorein (to contemplate), Athan. Quæst Misc., Qu. XI.
   Theos legetai apo to theorein ta panta, hoionei theoros kai theos,
   egoun theates panton.  (3) Tithenai (to place), Clem., Al. Strom., l.
   s. fin., theos para ten thesin eiretai.

   [3683] Deut. iv. 24.

   [3684] Lord (Kurios) is simply the LXX. rendering of the word which in
   reading Hebrew is substituted for the Ineffable Name.  Thus in the
   passages quoted, had the original language been used, the Four-Lettered
   Name would have appeared.

   [3685] Isa. xlii. 8.

   [3686] Amos ix. 6.

   [3687] Of the oration on Christmas Day, where He is called ho tou
   Patros horos kai logos, and see Note there.

   [3688] Ratio (relation; sometimes reason) Sermo (discourse) and Verbum
   (Word) are all renderings of Logos.

   [3689] John xiv. 9.

   [3690] Gen. v. 3.

   [3691] Acts xvii. 28.

   [3692] Gen. ii. 7.

   [3693] Ps. xxiii. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Fifth Theological Oration.

   On the Holy Spirit.

   I.  Such then is the account of the Son, and in this manner He has
   escaped those who would stone Him, passing through the midst of them.
   [3694]   For the Word is not stoned, but casts stones when He pleases;
   and uses a sling against wild beasts--that is, words--approaching the
   Mount [3695] in an unholy way.  But, they go on, what have you to say
   about the Holy Ghost?  From whence are you bringing in upon us this
   strange God, of Whom Scripture is silent?  And even they who keep
   within bounds as to the Son speak thus.  And just as we find in the
   case of roads and rivers, that they split off from one another and join
   again, so it happens also in this case, through the superabundance of
   impiety, that people who differ in all other respects have here some
   points of agreement, so that you never can tell for certain either
   where they are of one mind, or where they are in conflict.

   II.  Now the subject of the Holy Spirit presents a special difficulty,
   not only because when these men have become weary in their disputations
   concerning the Son, they struggle with greater heat against the Spirit
   (for it seems to be absolutely necessary for them to have some object
   on which to give expression to their impiety, or life would appear to
   them no longer worth living), but further because we ourselves also,
   being worn out by the multitude of their questions, are in something of
   the same condition with men who have lost their appetite; who having
   taken a dislike to some particular kind of food, shrink from all food;
   so we in like manner have an aversion from all discussions.  Yet may
   the Spirit grant it to us, and then the discourse will proceed, and God
   will be glorified.  Well then, we will leave to others [3696] who have
   worked upon this subject for us as well as for themselves, as we have
   worked upon it for them, the task of examining carefully and
   distinguishing in how many senses the word Spirit or the word Holy is
   used and understood in Holy Scripture, with the evidence suitable to
   such an enquiry; and of shewing how besides these the combination of
   the two words--I mean, Holy Spirit--is used in a peculiar sense; but we
   will apply ourselves to the remainder of the subject.

   III.  They then who are angry with us on the ground that we are
   bringing in a strange or interpolated God, viz.:--the Holy Ghost, and
   who fight so very hard for the letter, should know that they are afraid
   where no fear is; [3697] and I would have them clearly understand that
   their love for the letter is but a cloak for their impiety, as shall be
   shewn later on, when we refute their objections to the utmost of our
   power.  But we have so much confidence in the Deity of the Spirit Whom
   we adore, [3698] that we will begin our teaching concerning His Godhead
   by fitting to Him the Names which belong to the Trinity, even though
   some persons may think us too bold.  The Father was the True Light
   which lighteneth every man coming into the world.  The Son was the True
   Light which lighteneth every man coming into the world.  The Other
   Comforter was the True Light which lighteneth every man coming into the
   world. [3699]   Was and Was and Was, but Was One Thing.  Light thrice
   repeated; but One Light and One God.  This was what David represented
   to himself long before when he said, In Thy Light shall we see Light.
   [3700]   And now we have both seen and proclaim concisely and simply
   the doctrine [3701] of God the Trinity, comprehending out of Light (the
   Father), Light (the Son), in Light (the Holy Ghost).  He that rejects
   it, let him reject it; [3702] and he that doeth iniquity, let him do
   iniquity; we proclaim that which we have understood.  We will get us up
   into a high mountain, [3703] and will shout, if we be not heard, below;
   we will exalt the Spirit; we will not be afraid; or if we are afraid,
   it shall be of keeping silence, not of proclaiming.

   IV.  If ever there was a time when the Father was not, then there was a
   time when the Son was not.  If ever there was a time when the Son was
   not, then there was a time when the Spirit was not.  If the One was
   from the beginning, then the Three were so too.  If you throw down the
   One, I am bold to assert that you do not set up the other Two.  For
   what profit is there in an imperfect Godhead?  Or rather, what Godhead
   can there be if It is not perfect?  And how can that be perfect which
   lacks something of perfection?  And surely there is something lacking
   if it hath not the Holy, and how would it have this if it were without
   the Spirit?  For either holiness is something different from Him, and
   if so let some one tell me what it is conceived to be; or if it is the
   same, how is it not from the beginning, as if it were better for God to
   be at one time imperfect and apart from the Spirit?  If He is not from
   the beginning, He is in the same rank with myself, even though a little
   before me; for we are both parted from Godhead by time.  If He is in
   the same rank with myself, how can He make me God, or join me with
   Godhead?

   V.  Or rather, let me reason with you about Him from a somewhat earlier
   point, for we have already discussed the Trinity.  The Sadducees
   altogether denied the existence of the Holy Spirit, just as they did
   that of Angels and the Resurrection; rejecting, I know not upon what
   ground, the important testimonies concerning Him in the Old Testament.
   And of the Greeks those who are more inclined to speak of God, and who
   approach nearest to us, have formed some conception of Him, as it seems
   to me, though they have differed as to His Name, and have addressed Him
   as the Mind of the World, or the External Mind, and the like.  But of
   the wise men amongst ourselves, some have conceived of him as an
   Activity, some as a Creature, some as God; and some have been uncertain
   which to call Him, out of reverence for Scripture, they say, as though
   it did not make the matter clear either way.  And therefore they
   neither worship Him nor treat Him with dishonour, but take up a neutral
   position, or rather a very miserable one, with respect to Him.  And of
   those who consider Him to be God, some are orthodox in mind only, while
   others venture to be so with the lips also.  And I have heard of some
   who are even more clever, and measure Deity; and these agree with us
   that there are Three Conceptions; but they have separated these from
   one another so completely as to make one of them infinite both in
   essence and power, and the second in power but not in essence, and the
   third circumscribed in both; thus imitating in another way those who
   call them the Creator, the Co-operator, and the Minister, and consider
   that the same order and dignity which belongs to these names is also a
   sequence in the facts.

   VI.  But we cannot enter into any discussion with those who do not even
   believe in His existence, nor with the Greek babblers (for we would not
   be enriched in our argument with the oil of sinners). [3704]   With the
   others, however, we will argue thus.  The Holy Ghost must certainly be
   conceived of either as in the category of the Self-existent, or as in
   that of the things which are contemplated in another; of which classes
   those who are skilled in such matters call the one Substance and the
   other Accident.  Now if He were an Accident, He would be an Activity of
   God, for what else, or of whom else, could He be, for surely this is
   what most avoids composition?  And if He is an Activity, He will be
   effected, but will not effect and will cease to exist as soon as He has
   been effected, for this is the nature of an Activity.  How is it then
   that He acts and says such and such things, and defines, and is
   grieved, and is angered, and has all the qualities which belong clearly
   to one that moves, and not to movement?  But if He is a Substance and
   not an attribute of Substance, He will be conceived of either as a
   Creature of God, or as God.  For anything between these two, whether
   having nothing in common with either, or a compound of both, not even
   they who invented the goat-stag could imagine.  Now, if He is a
   creature, how do we believe in Him, how are we made perfect in Him?
   For it is not the same thing to believe IN a thing and to believe About
   it.  The one belongs to Deity, the other to--any thing.  But if He is
   God, then He is neither a creature, nor a thing made, nor a fellow
   servant, nor any of these lowly appellations.

   VII.  There--the word is with you.  Let the slings be let go; let the
   syllogism be woven.  Either He is altogether Unbegotten, or else He is
   Begotten.  If He is Unbegotten, there are two Unoriginates.  If he is
   Begotten, you must make a further subdivision.  He is so either by the
   Father or by the Son.  And if by the Father, there are two Sons, and
   they are Brothers.  And you may make them twins if you like, or the one
   older and the other younger, since you are so very fond of the bodily
   conceptions.  But if by the Son, then such a one will say, we get a
   glimpse of a Grandson God, than which nothing could be more absurd.
   For my part however, if I saw the necessity of the distinction, I
   should have acknowledged the facts without fear of the names.  For it
   does not follow that because the Son is the Son in some higher relation
   (inasmuch as we could not in any other way than this point out that He
   is of God and Consubstantial), it would also be necessary to think that
   all the names of this lower world and of our kindred should be
   transferred to the Godhead.  Or may be you would consider our God to be
   a male, according to the same arguments, because he is called God and
   Father, and that Deity is feminine, from the gender of the word, and
   Spirit neuter, because It has nothing to do with generation; But if you
   would be silly enough to say, with the old myths and fables, that God
   begat the Son by a marriage with His own Will, we should be introduced
   [3705] to the Hermaphrodite god of Marcion and Valentinus [3706] who
   imagined these newfangled Æons.

   VIII.  But since we do not admit your first division, which declares
   that there is no mean between Begotten and Unbegotten, at once, along
   with your magnificent division, away go your Brothers and your
   Grandsons, as when the first link of an intricate chain is broken they
   are broken with it, and disappear from your system of divinity.  For,
   tell me, what position will you assign to that which Proceeds, which
   has started up between the two terms of your division, and is
   introduced by a better Theologian than you, our Saviour Himself?  Or
   perhaps you have taken that word out of your Gospels for the sake of
   your Third Testament, The Holy Ghost, which proceedeth from the Father;
   [3707] Who, inasmuch as He proceedeth from That Source, is no Creature;
   and inasmuch as He is not Begotten is no Son; and inasmuch as He is
   between the Unbegotten and the Begotten is God.  And thus escaping the
   toils of your syllogisms, He has manifested himself as God, stronger
   than your divisions.  What then is Procession?  Do you tell me what is
   the Unbegottenness of the Father, and I will explain to you the
   physiology of the Generation of the Son and the Procession of the
   Spirit, and we shall both of us be frenzy-stricken for prying into the
   mystery of God. [3708]   And who are we to do these things, we who
   cannot even see what lies at our feet, or number the sand of the sea,
   or the drops of rain, or the days of Eternity, much less enter into the
   Depths of God, and supply an account of that Nature which is so
   unspeakable and transcending all words?

   IX.  What then, say they, is there lacking to the Spirit which prevents
   His being a Son, for if there were not something lacking He would be a
   Son?  We assert that there is nothing lacking--for God has no
   deficiency.  But the difference of manifestation, if I may so express
   myself, or rather of their mutual relations one to another, has caused
   the difference of their Names.  For indeed it is not some deficiency in
   the Son which prevents His being Father (for Sonship is not a
   deficiency), and yet He is not Father.  According to this line of
   argument there must be some deficiency in the Father, in respect of His
   not being Son.  For the Father is not Son, and yet this is not due to
   either deficiency or subjection of Essence; but the very fact of being
   Unbegotten or Begotten, or Proceeding has given the name of Father to
   the First, of the Son to the Second, and of the Third, Him of Whom we
   are speaking, of the Holy Ghost that the distinction of the Three
   Persons may be preserved in the one nature and dignity of the Godhead.
   For neither is the Son Father, for the Father is One, but He is what
   the Father is; nor is the Spirit Son because He is of God, for the
   Only-begotten is One, but He is what the Son is.  The Three are One in
   Godhead, and the One Three in properties; so that neither is the Unity
   a Sabellian one, [3709] nor does the Trinity countenance the present
   evil distinction.

   X.  What then?  Is the Spirit God?  Most certainly.  Well then, is He
   Consubstantial?  Yes, if He is God.  Grant me, says my opponent, that
   there spring from the same Source One who is a Son, and One who is not
   a Son, and these of One Substance with the Source, and I admit a God
   and a God.  Nay, if you will grant me that there is another God and
   another nature of God I will give you the same Trinity with the same
   name and facts.  But since God is One and the Supreme Nature is One,
   how can I present to you the Likeness?  Or will you seek it again in
   lower regions and in your own surroundings?  It is very shameful, and
   not only shameful, but very foolish, to take from things below a guess
   at things above, and from a fluctuating nature at the things that are
   unchanging, and as Isaiah says, to seek the Living among the dead.
   [3710]   But yet I will try, for your sake, to give you some assistance
   for your argument, even from that source.  I think I will pass over
   other points, though I might bring forward many from animal history,
   some generally known, others only known to a few, of what nature has
   contrived with wonderful art in connection with the generation of
   animals.  For not only are likes said to beget likes, and things
   diverse to beget things diverse, but also likes to be begotten by
   things diverse, and things diverse by likes.  And if we may believe the
   story, there is yet another mode of generation, when an animal is
   self-consumed and self-begotten. [3711]   There are also creatures
   which depart in some sort from their true natures, and undergo change
   and transformation from one creature into another, by a magnificence of
   nature.  And indeed sometimes in the same species part may be generated
   and part not; and yet all of one substance; which is more like our
   present subject.  I will just mention one fact of our own nature which
   every one knows, and then I will pass on to another part of the
   subject.

   XI.  What was Adam?  A creature of God.  What then was Eve?  A fragment
   of the creature.  And what was Seth?  The begotten of both.  Does it
   then seem to you that Creature and Fragment and Begotten are the same
   thing?  Of course it does not.  But were not these persons
   consubstantial?  Of course they were.  Well then, here it is an
   acknowledged fact that different persons may have the same substance.
   I say this, not that I would attribute creation or fraction or any
   property of body to the Godhead (let none of your contenders for a word
   be down upon me again), but that I may contemplate in these, as on a
   stage, things which are objects of thought alone.  For it is not
   possible to trace out any image exactly to the whole extent of the
   truth.  But, they say, what is the meaning of all this?  For is not the
   one an offspring, and the other a something else of the One?  Did not
   both Eve and Seth come from the one Adam?  And were they both begotten
   by him?  No; but the one was a fragment of him, and the other was
   begotten by him.  And yet the two were one and the same thing; both
   were human beings; no one will deny that.  Will you then give up your
   contention against the Spirit, that He must be either altogether
   begotten, or else cannot be consubstantial, or be God; and admit from
   human examples the possibility of our position?  I think it will be
   well for you, unless you are determined to be very quarrelsome, and to
   fight against what is proved to demonstration.

   XII.  But, he says, who in ancient or modern times ever worshipped the
   Spirit?  Who ever prayed to Him?  Where is it written that we ought to
   worship Him, or to pray to Him, and whence have you derived this tenet
   of yours?  We will give the more perfect reason hereafter, when we
   discuss the question of the unwritten; for the present it will suffice
   to say that it is the Spirit in Whom we worship, and in Whom we pray.
   For Scripture says, God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must
   worship Him in Spirit and in truth. [3712]   And again,--We know not
   what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit Itself maketh
   intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered; [3713] and
   I will pray with the Spirit and I will pray with the understanding
   also; [3714] --that is, in the mind and in the Spirit.  Therefore to
   adore or to pray to the Spirit seems to me to be simply Himself
   offering prayer or adoration to Himself.  And what godly or learned man
   would disapprove of this, because in fact the adoration of One is the
   adoration of the Three, because of the equality of honour and Deity
   between the Three?  So I will not be frightened by the argument that
   all things are said to have been made by the Son; [3715] as if the Holy
   Spirit also were one of these things.  For it says all things that were
   made, and not simply all things.  For the Father was not, nor were any
   of the things that were not made.  Prove that He was made, and then
   give Him to the Son, and number Him among the creatures; but until you
   can prove this you will gain nothing for your impiety from this
   comprehensive phrase.  For if He was made, it was certainly through
   Christ; I myself would not deny that.  But if He was not made, how can
   He be either one of the All, or through Christ?  Cease then to
   dishonour the Father in your opposition to the Only-begotten (for it is
   no real honour, by presenting to Him a creature to rob Him of what is
   more valuable, a Son), and to dishonour the Son in your opposition to
   the Spirit.  For He is not the Maker of a Fellow servant, but He is
   glorified with One of co-equal honour.  Rank no part of the Trinity
   with thyself, lest thou fall away from the Trinity; cut not off from
   Either the One and equally august Nature; because if thou overthrow any
   of the Three thou wilt have overthrown the whole.  Better to take a
   meagre view of the Unity than to venture on a complete impiety.

   XIII.  Our argument has now come to its principal point; and I am
   grieved that a problem that was long dead, and that had given way to
   faith, is now stirred up afresh; yet it is necessary to stand against
   these praters, and not to let judgment go by default, when we have the
   Word on our side, and are pleading the cause of the Spirit.  If, say
   they, there is God and God and God, how is it that there are not Three
   Gods, or how is it that what is glorified is not a plurality of
   Principles?  Who is it who say this?  Those who have reached a more
   complete ungodliness, or even those who have taken the secondary part;
   I mean who are moderate in a sense in respect of the Son.  For my
   argument is partly against both in common, partly against these latter
   in particular.  What I have to say in answer to these is as
   follows:--What right have you who worship the Son, even though you have
   revolted from the Spirit, to call us Tritheists?  Are not you
   Ditheists?  For if you deny also the worship of the Only Begotten, you
   have clearly ranged yourself among our adversaries.  And why should we
   deal kindly with you as not quite dead?  But if you do worship Him, and
   are so far in the way of salvation, we will ask you what reasons you
   have to give for your ditheism, if you are charged with it?  If there
   is in you a word of wisdom answer, and open to us also a way to an
   answer.  For the very same reason with which you will repel a charge of
   Ditheism will prove sufficient for us against one of Tritheism.  And
   thus we shall win the day by making use of you our accusers as our
   Advocates, than which nothing can be more generous.

   XIV.  What is our quarrel and dispute with both?  To us there is One
   God, for the Godhead is One, and all that proceedeth from Him is
   referred to One, though we believe in Three Persons.  For one is not
   more and another less God; nor is One before and another after; nor are
   They divided in will or parted in power; nor can you find here any of
   the qualities of divisible things; but the Godhead is, to speak
   concisely, undivided in separate Persons; and there is one mingling of
   Light, as it were of three suns joined to each other.  When then we
   look at the Godhead, or the First Cause, or the Monarchia, that which
   we conceive is One; but when we look at the Persons in Whom the Godhead
   dwells, and at Those Who timelessly and with equal glory have their
   Being from the First Cause--there are Three Whom we worship.

   XV.  What of that, they will say perhaps; do not the Greeks also
   believe in one Godhead, as their more advanced philosophers declare?
   And with us Humanity is one, namely the entire race; but yet they have
   many gods, not One, just as there are many men.  But in this case the
   common nature has a unity which is only conceivable in thought; and the
   individuals are parted from one another very far indeed, both by time
   and by dispositions and by power.  For we are not only compound beings,
   but also contrasted beings, both with one another and with ourselves;
   nor do we remain entirely the same for a single day, to say nothing of
   a whole lifetime, but both in body and in soul are in a perpetual state
   of flow and change.  And perhaps the same may be said of the Angels
   [3716] and the whole of that superior nature which is second to the
   Trinity alone; although they are simple in some measure and more fixed
   in good, owing to their nearness to the highest Good.

   XVI.  Nor do those whom the Greeks worship as gods, and (to use their
   own expression) dæmons, need us in any respect for their accusers, but
   are convicted upon the testimony of their own theologians, some as
   subject to passion, some as given to faction, and full of innumerable
   evils and changes, and in a state of opposition, not only to one
   another, but even to their first causes, whom they call Oceani and
   Tethyes and Phanetes, and by several other names; and last of all a
   certain god who hated his children through his lust of rule, and
   swallowed up all the rest through his greediness that he might become
   the father of all men and gods whom he miserably devoured, and then
   vomited forth again.  And if these are but myths and fables, as they
   say in order to escape the shamefulness of the story, what will they
   say in reference to the dictum that all things are divided into three
   parts, [3717] and that each god presides over a different part of the
   Universe, having a distinct province as well as a distinct rank?  But
   our faith is not like this, nor is this the portion of Jacob, says my
   Theologian. [3718]   But each of these Persons possesses Unity, not
   less with that which is United to it than with itself, by reason of the
   identity of Essence and Power. [3719]   And this is the account of the
   Unity, so far as we have apprehended it.  If then this account is the
   true one, let us thank God for the glimpse He has granted us; if it is
   not let us seek for a better.

   XVII.  As for the arguments with which you would overthrow the Union
   which we support, I know not whether we should say you are jesting or
   in earnest.  For what is this argument?  "Things of one essence, you
   say, are counted together," and by this "counted together," you mean
   that they are collected into one number. [3720]   But things which are
   not of one essence are not thus counted...so that you cannot avoid
   speaking of three gods, according to this account, while we do not run
   any risk at all of it, inasmuch as we assert that they are not
   consubstantial.  And so by a single word you have freed yourselves from
   trouble, and have gained a pernicious victory, for in fact you have
   done something like what men do when they hang themselves for fear of
   death.  For to save yourselves trouble in your championship of the
   Monarchia you have denied the Godhead, and abandoned the question to
   your opponents.  But for my part, even if labor should be necessary, I
   will not abandon the Object of my adoration.  And yet on this point I
   cannot see where the difficulty is.

   XVIII.  You say, Things of one essence are counted together, but those
   which are not consubstantial are reckoned one by one.  Where did you
   get this from?  From what teachers of dogma or mythology?  Do you not
   know that every number expresses the quantity of what is included under
   it, and not the nature of the things?  But I am so old fashioned, or
   perhaps I should say so unlearned, as to use the word Three of that
   number of things, even if they are of a different nature, and to use
   One and One and One in a different way of so many units, even if they
   are united in essence, looking not so much at the things themselves as
   at the quantity of the things in respect of which the enumeration is
   made.  But since you hold so very close to the letter (although you are
   contending against the letter), pray take your demonstrations from this
   source.  There are in the Book of Proverbs three things which go well,
   a lion, a goat, and a cock; and to these is added a fourth;--a King
   making a speech before the people, [3721] to pass over the other sets
   of four which are there counted up, although things of various
   natures.  And I find in Moses two Cherubim [3722] counted singly.  But
   now, in your technology, could either the former things be called
   three, when they differ so greatly in their nature, or the latter be
   treated as units when they are so closely connected and of one nature?
   For if I were to speak of God and Mammon, as two masters, reckoned
   under one head, when they are so very different from each other, I
   should probably be still more laughed at for such a connumeration.

   XIX.  But to my mind, he says, those things are said to be connumerated
   and of the same essence of which the names also correspond, as Three
   Men, or Three gods, but not Three this and that.  What does this
   concession amount to?  It is suitable to one laying down the law as to
   names, not to one who is asserting the truth.  For I also will assert
   that Peter and James and John are not three or consubstantial, so long
   as I cannot say Three Peters, or Three Jameses, or Three Johns; for
   what you have reserved for common names we demand also for proper
   names, in accordance with your arrangement; or else you will be unfair
   in not conceding to others what you assume for yourself.  What about
   John then, when in his Catholic Epistle he says that there are Three
   that bear witness, [3723] the Spirit and the Water and the Blood?  Do
   you think he is talking nonsense?  First, because he has ventured to
   reckon under one numeral things which are not consubstantial, though
   you say this ought to be done only in the case of things which are
   consubstantial.  For who would assert that these are consubstantial?
   Secondly, because he has not been consistent in the way he has happened
   upon his terms; for after using Three in the masculine gender he adds
   three words which are neuter, contrary to the definitions and laws
   which you and your grammarians have laid down.  For what is the
   difference between putting a masculine Three first, and then adding One
   and One and One in the neuter, or after a masculine One and One and One
   to use the Three not in the masculine but in the neuter, which you
   yourself disclaim in the case of Deity?  What have you to say about the
   Crab, which may mean either an animal, or an instrument, or a
   constellation?  And what about the Dog, now terrestrial, now aquatic,
   now celestial?  Do you not see that three crabs or dogs are spoken of?
   Why of course it is so.  Well then, are they therefore of one
   substance?  None but a fool would say that.  So you see how completely
   your argument from connumeration has broken down, and is refuted by all
   these instances.  For if things that are of one substance are not
   always counted under one numeral, and things not of one substance are
   thus counted, and the pronunciation of the name [3724] once for all is
   used in both cases, what advantage do you gain towards your doctrine?

   XX.  I will look also at this further point, which is not without its
   bearing on the subject.  One and One added together make Two; and Two
   resolved again becomes One and One, as is perfectly evident.  If,
   however, elements which are added together must, as your theory
   requires, be consubstantial, and those which are separate be
   heterogeneous, then it will follow that the same things must be both
   consubstantial and heterogeneous.  No:  I laugh at your Counting Before
   and your Counting After, of which you are so proud, as if the facts
   themselves depended upon the order of their names.  If this were so,
   according to the same law, since the same things are in consequence of
   the equality of their nature counted in Holy Scripture, sometimes in an
   earlier, sometimes in a later place, what prevents them from being at
   once more honourable and less honourable than themselves?  I say the
   same of the names God and Lord, and of the prepositions Of Whom, and By
   Whom, and In Whom, by which you describe the Deity according to the
   rules of art for us, attributing the first to the Father, the second to
   the Son, and the third to the Holy Ghost.  For what would you have
   done, if each of these expressions were constantly allotted to Each
   Person, when, the fact being that they are used of all the Persons, as
   is evident to those who have studied the question, you even so make
   them the ground of such inequality both of nature and dignity.  This is
   sufficient for all who are not altogether wanting in sense.  But since
   it is a matter of difficulty for you after you have once made an
   assault upon the Spirit, to check your rush, and not rather like a
   furious boar to push your quarrel to the bitter end, and to thrust
   yourself upon the knife until you have received the whole wound in your
   own breast; let us go on to see what further argument remains to you.

   XXI.  Over and over again you turn upon us the silence of Scripture.
   But that it is not a strange doctrine, nor an afterthought, but
   acknowledged and plainly set forth both by the ancients and many of our
   own day, is already demonstrated by many persons who have treated of
   this subject, and who have handled the Holy Scriptures, not with
   indifference or as a mere pastime, but have gone beneath the letter and
   looked into the inner meaning, and have been deemed worthy to see the
   hidden beauty, and have been irradiated by the light of knowledge.  We,
   however in our turn will briefly prove it as far as may be, in order
   not to seem to be over-curious or improperly ambitious, building on
   another's foundation.  But since the fact, that Scripture does not very
   clearly or very often write Him God in express words (as it does first
   the Father and afterwards the Son), becomes to you an occasion of
   blasphemy and of this excessive wordiness and impiety, we will release
   you from this inconvenience by a short discussion of things and names,
   and especially of their use in Holy Scripture.

   XXII.  Some things have no existence, but are spoken of; others which
   do exist are not spoken of; some neither exist nor are spoken of, and
   some both exist and are spoken of.  Do you ask me for proof of this?  I
   am ready to give it.  According to Scripture God sleeps and is awake,
   is angry, walks, has the Cherubim for His Throne.  And yet when did He
   become liable to passion, and have you ever heard that God has a body?
   This then is, though not really fact, a figure of speech.  For we have
   given names according to our own comprehension from our own attributes
   to those of God.  His remaining silent apart from us, and as it were
   not caring for us, for reasons known to Himself, is what we call His
   sleeping; for our own sleep is such a state of inactivity.  And again,
   His sudden turning to do us good is the waking up; for waking is the
   dissolution of sleep, as visitation is of turning away.  And when He
   punishes, we say He is angry; for so it is with us, punishment is the
   result of anger.  And His working, now here now there, we call walking;
   for walking is change from one place to another.  His resting among the
   Holy Hosts, and as it were loving to dwell among them, is His sitting
   and being enthroned; this, too, from ourselves, for God resteth nowhere
   as He doth upon the Saints.  His swiftness of moving is called flying,
   and His watchful care is called His Face, and his giving and bestowing
   [3725] is His hand; and, in a word, every other of the powers or
   activities of God has depicted for us some other corporeal one.

   XXIII.  Again, where do you get your Unbegotten and Unoriginate, those
   two citadels of your position, or we our Immortal?  Show me these in so
   many words, or we shall either set them aside, or erase them as not
   contained in Scripture; and you are slain by your own principle, the
   names you rely on being overthrown, and therewith the wall of refuge in
   which you trusted.  Is it not evident that they are due to passages
   which imply them, though the words do not actually occur?  What are
   these passages?--I am the first, and I am the last, [3726] and before
   Me there was no God, neither shall there be after Me. [3727]   For all
   that depends on that Am makes for my side, for it has neither beginning
   nor ending.  When you accept this, that nothing is before Him, and that
   He has not an older Cause, you have implicitly given Him the titles
   Unbegotten and Unoriginate.  And to say that He has no end of Being is
   to call Him Immortal and Indestructible.  The first pairs, then, that I
   referred to are accounted for thus.  But what are the things which
   neither exist in fact nor are said?  That God is evil; that a sphere is
   square; that the past is present; that man is not a compound being.
   Have you ever known a man of such stupidity as to venture either to
   think or to assert any such thing?  It remains to shew what are the
   things which exist, both in fact and in language.  God, Man, Angel,
   Judgment, Vanity (viz., such arguments as yours), and the subversion of
   faith and emptying of the mystery.

   XXIV.  Since, then, there is so much difference in terms and things,
   why are you such a slave to the letter, and a partisan of the Jewish
   wisdom, and a follower of syllables at the expense of facts?  But if,
   when you said twice five or twice seven, I concluded from your words
   that you meant Ten or Fourteen; or if, when you spoke of a rational and
   mortal animal, that you meant Man, should you think me to be talking
   nonsense?  Surely not, because I should be merely repeating your own
   meaning; for words do not belong more to the speaker of them than to
   him who called them forth.  As, then, in this case, I should have been
   looking, not so much at the terms used, as at the thoughts they were
   meant to convey; so neither, if I found something else either not at
   all or not clearly expressed in the Words of Scripture to be included
   in the meaning, should I avoid giving it utterance, out of fear of your
   sophistical trick about terms.  In this way, then, we shall hold our
   own against the semi-orthodox--among whom I may not count you.  For
   since you deny the Titles of the Son, which are so many and so clear,
   it is quite evident that even if you learnt a great many more and
   clearer ones you would not be moved to reverence.  But now I will take
   up the argument again a little way further back, and shew you, though
   you are so clever, the reason for this entire system of secresy.

   XXV.  There have been in the whole period of the duration of the world
   two conspicuous changes of men's lives, which are also called two
   Testaments, [3728] or, on account of the wide fame of the matter, two
   Earthquakes; the one from idols to the Law, the other from the Law to
   the Gospel.  And we are taught in the Gospel of a third earthquake,
   namely, from this Earth to that which cannot be shaken or moved. [3729]
     Now the two Testaments are alike in this respect, that the change was
   not made on a sudden, nor at the first movement of the endeavour.  Why
   not (for this is a point on which we must have information)?  That no
   violence might be done to us, but that we might be moved by
   persuasion.  For nothing that is involuntary is durable; like streams
   or trees which are kept back by force.  But that which is voluntary is
   more durable and safe.  The former is due to one who uses force, the
   latter is ours; the one is due to the gentleness of God, the other to a
   tyrannical authority.  Wherefore God did not think it behoved Him to
   benefit the unwilling, but to do good to the willing.  And therefore
   like a Tutor or Physician He partly removes and partly condones
   ancestral habits, conceding some little of what tended to pleasure,
   just as medical men do with their patients, that their medicine may be
   taken, being artfully blended with what is nice.  For it is no very
   easy matter to change from those habits which custom and use have made
   honourable.  For instance, the first cut off the idol, but left the
   sacrifices; the second, while it destroyed the sacrifices did not
   forbid circumcision. [3730]   Then, when once men had submitted to the
   curtailment, they also yielded that which had been conceded to them;
   [3731] in the first instance the sacrifices, in the second
   circumcision; and became instead of Gentiles, Jews, and instead of
   Jews, Christians, being beguiled into the Gospel by gradual changes.
   Paul is a proof of this; for having at one time administered
   circumcision, and submitted to legal purification, he advanced till he
   could say, and I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet
   suffer persecution? [3732]   His former conduct belonged to the
   temporary dispensation, his latter to maturity.

   XXVI.  To this I may compare the case of Theology [3733] except that it
   proceeds the reverse way.  For in the case by which I have illustrated
   it the change is made by successive subtractions; whereas here
   perfection is reached by additions.  For the matter stands thus.  The
   Old Testament proclaimed the Father openly, and the Son more
   obscurely.  The New manifested the Son, and suggested the Deity of the
   Spirit.  Now the Spirit Himself dwells among us, and supplies us with a
   clearer demonstration of Himself.  For it was not safe, when the
   Godhead of the Father was not yet acknowledged, plainly to proclaim the
   Son; nor when that of the Son was not yet received to burden us further
   (if I may use so bold an expression) with the Holy Ghost; lest perhaps
   people might, like men loaded with food beyond their strength, and
   presenting eyes as yet too weak to bear it to the sun's light, risk the
   loss even of that which was within the reach of their powers; but that
   by gradual additions, and, as David says, Goings up, and advances and
   progress from glory to glory, [3734] the Light of the Trinity might
   shine upon the more illuminated.  For this reason it was, I think, that
   He gradually came to dwell in the Disciples, measuring Himself out to
   them according to their capacity to receive Him, at the beginning of
   the Gospel, after the Passion, after the Ascension, making perfect
   their powers, being breathed upon them, and appearing in fiery
   tongues.  And indeed it is by little and little that He is declared by
   Jesus, as you will learn for yourself if you will read more carefully.
   I will ask the Father, He says, and He will send you another Comforter,
   even the spirit of Truth. [3735]   This He said that He might not seem
   to be a rival God, or to make His discourses to them by another
   authority.  Again, He shall send Him, but it is in My Name.  He leaves
   out the I will ask, but He keeps the Shall send, [3736] then again, I
   will send,--His own dignity.  Then shall come, [3737] the authority of
   the Spirit.

   XXVII.  You see lights breaking upon us, gradually; and the order of
   Theology, which it is better for us to keep, neither proclaiming things
   too suddenly, nor yet keeping them hidden to the end.  For the former
   course would be unscientific, the latter atheistical; and the former
   would be calculated to startle outsiders, the latter to alienate our
   own people.  I will add another point to what I have said; one which
   may readily have come into the mind of some others, but which I think a
   fruit of my own thought.  Our Saviour had some things which, He said,
   could not be borne at that time by His disciples [3738] (though they
   were filled with many teachings), perhaps for the reasons I have
   mentioned; and therefore they were hidden.  And again He said that all
   things should be taught us by the Spirit when He should come to dwell
   amongst us. [3739]   Of these things one, I take it, was the Deity of
   the Spirit Himself, made clear later on when such knowledge should be
   seasonable and capable of being received after our Saviour's
   restoration, when it would no longer be received with incredulity
   because of its marvellous character.  For what greater thing than this
   did either He promise, or the Spirit teach.  If indeed anything is to
   be considered great and worthy of the Majesty of God, which was either
   promised or taught.

   XXVIII.  This, then, is my position with regard to these things, and I
   hope it may be always my position, and that of whosoever is dear to me;
   to worship God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three
   Persons, One Godhead, undivided in honour and glory and substance and
   kingdom, as one of our own inspired philosophers [3740] not long
   departed shewed.  Let him not see the rising of the Morning Star, as
   Scripture saith, [3741] nor the glory of its brightness, who is
   otherwise minded, or who follows the temper of the times, at one time
   being of one mind and of another at another time, and thinking
   unsoundly in the highest matters.  For if He is not to be worshipped,
   how can He deify me by Baptism? but if He is to be worshipped, surely
   He is an Object of adoration, and if an Object of adoration He must be
   God; the one is linked to the other, a truly golden and saving chain.
   And indeed from the Spirit comes our New Birth, and from the New Birth
   our new creation, and from the new creation our deeper knowledge of the
   dignity of Him from Whom it is derived.

   XXIX.  This, then, is what may be said by one who admits the silence of
   Scripture.  But now the swarm of testimonies shall burst upon you from
   which the Deity of the Holy Ghost [3742] shall be shewn to all who are
   not excessively stupid, or else altogether enemies to the Spirit, to be
   most clearly recognized in Scripture.  Look at these facts:--Christ is
   born; the Spirit is His Forerunner.  He is baptized; the Spirit bears
   witness.  He is tempted; the Spirit leads Him up. [3743]   He works
   miracles; the Spirit accompanies them.  He ascends; the Spirit takes
   His place.  What great things are there in the idea of God which are
   not in His power? [3744]   What titles which belong to God are not
   applied to Him, except only Unbegotten and Begotten?  For it was
   needful that the distinctive properties of the Father and the Son
   should remain peculiar to Them, lest there should be confusion in the
   Godhead Which brings all things, even disorder [3745] itself, into due
   arrangement and good order.  Indeed I tremble when I think of the
   abundance of the titles, and how many Names they outrage who fall foul
   of the Spirit.  He is called the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ,
   the Mind of Christ, the Spirit of The Lord, and Himself The Lord, the
   Spirit of Adoption, of Truth, of Liberty; the Spirit of Wisdom, of
   Understanding, of Counsel, of Might, of Knowledge, of Godliness, of the
   Fear of God.  For He is the Maker of all these, filling all with His
   Essence, containing all things, filling the world in His Essence, yet
   incapable of being comprehended in His power by the world; good,
   upright, princely, by nature not by adoption; sanctifying, not
   sanctified; measuring, not measured; shared, not sharing; filling, not
   filled; containing, not contained; inherited, glorified, reckoned with
   the Father and the Son; held out as a threat; [3746] the Finger of God;
   fire like God; to manifest, as I take it, His consubstantiality); the
   Creator-Spirit, Who by Baptism and by Resurrection creates anew; the
   Spirit That knoweth all things, That teacheth, That bloweth where and
   to what extent He listeth; That guideth, talketh, sendeth forth,
   separateth, is angry or tempted; That revealeth, illumineth,
   quickeneth, or rather is the very Light and Life; That maketh Temples;
   That deifieth; That perfecteth so as even to anticipate Baptism, [3747]
   yet after Baptism to be sought as a separate gift; [3748] That doeth
   all things that God doeth; divided into fiery tongues; dividing gifts;
   making Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers;
   understanding manifold, clear, piercing, undefiled, unhindered, which
   is the same thing as Most wise and varied in His actions; and making
   all things clear and plain; and of independent power, unchangeable,
   Almighty, all-seeing, penetrating all spirits that are intelligent,
   pure, most subtle (the Angel Hosts I think); and also all prophetic
   spirits and apostolic in the same manner and not in the same places;
   for they lived in different places; thus showing that He is
   uncircumscript.

   XXX.  They who say and teach these things, and moreover call Him
   another Paraclete in the sense of another God, who know that blasphemy
   against Him alone cannot be forgiven, [3749] and who branded with such
   fearful infamy Ananias and Sapphira for having lied to the Holy Ghost,
   what do you think of these men? [3750]   Do they proclaim the Spirit
   God, or something else?  Now really, you must be extraordinarily dull
   and far from the Spirit if you have any doubt about this and need some
   one to teach you.  So important then, and so vivid are His Names.  Why
   is it necessary to lay before you the testimony contained in the very
   words?  And whatever in this case also [3751] is said in more lowly
   fashion, as that He is Given, Sent, Divided; that He is the Gift, the
   Bounty, the Inspiration, the Promise, the Intercession for us, and, not
   to go into any further detail, any other expressions of the sort, is to
   be referred to the First Cause, that it may be shewn from Whom He is,
   and that men may not in heathen fashion admit Three Principles.  For it
   is equally impious to confuse the Persons with the Sabellians, or to
   divide the Natures with the Arians.

   XXXI.  I have very carefully considered this matter in my own mind, and
   have looked at it in every point of view, in order to find some
   illustration of this most important subject, but I have been unable to
   discover any thing on earth with which to compare the nature of the
   Godhead.  For even if I did happen upon some tiny likeness it escaped
   me for the most part, and left me down below with my example.  I
   picture to myself an eye, [3752] a fountain, a river, as others have
   done before, to see if the first might be analogous to the Father, the
   second to the Son, and the third to the Holy Ghost.  For in these there
   is no distinction in time, nor are they torn away from their connexion
   with each other, though they seem to be parted by three personalities.
   But I was afraid in the first place that I should present a flow in the
   Godhead, incapable of standing still; and secondly that by this figure
   a numerical unity would be introduced.  For the eye and the spring and
   the river are numerically one, though in different forms.

   XXXII.  Again I thought of the sun and a ray and light.  But here again
   there was a fear lest people should get an idea of composition in the
   Uncompounded Nature, such as there is in the Sun and the things that
   are in the Sun.  And in the second place lest we should give Essence to
   the Father but deny Personality to the Others, and make Them only
   Powers of God, existing in Him and not Personal.  For neither the ray
   nor the light is another sun, but they are only effulgences from the
   Sun, and qualities of His essence.  And lest we should thus, as far as
   the illustration goes, attribute both Being and Not-being to God, which
   is even more monstrous.  I have also heard that some one has suggested
   an illustration of the following kind.  A ray of the Sun flashing upon
   a wall and trembling with the movement of the moisture which the beam
   has taken up in mid air, and then, being checked by the hard body, has
   set up a strange quivering.  For it quivers with many rapid movements,
   and is not one rather than it is many, nor yet many rather than one;
   because by the swiftness of its union and separating it escapes before
   the eye can see it.

   XXXIII.  But it is not possible for me to make use of even this;
   because it is very evident what gives the ray its motion; but there is
   nothing prior to God which could set Him in motion; for He is Himself
   the Cause of all things, and He has no prior Cause.  And secondly
   because in this case also there is a suggestion of such things as
   composition, diffusion, and an unsettled and unstable nature...none of
   which we can suppose in the Godhead.  In a word, there is nothing which
   presents a standing point to my mind in these illustrations from which
   to consider the Object which I am trying to represent to myself, unless
   one may indulgently accept one point of the image while rejecting the
   rest.  Finally, then, it seems best to me to let the images and the
   shadows go, as being deceitful and very far short of the truth; and
   clinging myself to the more reverent conception, and resting upon few
   words, using the guidance of the Holy Ghost, keeping to the end as my
   genuine comrade and companion the enlightenment which I have received
   from Him, and passing through this world to persuade all others also to
   the best of my power to worship Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the One
   Godhead and Power.  To Him belongs all glory and honour and might for
   ever and ever.  Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3694] Luke iv. 29, 30.

   [3695] Exod. xix. 13.

   [3696] E.g. S. Basil and S. Gregory of Nyssa.

   [3697] Ps. liii. 5.

   [3698] presbeuein is not commonly used in this sense, but there are
   classical instances of it (e.g. Æsch. Choeph., 488; Soph., Trach.,
   1065, and it occurs also in Plato), and this is the sense in which it
   is here rendered by Billius; but a V. L. of some mss. gives the
   meaning, whose cause we are pleading, which is more frequent use of the
   word.

   [3699] John i. 9.

   [3700] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

   [3701] Al. The Confession.

   [3702] Isa. xxi. 2.

   [3703] Ib. xl. 9.

   [3704] Ps. cxli. 5.

   [3705] Irenæus. I., 6.

   [3706] It would seem that S. Gregory commonly confused Marcion with
   Marcus, one of the leaders of the Gnostic School of Valentinus.  In
   another place he speaks of the Æons of Marcion and Valentinus,
   evidently meaning Marcus; for the system of Marcion is characterized by
   an entire absence of any theory of Emanations (Æons).  Similarly there
   is no trace in Marcion of this notion of a hermaphrodite Deity, but
   there is something very like it in the account of Marcus given by S.
   Irenæus.

   [3707] John xv. 26.  "It did not fall within this Father's (Greg. Naz.)
   province to develop the doctrine of the Procession.  He is content to
   shew that the Spirit was not Generated, seeing that according to
   Christ's own teaching He Proceeds from the Father.  The question of His
   relation to the Son is alien to S. Gregory Nazianzen's purpose; nor
   does it seem to have once been raised in the great battle between
   Arianism and Catholicity which was fought out at Constantinople during
   Gregory's Episcopate" (Swete on the Procession, p. 107).

   [3708] Ecclus. i. 2.

   [3709] Sabellius, who taught at Rome during the Pontificate of
   Callistus, was by far the most important heresiarch of his period, and
   his opinions by far the most dangerous.  While strongly emphasizing the
   fundamental doctrine of the Divine Unity, he also admitted in terms a
   Trinity, but his Trinity was not that of the Catholic dogma, for he
   represented it as only a threefold manifestation of the one Divine
   Essence.  The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are in his view only
   temporary phænomena, which fulfil their mission, and then return into
   the abstract Monad.  Dr. Schaff (Hist. of the Church, Ante-Nicene
   Period, p. 582) gives the following concise account of his teaching:
   "The unity of God, without distinction in itself, unfolds or extends
   itself in the course of the word's development in three different forms
   and periods of revelation, and after the completion of redemption
   returns into Unity.  The Father reveals Himself in the giving of the
   Law or the Old Testament Economy (not in the creation also, which in
   his view precedes the Trinitarian revelation); the Son in the
   Incarnation; the Holy Ghost in inspiration; the revelation of the Son
   ends with the Ascension; that of the Spirit goes on in generation and
   sanctification.  He illustrates the Trinitarian revelation by comparing
   the Father to the disc of the sun, the Son to its enlightening power,
   the Spirit to its warming influence.  He is also said to have likened
   the Father to the body, the Son to the soul, the Holy Ghost to the
   spirit of man:  but this is unworthy of his evident speculative
   discrimination.  His view of the Logos too is peculiar.  The Logos is
   not identical with the Son, but is the Monad itself in its transition
   to Triad; that is, God conceived as vital motion and creating
   principle; the Speaking God, as distinguished from the Silent God.
   Each Person (or Aspect--the word is ambiguous) is another Uttering; and
   the Three Persons together are only successive evolutions of the Logos,
   or world-ward aspect of the Divine Nature.  As the Logos proceeded from
   God, so He at last returns into Him, and the process of Trinitarian
   development closes."

   [3710] Isa. viii. 19.

   [3711] i.e. the Phoenix.  Hdt., ii. 37.

   [3712] John iv. 24.

   [3713] Rom. viii. 26.

   [3714] 1 Cor. xiv. 15.

   [3715] John i. 2.

   [3716] "Similarly it is clear concerning the Angels, that they have a
   being incapable of change, so far as pertains to their nature, with a
   capacity of change as to choice, and of intelligence and affections and
   places, in their own manner" (S. Thomas Aq., Summa, I., x., 5).

   [3717] Homer, Il., xiv., 189.

   [3718] Jer. x. 16.

   [3719] Petavius praises this dictum, De Trin., IV., xiii., 9.

   [3720] sunarithmeitai, as when you say Three Gods, or Three Men, and
   the like, as you do when you reckon up things of the same sort.  On the
   other hand, you must use the plural number in reckoning up things which
   differ in kind.

   [3721] Prov. xxx. 29, 30. 31.

   [3722] Exod. xxxvii. 7.

   [3723] This is the famous passage of the Witnesses in 1 John v. 8.  In
   some few later codices of the Vulgate are found the words which form
   verse 7 of our A.V.  But neither verse 7 nor these words are to be
   found in any Greek ms. earlier than the Fifteenth Century; nor are they
   quoted by any Greek Father, and by very few and late Latin ones.  They
   have been thought to be cited by S. Cyprian in his work on the Unity of
   the Church; and this citation, if a fact, would be a most important
   one, as it would throw back their reception to an early date.  But
   Tischendorf (Gk. Test., Ed. viii., ad. loc.) gives reasons for
   believing that the quotation is only apparent, and is really of the
   last clause of verse 8.

   [3724] i.e. Though the things referred to many differ essentially, yet
   if the name by which they are known is the same, one utterance of it
   with one numeral is enough to express a collection of them all.

   [3725] var. lect., receiving.

   [3726] Isa. xli. 4.

   [3727] Ib. xliii. 10.

   [3728] Heb. xii. 26.

   [3729] Referring to the earthquake at the giving of the Law on Mt.
   Sinai (Heb. xiii.), and to the prophesy of Haggai (ii. 6), with
   reference to the Incarnation.  The third great earthquake is that of
   the end of the world (Heb. xii. 26).

   [3730] Acts xvi. 3.

   [3731] Ib. xxi. 26.

   [3732] Galat. vii. 7-17.

   [3733] Theology is here used in a restricted sense, as denoting simply
   the doctrine of the Deity of the Son or Logos.  It is very frequently
   used in this limited sense; examples of which may readily be found in
   Gregory of Nyssa, Basil, Chrysostom, and others.  A similar use occurs
   in Orat. XXXVIII., c. 8, in which passage theologia is contrasted with
   oikonomia, the doctrine of our Lord's Divinity with that of the
   Incarnation.

   [3734] Ps. lxxxiv. 7, and 2 Cor. iii. 18.

   [3735] John xiv. 16, 17.

   [3736] John xvi. 7.

   [3737] Ib. xvi. 8.

   [3738] Ib. xvi. 12.

   [3739] Ib. xiv. 26.

   [3740] Perhaps S. Gregory Thaumaturgus is meant.  He was born about
   a.d. 210.  The date of his death is uncertain, but was probably not
   before 270.  He was Bishop of Neocæsarea in Pontus.  Amongst his works
   was an Exposition of the Faith, which he is said to have received by
   direct revelation, and in it the words in the text were contained.  S.
   Gregory in another Oration refers to the closing sentences as the
   substance of the Formula itself:  "There is nothing created or servile
   in the Trinity, nor anything superinduced, as though previously
   non-existing and introduced afterwards.  Never therefore, was the Son
   wanting to the Father, nor the Spirit to the Son; but there is ever the
   same Trinity, unchangeable and unalterable"(Reynolds, in Dict. Biog.).

   [3741] Job iii. 9.

   [3742] Luke i. 35; iii. 22; iv. 1.

   [3743] Luke iv. 1, 18.

   [3744] Acts ii. 4.

   [3745] v. l.  Yea, even disorder.

   [3746] Viz.:--where we are told that Blasphemy against Him hath never
   forgiveness.

   [3747] As in the case of the Centurion Cornelius, Acts x. 9.

   [3748] i.e. in Confirmation.

   [3749] Matt. xii. 31.

   [3750] Acts v. 3, etc.

   [3751] As before in the case of the Son.  See above, Theol., iii. 18.

   [3752] Elias Cretensis says that the Eye in this passage is not to be
   understood of the member of the body so called, but as the Eye or the
   centre of a spring, the point from which the water flows.

